THE CODE OF THE CITY OF LA PALMA, CALIFORNIA 
____________ 
Published in 2013 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
  
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
LA PALMA, CALIFORNIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Steve Hwangbo 
Mayor 
____________ 
Steve Shanahan 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
G. Henry Charoen 
Gerard Goedhart 
Peter Kim 
City Council 
____________ 
Ellen Volmert 
City Manager 
____________ 
Joel Kuperberg 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Laurie A. Murray, CMC 
Administrative Services Manager/City Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
LA PALMA, CALIFORNIA 
____________ 
Gerard Goedhart 
Mayor 
____________ 
Marshall Goodman 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Kathy Flachmeier 
Peter L. Kim 
Michele Steggell 
City Council 
____________ 
Laurie A. Murray 
City Manager 
____________ 
Joel Kuperberg 
City Attorney  
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of La Palma, California. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1975 Code, as updated by ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Council through July 2, 2013. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1975 Code, as updated, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
RELATED LAWS 	RL:1 
SPECIAL ACTS 	SA:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	RLCT:1 
SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	SACT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Jim Jenkins, Senior Code Attorney, and Jimmy L. Charlton Jr., Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Laurie A. Murray, CMC, Administrative Services Manager/City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of La Palma, California. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of La Palma, California. 
©  Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of La Palma, California. 2013. 
ORDINANCE NO. 2013-06 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF LA PALMA AMENDING AND RECODIFYING, AND ADOPTING BY REFERENCE, THE LA PALMA CITY CODE (2013 EDITION) AS THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF LA PALMA 
WHEREAS, Government Code Sections 50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10 provide for the codification, compilation, recodification, recompilation and publication of permanent and general ordinances of cities; and 
WHEREAS, the ordinances of the City of La Palma ("City") were originally codified as the "La Palma City Code" on June 7, 1976 through the adoption of Ordinance No. 76-1 (the "1976 Code"); and 
WHEREAS, although the 1976 Code has been supplemented over the years with the passage of new ordinances, it has not been recompiled or recodified in its entirety since the original codification in 1976; and 
WHEREAS, the City now desires to revise, recodify, recompile and update the ordinances comprising the 1976 Code to modernize the La Palma City Code, render it consistent with current law and City practices, eliminate obsolete references and provide it in a more user-friendly format to aid City staff, residents and other individuals and entities that wish to use the La Palma City Code; and 
WHEREAS, the La Palma City Code has undergone a comprehensive review by City staff, the City Attorney and the Municipal Code Corporation, resulting in the restructuring and revision of various provisions throughout the Code's chapters; and 
WHEREAS, on November 19, 2013, the City Council conducted its first reading of, and introduced, this Ordinance, and directed the City Clerk to notice a public hearing on the Ordinance for December 3, 2013; and 
WHEREAS, a copy of the amended, updated and recompiled La Palma City Code (2013 Edition) has been on file in the office of the City Clerk at least 15 days preceding the date of the public hearing concerning this Ordinance, and remains there on file for public inspection; and 
WHEREAS, pursuant to Government Code section 50022.3, the City Council conducted a duly noticed public hearing on December 3, 2013, and has considered the evidence and testimony submitted at that public hearing. 
NOW, THEREFORE, THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF LA PALMA DOES HEREBY ORDAIN AS FOLLOWS: 
SECTION 1: RECODIFICATION AND ADOPTION. Pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Sections 50022.1 through 50022.8, and 50022.10, there is hereby recodified and adopted the "La Palma City Code" (2013 Edition) as revised, reformatted, indexed, codified, compiled, edited, updated and republished by Municipal Code Corporation, including Chapters 1 to 44, together with those secondary codes adopted by reference as authorized by the California State Legislature, save and except those portions of the secondary codes as are deleted, modified or amended by the provisions of the La Palma City Code. 
SECTION 2: CONTINUATION OF EXISTING LAW. The recodification and adoption of the La Palma City Code is intended by the City Council to be a continuation of existing ordinances and nothing is intended to modify or enact any new taxes. To the extent the provisions of the 2013 Edition of the La Palma City Code are substantively the same as existing law, the provisions of the La Palma City Code (2013 edition) shall be considered a continuation of existing law and not new enactments. 
SECTION 3: REPEAL. Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance or in the 2013 Edition of the La Palma City Code, all provisions of the 1976 Code are hereby repealed on the effective date of this Ordinance. 
SECTION 4: EFFECT OF RECODIFICATION AND REPEAL. The recodification and adoption of the La Palma City Code (2013 Edition) and the repeal of the 1976 Code as specified in this Ordinance shall not affect the following matters: 
a)  Actions and proceedings that began before the effective date of this Ordinance. 
b)  Civil, criminal and administrative proceedings concerning ordinance violations committed before the effective date of this Ordinance. 
c)  The amount of or collection of license, fee, penalty debt, forfeiture or obligation due and unpaid as of the effective date of this Ordinance. 
d)  Bonds and cash deposits required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, resolution or regulation. 
e)  Matters of record that refer to or are connected with a provision of the 1976 Code as amended. Such references shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions of the La Palma City Code (2013 Edition). 
SECTION 5: PENALTIES. The penalties provided for by the La Palma City Code (2013 Edition) are set forth in Article XI, Division 2 and in accordance with California Government Code Section 50022.4 are hereby set forth in this Ordinance: 
DIVISION 2. GENERAL PENALTY 
Sec. 2-350. Misdemeanor penalty. 
Except in cases where a different punishment is specifically prescribed elsewhere in this Code, every misdemeanor offense shall be punishable by imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months, or by fine not exceeding $1,000.00, or by both fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the court. (Code 1975, § 3-5; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 3) 
Sec. 2-351. Infraction penalty. 
(a) Except in cases where a different punishment is specifically prescribed elsewhere in this Code, every violation determined to be an infraction is punishable by: 
(1) A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation; 
(2) A fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation of the same provision within one year; 
(3) A fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation of the same provision within one year. 
(b) Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, a violation of the local building and safety code determined to be an infraction is punishable by: 
(1) A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation; 
(2) A fine not exceeding $500.00 for a second violation of the same provision within one year; 
(3) A fine not exceeding $1,000.00 for each additional violation of the same provision within one year. 
(Code 1975, § 3-6; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 3) 
Sec. 2-352. Continuing violation. 
Each day any violation or failure to perform an act shall continue shall constitute a separate offense, unless otherwise specifically provided. (Code 1975, § 3-7; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 3) 
SECTION 6: CODE SECTIONS. La Palma City Code sections cited on signage within the City shall, until updated if and as required, be deemed to be citations to the counterpart sections in the La Palma City Code (2013 Edition) for purposes of notice and enforcement. 
SECTION 7: CEQA. The City Council finds and determines that adoption of this Ordinance does not have any potential for causing a significant effect on the environment, and, therefore, does not constitute a "project" as that term is defined by the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), Public Resources Code Section 21000, et seq., and, thus, in accordance with Section 15061(b)(3) of Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations, no environmental review is merited. 
SECTION 8: ADDITIONAL FINDINGS. The City Council finds and determines that the amendments to and recodification of the La Palma City Code proposed by this Ordinance are: 
a)  Consistent with all of the applicable objectives, policies, general land uses, programs, and actions of all applicable elements in the general plan; 
b)  Not detrimental to the public convenience, health, safety, or general welfare of the City; and 
c)  Internally consistent. 
SECTION 9: SEVERABILITY. If any section, subsection, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this Ordinance is, for any reason, held to be invalid by a final judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted this Ordinance and each, section subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this Ordinance irrespective of the fact that one or more sections, subdivisions, sentences, clauses, phrases, or portions of this Ordinance be declared invalid. 
SECTION 10: PROCEDURAL COMPLIANCE. All required proceedings and considerations precedent to the adoption of this Ordinance have been regularly taken in accordance with applicable law. 
SECTION 11: PUBLICATION. The City Clerk is authorized and directed to publish this Ordinance or a summary thereof in the manner provided by law and in accordance with procedures normally taken. The City Clerk shall keep not less than one certified copy of the La Palma City Code (2013 Edition) on file in the City Clerk's office for review and use by the public. 
APPROVED AND ADOPTED by the City Council of the City of La Palma at a regular meeting held on the 3rd day of December 2013. 

	_____
Steve Hwangbo 
Mayor 
 
ATTEST: 
_____
Kimberly A. Kenney 
Deputy City Clerk 	
 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA ) 
COUNTY OF ORANGE  ) SS. 
CITY OF LA PALMA    ) 
 
I, LAURIE A. MURRAY, City Clerk of the City of La Palma, California, DO HEREBY CERTIFY that the foregoing Ordinance was adopted by the City Council of said City at a regular meeting of said City Council held on the 3rd day of December 2013, and that it was so adopted by called vote as follows: 

   AYES: Charoen, Goedhart, Hwangbo, Kim, and Shanahan 

   NOES: None 
 
	_____
Kimberly A. Kenney 
Deputy City Clerk 
  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local government generally, Const. of Cal., art. XI, § 1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of La Palma, California," and may be so cited. This Code may also be cited as the "La Palma City Code" or as the "City Code". 
(Code 1975, § 1-1) 
State Law reference— Authority of City to recodify code of ordinances, Government Code § 50022.10.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the City, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City Council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
(1)  Generally. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the City Council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provisions of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than another more general provision imposed by the Code or other law, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be controlling. 
(2)  California Codes. Any reference to the codified statutes of the State, including but not limited to Business and Professions Code, Civil Code, Code of Civil Procedure, Commercial Code, Corporations Code, Education Code, Elections Code, Evidence Code, Family Code, Financial Code, Fish and Game Code, Food and Agricultural Code, Government Code, Harbors and Navigation Code, Health and Safety Code, Insurance Code, Labor Code, Military and Veterans Code, Penal Code, Probate Code, Public Contract Code, Public Resources Code, Public Utilities Code, Revenue and Taxation Code, Streets and Highways Code, Unemployment Insurance Code, Vehicle Code, Water Code, or Welfare and Institutions Code, are to such codes as adopted and now or hereafter amended. Any reference to a State law or State act by title is to such law or act as amended. 
City. The term "the City" or "this City" shall be construed as if followed by the words "of La Palma, California." 
Code. The term "Code" or "City Code" means "The Code of the City of La Palma, California" or the "La Palma City Code." 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Government Code § 50022.1. 
Computation of time. The time in which any act provided by law is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day is a holiday, and then it is also excluded. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code §§ 6707, 6800. 
Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events, which items, conditions, provisions, or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either . . . or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, except that in appropriate cases the terms "or" and "and" are interchangeable: 
(1)  "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions, or events apply. 
(2)  "Or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions, or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  "Either. . . or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions, or events apply singly but not in combination. 
Council or City Council. The term "Council" or "City Council" means the City Council of the City of La Palma. 
County. The term "County" means Orange County, California. 
Day. The term "day" means the period of time between any midnight and the midnight following. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Government Code § 6806. 
Daytime, nighttime. The term "daytime" means the period of time between sunrise and sunset. "Nighttime" is the period of time between sunset and sunrise. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Government Code § 6807. 
Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Government Code § 12. 
Goods. The term "goods" includes wares or merchandise. 
Includes or included. The term "includes" or "included" means "includes" without excluding other items. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Government Code § 6804. 
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Number. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Government Code § 13. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes affirmation. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Government Code § 15. 
Officers, departments, etc. Officers, departments, boards, commissions, and employees referred to shall mean officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees of the City of La Palma, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
Official time. Whenever certain hours are named in this Code, they shall mean Pacific Standard Time or Daylight Saving Time, as may be in current use in the City. 
Operate. The term "operate" includes carry on, keep, conduct, or maintain. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" includes any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, corporation, or company. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Government Code § 17, Civil Code § 17. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" means and includes every species of property, except real property, as herein defined. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Civil Code §§ 14, 663. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Process. The term "process" means and includes a writ or summons issued in the course of judicial proceedings of either a civil or criminal nature. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Government Code § 22. 
Property. The term "property" means and includes real and personal property. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Civil Code § 14, Code of Civil Procedure § 481.195, Government Code § 180. 
Real property. The term "real property" means and includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Civil Code §§ 14, 658. 
Sale. The term "sale" means and includes any sale, exchange, barter, or offer for sale. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory and the term "may" is permissive. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Government Code § 14. 
Signature or subscription by mark. The term "signature" or "subscription by mark" means and includes a mark when the signer or subscriber cannot write, such signer's or subscriber' s name being written near the mark by a witness who writes his or her own name near the signer's or subscriber's name; but a signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two witnesses so sign their own names thereto. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Government Code § 16. 
State. The term "State" means the State of California. 
Street. The term "street" means and includes all public ways, alleys, lanes, courts, and sidewalks and those parts of public squares and places which form traveled parts of highways. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Vehicle Code § 590. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or an oral lease of or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future includes the present. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Government Code § 11. 
Week. The term "week" means seven consecutive days. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Government Code § 6805. 
Writing. The term "writing" means and includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement, or record is required or authorized by this Code, it shall be made in writing in the English language unless it is expressly provided otherwise. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Government Code § 8. 
Year. The term "year" means a period of 365 days. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Government Code § 6803. 
(Code 1975, § 1-2; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 1-3. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same in substance as those of ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1975, § 1-3)  
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution, or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(c)  This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new sections upon the same subject or in any other ordinance. 
(Code 1975, § 1-4)  
Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, division, article, or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1975, § 1-5) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Government Code § 23.  
Sec. 1-6. - Headings of sections. 
The headings of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the headings, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1975, § 1-6)  
Sec. 1-7. - Notices. 
Whenever a notice is required to be given under this Code, unless different provisions herein are otherwise specifically made, such notice may be given pursuant to applicable provisions of State law. 
(Code 1975, § 1-9; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  Each bill which proposes an ordinance to repeal, amend, or add to any portion of this Code and each bill which proposes an ordinance of a general and permanent nature suitable for inclusion in this Code, though constituting new subject matter not therein contained, shall be drafted so as to specify the specific section numbers, subsections, etc., of this Code which are to be repealed or amended and, with respect to additions and to new subject matter, so as to provide appropriate chapter, article, section, etc., numbers therefor and each amendment of and addition to this Code shall be set out in full and appropriate chapter and article headings and section headings shall be included. 
(b)  Upon the adoption of an ordinance to repeal, amend, or add to any portion of this Code or to include new subject matter in this Code, the City Clerk shall separate the several chapters, articles, sections, etc., of such ordinance and enter them in their proper places in each file copy of this Code and shall remove therefrom any portion so repealed or amended and in the margin of each insertion in the file copies of this Code he or she shall note and initial the date of passage, effective date, and number of the amending or repealing ordinance. 
(c)  Items removed from the file copies of this Code pursuant to subsection (b) of this section shall be maintained by the City Clerk in a reasonably accessible manner. The volume in which such repealed and amended items are to be included shall be known as the "Record of Repealed and Amended Portions of the Code of La Palma, California," the purpose of which is to enable the City Council and other persons interested to ascertain the statutes of this Code at any given time in the past. 
(Code 1975, § 1-10)  
Sec. 1-9. - References to chapters or sections. 
All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified.  
Sec. 1-10. - History notes. 
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section.  
Sec. 1-11. - References and editor's notes. 
References and editor's notes following certain sections are inserted as an aid and guide to the reader and are not controlling or meant to have any legal effect.  
Sec. 1-12. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by City personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the City. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the City Council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code during that period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate section headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in section headings, titles for sections and headings for other subdivisions of the Code; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the term "this ordinance" or terms of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ through ____________ ." The inserted section numbers will indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code; and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-13. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the City to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever except pursuant to ordinance or other official act of the City Council which will cause the law of the City to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in sections 2-350 through 2-352.  
Sec. 1-14. - Rates, charges, or fees established. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided for, all rates, charges, or fees necessary for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this Code shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by motion, resolution or ordinance of the City Council, from time to time. Any rates, charges, or fees established by the City pursuant to the regulations or requirements established herein may be changed from time to time by the City Council, and such changes shall both be considered an amendment to this Code. 
(b)  Whenever any provision of this Code provides that a rate, charge, or fee shall be established by the City Council, from time to time, and the amount of such rate, charge, or fee is not expressed in this Code in any dollar amount, then the amount of such rate, charge, or fee shall be the most recent and latest amount established, set or fixed by the City Council by ordinance, resolution, or motion.  
Sec. 1-15. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the City or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the City or any evidence of the City's indebtedness; 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the City; 
(4)  Any ordinance or resolution fixing the salary of any City officer or employee, unless superseded; 
(5)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing and prescribing employment and personnel policies and procedures; 
(6)  Any right of franchise granted by the City to any person, firm, or corporation; 
(7)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, closing, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the City; 
(8)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the City; 
(9)  Any appropriation ordinance; 
(10)  Any ordinance or resolution which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term; 
(11)  Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(12)  Any zoning ordinance or amendments thereto, and any ordinance establishing a board of zoning appeals or planning commission, including joint commissions; 
(13)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat or providing for subdivision regulations; 
(14)  Any ordinance or resolution describing or altering the boundaries of the City or annexing property to the City; 
(15)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the City not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(16)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code; 
(17)  Any ordinance or regulation prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations concerning through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones, not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code; 
(18)  Any ordinance or resolution of agreement with another political subdivision; and 
(19)  Any other ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; or which is referred to elsewhere in this Code as continuing in effect. 
(b)  Nor shall the repeal of any such ordinance or resolution be construed to revive any ordinance, resolution or part thereof that has been repealed or superseded by a subsequent ordinance or resolution which is repealed or superseded by this chapter. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Government of cities generally, Government Code § 34000 et seq.; City officials generally, Government Code § 36501 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Official seal. 
(a)  The impression of the City seal shall be made and used upon official documents executed by the City or its duly authorized officials. 
(b)  The City Clerk shall be the custodian of the City seal. 
(c)  The City seal is described as follows: 
(1)  The shape is round. A gold band circles the seal. The width of the band is approximately 15 percent of the outside diameter of the seal. The band is bordered, on the outside and inside, with a narrow black line. 
(2)  Block lettering around the upper part of the gold band reads "CITY OF LA PALMA" and lettering around the lower part of the band is "CALIFORNIA," in upright position. All lettering is black. 
(3)  The upper inner area is a medium blue colored background, covering approximately 60 percent of the total inner area and separated from the lower part, which is a medium green color, by a horizontal thin black line. 
(4)  The central figure is a torch. The upper part of the torch is bowl-shaped. It and the stem are gold and the stem is held in a white colored hand, outlined in black. 
(5)  The flame is also gold around its outside area, surrounding a red flame in the center of which is a white flame. The torch configuration is imposed in the center, partly in each colored field. In the upper part of the blue field, to the left, is a white factory building and just below it is a white ranch type house, both outlined in black. 
(6)  To the right of the torch is a California Fan palm tree, with approximately one-fourth of the black trunk in the green area and the upper part in the blue area. The fans are green, outlined in black. To the left of the torch, a black and white cow grazes in the lower green area. 
(7)  Below the torch, in black lettering is the corporate identification: 
"'INCORPORATED 
OCTOBER, 1955'" 
(Code 1975, § 1-7; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 2-2. - Posting of ordinances and other public notices. 
The City Council shall, by resolution, designate the places for the posting of ordinances and other public notices required to be posted by law within the City. 
(Code 1975, § 1-11; Ord. No. 79-2, § 1) 
State Law reference— Publication of ordinances, Government Code § 36933.  
Sec. 2-3. - Council meetings—Time. 
The City Council shall hold regular meetings on the first and third Tuesday of each month. The time of the meeting shall be established by resolution. A regular meeting coinciding with a State holiday shall be held upon the next succeeding day that is not a holiday. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1; Ord. No. 2000-01, § 2) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Government Code § 36805; state law as to time of adjourned meetings, Government Code § 36809.  
Sec. 2-4. - Same—Location. 
Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held in the Council chambers of the City hall. 
(Code 1975, § 2-2; Ord. No. 216, § 1)  
Sec. 2-5. - Location of City hall. 
The City hall shall be located at 7822 Walker Street. 
(Code 1975, § 2-3; Ord. No. 216, § 1)  
Sec. 2-6. - Compensation—Members of City Council. 
(a)  This section is enacted pursuant to Government Code § 36516, authorizing the Council to provide by ordinance that each member of the Council shall receive a prescribed salary, the amount of which is based upon the population of the City as determined by estimates made by the Department of Finance. 
(b)  Each member of the City Council shall receive as salary, the sum of $300.00 per month, as prescribed in Government Code § 36516, which salary shall be payable each month for the preceding month. If the commencement or termination of office shall include at least one regular council meeting, a full month's salary shall be paid for such partial month in office. 
(c)  The salaries prescribed in this section are and shall be exclusive of any amounts payable to each member of the City Council as reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred by such member in the performance of official duties for the City. 
(Code 1975, § 2-4; Ord. No. 125, §§ 1, 3—5; Ord. No. 79-3, § 2; Ord. No. 86-12, § 1) 
State Law reference— City council members permitted to be reimbursed for expenses incurred in performance of official duties, Government Code § 36514.5.  
Sec. 2-7. - Same—Officers and employees. 
The salaries and compensation of officers and employees of the City shall be as fixed and determined by resolution of the City Council. 
(Code 1975, § 2-5; Ord. No. 19, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Government Code § 36506.  
Sec. 2-8. - Term of office for Councilmembers. 
(a)  No person shall hold office as a member of the City Council for more than two consecutive terms. Any person may hold office as a member of the City Council for more than two terms if he or she does not hold office as a member of the City Council for four or more consecutive years immediately following the conclusion of each two consecutive terms of office as a member of the City Council. 
(b)  If a person serves for at least two years of a term, that person for purposes of subsection (a) of this section shall be considered to have served a full four-year term. 
(c)  The term limits established by this section shall be applicable to all terms of office for members of the City Council commencing with the terms of members of the City Council elected at the November 5, 1996, City general municipal election. If it is determined that the term limits established by this section cannot legally be made applicable to the terms for the offices that are filled at said election, then they will still be effective as to all instances of the filling of the office of a member of the City Council, whether it be by appointment or election, that occur after this section goes into effect. 
(Code 1975, § 2-5.1; Ord. No. 96-2, § 2) 
State Law reference— Term of office, Government Code § 34879.  
Sec. 2-9. - Acts by deputies. 
Whenever a power is granted to or is duly imposed upon a public officer or employee, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy of such officer or employee or by a person otherwise duly authorized pursuant to law or ordinance or by an officer of the County or by a deputy or employee of such officer when by contract with the City such officer is obligated and has agreed to perform certain duties on behalf of the City unless this Code expressly provides otherwise. 
(Code 1975, § 2-6; Ord. No. 19, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Government Code § 7.  
Sec. 2-10. - Filing fee for candidates for elective office. 
(a)  A filing fee of $25.00 is hereby established for candidates' nomination papers for elective offices at municipal elections held in the City. 
(b)  The filing fee shall be paid to the City Clerk by each candidate for an elective office at the time the candidate's nomination paper is filed with the City Clerk. 
(c)  The City Clerk shall transfer to the City Treasurer all fees received which shall be deposited in the General Fund. 
(Code 1975, § 2-7; Ord. No. 73-14, §§ 1—3)  
Secs. 2-11—2-38. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY MANAGER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— City manager generally, Government Code § 34851 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-39. - Office created; qualifications; term. 
The office of the City Manager is hereby created and established. The City Manager shall be appointed by the City Council solely on the basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications and ability, and shall hold office at and during the pleasure of the City Council. 
(Code 1975, § 2-8; Ord. No. 3, § 1)  
Sec. 2-40. - Residency; eligibility for appointment of Councilmembers. 
(a)  Residence in the City at the time of appointment shall not be required as a condition of appointment to the position of City Manager. 
(b)  No person elected to membership on the City Council shall, subsequent to such election, be eligible for appointment as City Manager until one year has elapsed after he or she has ceased to be a member of the City Council. 
(Code 1975, § 2-9; Ord. No. 3, § 2)  
Sec. 2-41. - Compensation. 
(a)  The City Manager shall receive such compensation as the City Council shall from time to time determine and fix. Such compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the City as the City Council shall designate. 
(b)  The City Manager shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by him or her in the performance of his or her duties or incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the City under direction of the City Council. Reimbursement shall only be made when a verified itemized claim, setting forth the sums expended for which reimbursement is requested, has been presented to the City Council and has been duly approved and allowed by the City Council. 
(Code 1975, § 2-10; Ord. No. 3, § 5)  
Sec. 2-42. - Powers and duties. 
The City Manager shall be the administrative head of the City government under the direction and control of the City Council, except as otherwise provided in this article. He/she shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the City which are under his or her control. In addition to his or her general powers as administrative head and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be his or her duty and he or she shall have the power: 
(1)  To see that the laws of the State pertaining to the City and all laws and ordinances of the City are duly enforced and that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the City are faithfully observed. 
(2)  To control, order and give directions to all heads of departments, subordinate officers, and employees of the City except the City Attorney. 
(3)  To transfer employees from one department to another. 
(4)  To consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments, or units under his or her direction. 
(5)  To appoint, promote, discipline, demote, and remove any officers and employees of the City except the City Attorney. 
(6)  To exercise control over and to supervise in general all departments and divisions of the City government and all appointive officers and employees thereof except the City Attorney. 
(7)  To attend all meetings of the City Council and its committees unless excused therefrom by the City Council, except when his or her removal is under consideration by the City Council. 
(8)  To recommend to the City Council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he or she deems necessary or expedient. 
(9)  To keep the City Council at all times fully advised as to the financial conditions and needs of the City. 
(10)  To prepare and submit to the City Council the annual budget and to administer it after adoption. 
(11)  To purchase or cause to be purchased all supplies for all departments or divisions of the City. 
(12)  To make investigations into the affairs of the City and any department or division thereof and any contract or the proper performance of any obligation running to the City. 
(13)  To investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the government of the City and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the City and to see that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the City are faithfully observed. 
(14)  To exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks, streets, and other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the City Council and not specifically delegated to a particular board or officer. 
(15)  To devote his or her time as required by the duties and interest of the City. 
(16)  To make reports and recommendations as may be desirable or as are requested by the City Council. 
(17)  To serve in any appointed office or as head of a department within the City government to which he or she may be qualified when appointed thereto by the City Council and to hold and perform the duties thereof at the pleasure of the City Council. 
(18)  To provide leadership for civic movements designated to benefit the residents of the City when so authorized by the City Council. 
(19)  To perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him or her from time to time by ordinance or resolution of the City Council. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11; Ord. No. 3, § 6; Ord. No. 97-08, § 1) 
State Law reference— Power to dismiss and appoint other officers and employees, Government Code § 34856; vesting authority to appoint subordinate City officials in City manager, Government Code § 36510.  
Sec. 2-43. - Bond. 
The City Manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the City Council in such sum as may be determined by the City Council and shall be conditioned on the faithful performance of the duties imposed on the City Manager. 
(Code 1975, § 2-12; Ord. No. 3, § 3) 
State Law reference— Bonds of City officers and employees generally, Government Code § 36518 et seq.  
Sec. 2-44. - Ex officio member of boards and commissions. 
The City Manager shall be an ex officio member of all boards and commissions appointed by the mayor or the City Council pursuant to law, with a right to participate in all deliberations or actions by his or her voice, but without vote. 
(Code 1975, § 2-13; Ord. No. 3, § 6)  
Sec. 2-45. - Assistance of subordinate officers. 
It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers, including the City Attorney, to cooperate with and assist the City Manager in administering the affairs of the City most efficiently, economically, and harmoniously so far as may be consistent with their duties as prescribed by law and the ordinances of the City. 
(Code 1975, § 2-14; Ord. No. 3, § 8; Ord. No. 97-08, § 2)  
Sec. 2-46. - Administrative link to City Council. 
The City Council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the City through the City Manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and no individual member of the City Council shall give orders to the City Manager or any subordinate of the City Manager. In the case of each communication by a member of the City Council to the City Manager that is an order or a request, it shall be the responsibility of the City Manager to determine immediately whether such communication is an order or a request. If, in the opinion of the City Manager, such communication is an order as prohibited by this section, the City Manager shall immediately advise the City Council Member that such communication is in conflict with this section. The City Manager shall also place such communication on the agenda for the next regularly scheduled Council meeting. Any communication to the City Manager by any member of the City Council that is not handled by the City Manager as provided in this section shall not constitute a violation of this section. 
(Code 1975, § 2-15; Ord. No. 3, § 9; Ord. No. 75-11)  
Sec. 2-47. - Temporary absence or disability. 
In case of the absence or disability of the City Manager, the City Council may designate some duly qualified person to perform the duties of the City Manager during the period of absence or disability of such City Manager, subject, however, to the furnishing by such person of a corporate surety bond conditioned on faithful performance of the duties required to be performed. 
(Code 1975, § 2-16; Ord. No. 3, § 4)  
Sec. 2-48. - Removal of City Manager. 
(a)  The removal of the City Manager shall be effected by a majority vote of the members of the City Council. The removal from office of the City Manager shall be at such time and on such terms and conditions as the City Council shall determine at the time of removal. 
(b)  Nothing herein contained shall be construed as a limitation on the power or authority of the City Council to enter into a written agreement with the City Manager delineating specific terms and conditions of employment and removal from office. 
(Code 1975, § 2-17; Ord. No. 81-4, § 1)  
Secs. 2-49—2-69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PLANNING AGENCY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-06, § 4, adopted May 3, 2016, amended the title of art. III to read as set out herein. Previously art. III was titled "Planning Commission." 
State Law reference— City planning agencies generally, Government Code § 65100 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-70. - City Council acting as Planning Agency. 
The City Council, as the legislative body for the City, shall perform and function as the City's Planning Agency. The City Council, as the legislative body, shall handle all matters for the City, both as the City Council and, where required by law, as the City's Planning Agency. 
(Code 1975, § 2-18; Ord. No. 105; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 4, 5-3-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-06, § 4, adopted May 3, 2016, amended § 2-70, to read as set out herein. Previously § 2-70 was titled "City Council acting as Commission."  
Secs. 2-71—2-98. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FOUND PROPERTY AND MONEY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Lost and unclaimed property generally, Civil Code § 2080 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-99. - Receipt. 
The Police Chief shall make provisions for receiving and safekeeping found property and money delivered to him or her or coming into his or her possession. A receipt shall be issued to the person delivering such property or such money. 
(Code 1975, § 2-19; Ord. No. 214, § 1)  
Sec. 2-100. - Retention period. 
(a)  Found property shall be stored in a safe place and found money deposited with the Finance Director for a period of six months unless sooner claimed by the true owner. If value of the property or money is more than $100.00, the property shall be held for a period of one year. 
(b)  Found money shall be deposited with the Finance Director for a period of three years unless sooner claimed by the owner. If the amount of money is less than $15.00 the money shall be deposited with the Finance Director for a period of one year. 
(c)  If property or money is not claimed within the applicable time period provided in this section, it shall then be deemed to be unclaimed property or unclaimed money and be subject to disposal as provided in this article. 
(Code 1975, § 2-20; Ord. No. 214, §§ 2, 4)  
Sec. 2-101. - Reclaiming—True owner. 
During the applicable retention period, found property may be delivered to or such money paid to the true owner. Such property shall be delivered upon reasonable proof of ownership after ten days' notice by mail to the person who delivered such property and to others who have asserted a claim of ownership at any address given by such persons. Such money shall be paid to the true owner upon written order to the City Manager and Finance Director from the Police Chief. The Police Chief shall make such order upon the same proof of ownership and with the same notice as prescribed in the case of property. Charges for the care of the property or money not exceeding ten percent of the value of the property or the amount of the money may be charged for its safekeeping. If ownership cannot be determined to the satisfaction of the Police Chief, he or she may refuse to deliver such property or order the payment of such money to anyone until ordered to do so by a court. 
(Code 1975, § 2-21; Ord. No. 214, § 3)  
Sec. 2-102. - Same—Finder. 
If, at the time of delivery of found property or money, the person who delivered it to the Police Chief indicates in writing that he or she wishes to assert a claim to the property or money as a finder, the property or money may be delivered to him or her if the true owner does not appear during the applicable retention period, provided that the person who delivered it otherwise complied with State law. 
(Code 1975, § 2-22; Ord. No. 214, § 4)  
Sec. 2-103. - Disposition of unclaimed money. 
At any time of the expiration of the three year retention period, the Finance Director may cause a notice to be published once a week for two consecutive weeks in an adjudicated newspaper, stating the amount of money, the fund in which it is held, and that the money will become the City's property 45 days after the first publication of the notice. If no claim to the money is filed within said 45-day period, the money shall be deposited into the General Fund. If the amount of money is less than $15.00, the money shall be deposited into the General Fund after one year of retention without the need for a published notice. 
(Code 1975, § 2-23; Ord. No. 214, § 5)  
Sec. 2-104. - Disposition of unclaimed property. 
(a)  Property received and not delivered to the true owner or claimed by the finder shall be disposed of by public auction or appropriation to the use of the City not less than five days after a notice describing the articles to be disposed of and announcing the date, time and place of the auction is published once in the official newspaper of the City. 
(b)  After such auction is completed, the Police Chief shall deliver the proceeds of the auction to the Finance Director for deposit in the General Fund. 
(Code 1975, § 2-24; Ord. No. 214, §§ 6, 9)  
Sec. 2-105. - Costs and charges. 
Any costs or charges for keeping or depositing the property or money and the costs or charges for the advertising and sale shall be a proper charge against the City. The City shall be reimbursed for such costs by any party to whom the property or money is delivered at the time of delivery. 
(Code 1975, § 2-25; Ord. No. 214, § 7)  
Sec. 2-106. - Appropriation for City use. 
Any articles of property to be appropriated to the use of the City shall be made available to the division in need thereof upon approval of such appropriation by the City Manager. 
(Code 1975, § 2-26; Ord. No. 214, § 8)  
Sec. 2-107. - Unsaleable and unusable property. 
Any property advertised and offered for sale but not sold and not suitable for appropriation to the use of the City shall be deemed to be of no value and shall be disposed of in such manner as the City Manager directs and as permitted by law. 
(Code 1975, § 2-27; Ord. No. 214, § 10)  
Sec. 2-108. - Perishable property. 
Any property coming into the possession of the Police Chief which he or she determines to be in danger of perishing or of losing the greater part of its value or, when the charges of storage amount to two-thirds of its value, may be sold at public auction after 90 days, with publication of a notice of the date, time, and place of the auction, at least five days prior to the auction. Such proceeds shall be treated in the same manner as if such property had been money in the first instance. If such property cannot be sold, it shall be treated in the same manner as unsaleable and unusable property. 
(Code 1975, § 2-28; Ord. No. 214, § 11)  
Secs. 2-109—2-129. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE DIRECTOR[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of City to establish office, duties, and powers of director of finance, Government Code § 40805.5; City treasurer generally, Government Code § 41000 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-130. - Office of Finance Director—Creation. 
In accordance with Government Code § 40805.5 and in order to establish a uniform method for the processing and development of fiscal accounting and budgetary functions within the City government, there is hereby established the office of the Finance Director. 
(Code 1975, § 2-29; Ord. No. 82-15, § 1)  
Sec. 2-131. - Same—Appointment, powers, duties and responsibilities. 
The City Manager shall be the Finance Director. The City Manager may delegate any of the powers and duties conferred upon him or her as Finance Director under this article to any other officer or employee of the City, or may recommend that such powers or duties be performed under contract as provided in section 2-133. The Finance Director shall: 
(1)  Plan, organize, direct, and supervise the accounting auditing, budget preparation, cost accounting, functions and systems of the City. 
(2)  Maintain and operate the general accounting system of the City, and prescribe the appropriate accounting and bookkeeping procedures that may or hereafter be established or in operation in any department. 
(3)  Invest inactive or surplus available public funds in accordance with State laws and maintain appropriate investment records. 
(4)  Perform such accounting functions and duties in accordance with the latest and most modern accounting methods as the science of accounting progresses. 
(5)  Assist in the preparation of the annual operating budget and in the administration thereof; prepare instructions and forms for securing budget estimates and projections to effect a balanced budget; supervise the preparation of copies of the budget and its distribution. 
(6)  Assume and perform all municipal functions and duties relating to the preparation, preauditing, presenting and disbursement of claims, warrants and demands against the City, including payrolls, to ensure that budget appropriations are not exceeded; audit all expenditures as to budget or Council authorization; audit and approve for payment all bills, invoices, payrolls, and demands; prepare and submit to the City Council periodically a register of audited demands in conformance with State law; supervise and be responsible for the disbursement of all moneys. 
(7)  Assist on special City-wide finance programs; such as insurance and long-term capital budget programs. 
(8)  Review revenue and expenditure reports in comparison with the approved budget and initiate the controls necessary to keep budget in balance. 
(9)  Cooperate in the purchase of all services, supplies, goods, wares, merchandise, equipment and material which may be required by the City; give general direction for the purchasing function of the City, and audit and approve all purchase orders for payment. 
(10)  Unless otherwise determined by the City Council, the Finance Director shall perform the functions of City Treasurer under this Code. If the City Council decides to have a different person perform the functions of City Treasurer, the Finance Director shall supervise the City Treasurer's functions in cooperation with the appointed City Treasurer. 
(11)  Supervise the Water Division financial accounting and functions. 
(12)  Plan and direct the implementation of appropriate financial policies, including the preparation of regular and special reports covering the revision, improvement, or adjustment of these polices. 
(13)  Perform all of the financial and accounting duties imposed upon the City Clerk by state statute, and the City Clerk shall be relieved of such duties imposed upon the City Clerk by Government Code §§ 40802 through 40805.5. 
(Code 1975, § 2-30; Ord. No. 82-15, § 1)  
Sec. 2-132. - Same—Financial reports. 
The Finance Director shall prepare the following reports in sufficient detail as to show the exact financial condition of the City: 
(1)  Quarterly, or more frequently, cumulative statements of all receipts disbursements and cash balances by fund as of the reporting date. 
(2)  Such other financial and activity reports as may be required by the City Council. 
(3)  Compulsory reports for State and private agencies. 
(Code 1975, § 2-31; Ord. No. 82-15, § 1)  
Sec. 2-133. - Right to contract for special services. 
The Finance Director shall consider and prepare recommendations regarding the extent to which the City should contract for the performance of technical services in connection with the operation of the financial system. The City Council may contract with any qualified person or public or private agency for the performance of any of the duties and responsibilities imposed by this article. 
(Code 1975, § 2-32; Ord. No. 82-15, § 1)  
Secs. 2-134—2-164. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Community Redevelopment Law, Health and Safety Code § 33000 et seq.; community development commission generally, Health and Safety Code § 34100 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-165. - Community Redevelopment Agency—Findings. 
The City Council finds and determines that there is a need for a Community Redevelopment Agency to function in the City of La Palma. 
(Code 1975, § 2-33; Ord. No. 82-16, § 1)  
Sec. 2-166. - Same—Activated; powers and duties. 
The Redevelopment Agency of the City is hereby activated, and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, shall have full power to transact any business and execute its powers as set forth in Health and Safety Code § 33000. 
(Code 1975, § 2-34; Ord. No. 82-16, § 2)  
Sec. 2-167. - Community Development Commission—Findings. 
The City Council finds and determines that there is a need for a Community Development Commission to function in the City. 
(Code 1975, § 2-35; Ord. No. 82-16, § 3)  
Sec. 2-168. - Same—Activation; powers and duties. 
The Community Development Commission of the City, is hereby activated, and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, shall have full power to transact any business and execute its powers as set forth in Health and Safety Code § 34100. The Community Development Commission shall operate and govern the La Palma Redevelopment Agency, and shall have such other nature, power, authority, functions and jurisdiction relating to community development as may be delegated to the commission by the City Council. The commission shall not exercise any of the nature, power, authority, functions and jurisdiction of a housing authority in the City. 
(Code 1975, § 2-36; Ord. No. 82-16, § 4)  
Sec. 2-169. - Same—City Council to act. 
Pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 34120, the City Council hereby declares itself to constitute the Community Development Commission, and finds that such action will serve the public interest and promote the public safety and welfare in an effective manner. 
(Code 1975, § 2-37; Ord. No. 82-16, § 5) 
State Law reference— City council authority to appoint itself as to be the Community Development Commission, Health and Safety Code § 34120.  
Sec. 2-170. - City Manager authority. 
The City Council hereby designates the City Manager as the Executive Director of the Community Development Commission and hereby delegates to the City Manager all of the power and authority of the Commission for the administration of the activities of the Commission and the Redevelopment Agency, subject to direction and control by the Commission. 
(Code 1975, § 2-38; Ord. No. 82-16, § 6)  
Secs. 2-171—2-193. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PURCHASE OF SUPPLIES, MATERIALS, EQUIPMENT AND SERVICES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Purchases of supplies and equipment by local agencies, Government Code § 54202 et seq.; Local Agency Public Construction Act, Public Contract Code § 20100 et seq.; bid procedures for public construction contracts awarded by cities, Public Contract Code § 20160 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-194. - Adoption of purchasing system. 
In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies, materials, equipment and services at the lowest possible cost commensurate with the quality needed, to clearly define authority for the purchasing function and to exercise positive financial control over such purchases, a purchasing system is hereby adopted. 
(Code 1975, § 2-39; Ord. No. 84-17, § 1)  
Sec. 2-195. - General policy. 
Purchases shall be in accordance with allocations approved in the City budget. At the same time, the City Council recognizes that in certain unanticipated exception cases, administrative necessity may dictate that a certain latitude be permitted in the implementation of this purchasing system. 
(Code 1975, § 2-40; Ord. No. 84-17, § 1)  
Sec. 2-196. - Authority. 
The authority for the purchase of supplies, materials, equipment and services shall be vested in the City Manager or his or her designee. In this regard, the City Manager shall have the authority to: 
(1)  Purchase supplies, materials, equipment and services in accordance with the purchasing procedures prescribed in this article; 
(2)  Act to procure for the City the needed quality in supplies, materials, equipment and services at the least expense to the City; 
(3)  Correlate purchase requests with the approved budget and availability of funds; 
(4)  Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies, materials, equipment and services; 
(5)  Where possible, consolidate all of the department purchasing needs and schedule quantity discounts and volume buying; 
(6)  Endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases; 
(7)  Prepare administrative rules and regulations governing the purchase of supplies, materials, equipment and services for the internal management and operation of the purchasing system; 
(8)  Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products; 
(9)  Prescribe and maintain such forms as reasonably necessary to the operation of this article; 
(10)  Prepare and recommend to the City Council revisions and amendments to the purchasing ordinance codified in this article. 
(Code 1975, § 2-41; Ord. No. 84-17, § 1)  
Sec. 2-197. - Bidding. 
Purchasing shall be entered into pursuant to either formal or informal bid procedures as hereinafter prescribed. All solicitation of bids shall be unrestricted and competitive except as provided in subsection (3) of this section. 
(1)  Formal purchasing procedures. The purchase of supplies, materials, equipment and services of estimated value greater than $25,000.00 shall require the approval of the City Council following a formal bid procedure as set forth in section 2-198. Purchases shall not be divided into smaller amounts to avoid formal bid procedures. 
(2)  Informal purchasing. The purchase of supplies, materials, equipment and services of an estimated value of $25,000.00 or less shall be made pursuant to an informal bid procedure as set forth in section 2-199. 
(3)  Exceptions. 
a.  Other public agency bids. The purchase of supplies, materials, equipment and services may be accomplished in accordance with any bid awarded by another public agency for which the City would normally follow its own formal or informal bid procedures. Prior approval of the City Council for specific purposes shall be required. 
b.  Certain professional services. The procurement of professional and other nonpublic works contractual services may be made on the basis of the qualification and experience of the bidders, and without following either formal or informal bid procedures. 
(Code 1975, § 2-42; Ord. No. 84-17, § 1; Ord. No. 98-03, § 1)  
Sec. 2-198. - Formal bid procedure. 
Purchases shall be by written contract or approved purchase order pursuant to the procedure hereinafter prescribed. Purchases shall be awarded to the bidder whose bid is most responsive to the City in terms of price, quality and timeliness and where the bidder is determined by the City Council to be the most highly qualified and responsible bidder to supply the materials, supplies or service. 
(1)  Notice inviting bids. Notices inviting bids shall include a description of specifications of the articles to be purchased, delivery, conditions and discounts, and shall state where bid documents and specifications may be secured, the time and place for filing and of opening bids, and when the award will be made or all bids rejected. 
a.  Public notice. Notices inviting bids shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least ten days before the date of opening of the bids. As an alternative, when publication in a newspaper is not practical, notices may be posted in at least three public places in the City that have been designated by Council action as the places for posting public notices. 
b.  Other notices. The City Manager shall also advertise pending purchases by notices in such publications or trade journals or in such other manner as the City Manager may deem appropriate so as to ensure that competitive bids are secured by the City. 
(2)  Bidder's security. When deemed necessary by the City Manager, bidder's security may be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Bidders shall be entitled to return of bond security; provided, however, that a successful bidder shall forfeit his or her bond security upon his or her refusal or failure to execute the contract within the time period specified in the bid documents after the notice of award of contract has been mailed, unless in the latter event the City is solely responsible for the delay in executing the contract. The City Council may, on refusal of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the next most responsive bidder. If the City Council awards the contract to the next most responsive bidder, the amount of the first most responsive bidder's security shall be applied by the City to the contract price differential between the first most responsive bid and the second most responsive bid, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the first most responsive bidder. 
(3)  Bid opening procedure. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices or as soon thereafter as possible. The date and time bids are received shall be marked on the envelope. Bids received after the deadline established in the notices inviting bids shall be returned to the bidder unopened. A tabulation of all bids received shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of not less than 30 calendar days after the bid opening. The name of the most responsive bidder will be identified. 
(4)  Rejection of bids. For stated reason, the City Council may reject any or all bids presented and readvertise for bids pursuant to the procedure hereinabove prescribed. 
(5)  Tie bids. If two or more bids received are the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if the public interest will not permit the delay of readvertising for bids, the City Council may at its discretion accept the one it chooses or accept the lowest bid made by one of the bidders, after negotiation with the bidders that are tied at the time of the bid opening. 
(6)  Performance bonds. The City Manager shall have authority to require a performance bond before entering into a contract or approving a purchase order in such amount as it shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the City. 
(Code 1975, § 2-43; Ord. No. 84-17, § 1; Ord. No. 98-03, § 2)  
Sec. 2-199. - Informal bid procedure. 
(a)  Purchases may be made by the City Manager in the open market pursuant to the procedure hereinafter prescribed and without observing the procedure prescribed in section 2-198; provided, however, all bidding may be dispensed with for purchases having a total estimated value of less than $1,000.00. 
(b)  Purchases shall be awarded to the bidder whose bid is most responsive to the City in terms of price, quality and timeliness, and where the bidder is determined by the City Manager to be the most highly qualified and responsible bidder to supply the material, supplies or service. 
(c)  Minimum number of bids. Informal bid purchases shall, wherever possible, be based on at least three bids. 
(d)  Notice inviting bids. The City Manager, his or her designee or department head of the department requesting the supplies, materials, equipment and service, shall solicit bids of prospective vendors, personally, by telephone, by written request, or by public notice posted on the public bulletin board in the City hall. 
(e)  Written response. Written responses to the notice inviting bids shall be submitted to the City Manager with the request for purchase. Such responses shall be open to public inspection. 
(Code 1975, § 2-44; Ord. No. 84-17, § 1; Ord. No. 92-11, § 1; Ord. No. 98-03, § 3)  
Sec. 2-200. - Existing maintenance service agreements. 
Renewal of existing maintenance service agreements may be approved by the City Manager. A change in an existing maintenance service contractor may be made by the City Manager when, in his or her opinion, such change is necessary due to a change in the cost for such service or the quality of service. The purchase of substitute maintenance services shall be made in accordance with section 2-197. 
(Code 1975, § 2-45; Ord. No. 84-17, § 1)  
Sec. 2-201. - Exception to bidding procedures; emergencies. 
When, in the opinion of the City Manager, an emergency requires that a purchase of supplies, materials, equipment and services be made from the nearest available source, the City Manager, or his or her designee, may procure such without complying with the bidding procedures prescribed above. A complete report, including a description of the emergency and the source for the purchase shall be submitted to the City Council in conjunction with the warrant for the payment of the purchase of such supplies, materials, equipment and services. 
(Code 1975, § 2-46; Ord. No. 84-17, § 1)  
Sec. 2-202. - Article not applicable to any public project. 
The provisions of this article are not applicable to any "public project," as defined in California Public Contract Code § 20161, for the construction or repair of a municipal building, work, improvement, or street by the City.  
Secs. 2-203—2-225. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - LIMITATIONS PERIOD FOR CHALLENGING ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS 
 
Sec. 2-226. - Action; filing. 
Any action to contest or review any decision of the City, its City Council, committees, commissions, agencies, or officers, shall be filed with a court of competent jurisdiction not later than the 90th day following the date on which the decision becomes final, unless this Code or State law requires otherwise. 
(Code 1975, § 2-47; Ord. No. 88-11, § 1)  
Sec. 2-227. - Decision defined. 
As used in section 2-226, the term "decision" means an adjudicatory administrative decision made, after hearing, suspending, demoting, or dismissing an officer or employee, or approving, revoking, or denying an application for a permit, license, or an application for any retirement benefit or allowance. 
(Code 1975, § 2-48; Ord. No. 88-11, § 1)  
Sec. 2-228. - Notice. 
With respect to decisions rendered by the City and governed by this article, the City shall provide notice to the party that the time within which judicial review must be sought is governed by this article, and the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.6. 
(Code 1975, § 2-49; Ord. No. 88-11, § 1)  
Secs. 2-229—2-249. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - CLAIMS FOR MONEY OR DAMAGES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Claims and actions against public entities and public employees, Government Code § 810 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-250. - Requirement for presentation of claims. 
(a)  Pursuant to Government Code § 935, and except as provided below, claims against the City or any City officer, employee or agent for money or damages which are excepted by Government Code § 905 from claims presentation requirements, and which are not governed by any other statute or regulation expressly relating thereto, shall be governed by the procedures contained in Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 900) and Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 910) of Part 3, Division 3.6, Title 1 of the Government Code as a prerequisite to bringing any lawsuit or action for money or damages against the City or any City officer, employee or agent. Such claims shall include the following: 
(1)  Claims under the Revenue and Taxation Code or other statute prescribing procedures for the refund, rebate, exemption, cancellation, amendment, modification, or adjustment of any tax, assessment, fee or charge or any portion thereof, or of any penalties, costs or charges related thereto; 
(2)  Claims in connection with which the filing of a notice of lien, statement of claim, or stop notice is required under any provisions of law relating to mechanics', laborers' or materialmen's liens; 
(3)  Claims by public employees for fees, salaries, wages, mileage, or other expenses and allowances; 
(4)  Claims for which the workers' compensation authorized by Division 4 (commencing with Section 3201) of the Labor Code is the exclusive remedy; 
(5)  Applications or claims for any form of public assistance under the Welfare and Institutions Code or other provisions of law relating to public assistance programs, and claims for goods, services, provisions, or other assistance rendered for or on behalf of any recipient of any form of public assistance; 
(6)  Applications or claims for money or benefits under any public retirement or pension system; 
(7)  Claims for principal or interest on any bonds, notes, warrants, or other evidences of indebtedness; 
(8)  Claims for the reimbursement, repayment, refund, cancellation, or exemption of any tax or fee adopted, imposed, levied, or collected by the City; 
(9)  Claims which relate to a special assessment constituting a specific lien against the property assessed and which are payable from the proceeds of such assessment, by offset of a claim for damages against it or by delivery or any warrant or bonds representing it; 
(10)  Claims by the State or by a State department or agency or by another local public entity or by a judicial branch entity; 
(11)  Claims arising under any provision of the Unemployment Insurance Code, including but not limited to claims for money or benefits, or for refunds or credits of employer or worker contributions, penalties or interest, or for refunds to workers of deductions from wages in excess of the amount prescribed; 
(12)  Claims for the recovery of penalties or forfeitures made pursuant to the Labor Code § 1720; 
(13)  Claims governed by the Pedestrian Mall Law of 1960, Part 1 (commencing with Section 11000) of Division 13 of the Streets and Highways Code; 
(14)  Claims made pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure § 340.1 for the recovery of damages suffered as a result of childhood sexual abuse. This subdivision shall apply only to claims arising out of conduct occurring on or after January 1, 2009; 
(15)  Any other claims that may be included within Government Code § 905 after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(b)  Claims filed pursuant to subsection (a)(1), (8) or (9) of this section may only be filed by the person who actually paid the tax or assessment, and only the person who paid the tax or assessment may bring an action for a refund, reimbursement, repayment, cancellation, or exemption. 
(Code 1975, § 2-50; Ord. No. 2001-05, § 1)  
Secs. 2-251—2-278. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - PERSONNEL SYSTEM[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of a City to establish a personnel system, merit system, or civil service system, Government Code § 45000 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-279. - Adoption of personnel system. 
In order to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters; to attract to municipal service the best and most competent persons available; to assure that appointments and promotions of employees will be based on merit and fitness; and to provide a reasonable degree of security of qualified employees, the personnel system set forth in this article is hereby adopted. 
(Code 1975, § 18A-1; Ord. No. 82-23, § 1, 10-21-1982)  
Sec. 2-280. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Appointing authority means the City Manager, who in his or her individual capacity, has the final authority to appoint, promote, discipline, demote and remove any officers and employees of the City, except the City Attorney. 
Appointment means the selection of a candidate for a full-time position in the competitive service and assigned to such position. 
Class means all positions sufficiently similar in duties, authority, and responsibility, to permit grouping under a common title in the application with equity of common standards of selection, transfer, demotion, and salary. 
Competitive service means all regular full-time positions of employment in the service of the City, except those specifically excluded by this article. 
Demotion means the movement of an employee from one class to another class having a lower maximum rate of pay. 
Disciplinary action means demotion, reduction in pay, suspension, or dismissal for due cause. 
Dismissal means the discharge of an employee from the competitive service for due cause. 
Due cause means a violation of the provisions of the Administrative Manual, personnel rules, department rules, or procedures, or any conduct or behavior that would publicly embarrass or discredit members of the City Council, the City Manager, his or her staff, or the citizens of the City. 
Emergency leave of absence means that in an emergency, an employee is granted a leave without pay without loss of vacation, sick leave, and seniority benefits. 
Employment list means a list of names of persons who may be considered for employment with the City under specific conditions. 
Examination means selection techniques used to measure the relative capacities of the persons applying for positions within the competitive service. 
Grievance means any dispute concerning the interpretation of application of the administrative rules, personnel rules, regulations governing personnel practices, wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment. 
Layoff means the separation of employees from the active work force due to lack of work or funds, or to the abolition of positions by the City Council for the above reasons, or due to organizational changes. 
Open test means an examination for a position in the competitive service that is advertised and made available to all interested persons. 
Personal leave of absence means an employee is granted a leave without pay during which no benefits are accrued. 
Position means a group of duties and responsibilities in the competitive service requiring the full-time employment of one person. 
Position classification plan means a manual describing employee career ladders, class titles, and class specifications for all positions in the competitive service. 
Probationary period means a working test-period during which an employee is required to demonstrate his or her fitness for the position to which he or she is appointed by actual performance of the duties of the position. 
Probationer means an employee who is still working in a probationary period. 
Promotion means the movement of an employee from one class to another having a higher maximum rate of pay. 
Promotional test means an examination for a position in the competitive service that is only open to existing employees. 
Provisional appointment means an appointment of a person who possesses the minimum qualifications established for a particular class and who has been appointed to a position in that class in the absence of available eligibles on an employment list. 
Reduction in pay means an employee is reduced in salary within the salary range for the position to which appointed. 
Re-employment means the rehiring, without examination, of a former full-time employee. 
Regular status means the status of an employee in the competitive service who has successfully completed a probationary period. 
Suspension means the temporary separation from the service of an employee with or without pay, for disciplinary purposes. 
Transfer means a change of an employee from one position to another position in the same class or in a comparable class. 
(Code 1975, § 18A-2; Ord. No. 82-23, § 2, 10-21-1982; Ord. No. 88-13, § 1; Ord. No. 97-08, § 3)  
Sec. 2-281. - Personnel Officer. 
The City Manager shall be the Personnel Officer. The City Manager may delegate any of the powers and duties conferred upon him or her as Personnel Officer under this article to any other officer or employee of the City, or may recommend that such powers and duties be performed under contract as provided in section 2-292. The Personnel Officer shall: 
(1)  Administer all the provisions of this article and of the personnel rules. 
(2)  Prepare and recommend to the City Council personnel rules, and revisions and amendments to such rules. 
(3)  Prepare or cause to be prepared a position classification plan, including class specifications, and revisions of the plan. 
(4)  Provide for the publishing or posting of notices of tests for positions in the competitive service; the receiving of applications thereof; the conducting and grading of tests; the certifications of an employment list of all persons eligible for appointment to the appropriate position in the competitive service. 
(Code 1975, § 18A-3; Ord. No. 82-23, § 3, 10-21-1982; Ord. No. 2000-04, § 1) 
State Law reference— Authority of legislative body of City to appoint personnel officer and delegate powers and duties in relation to system, Government Code § 45004.  
Sec. 2-282. - Competitive service. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all offices, positions and employments in the service of the City, except the following certain exempt positions: 
(1)  Elective officers. 
(2)  City Manager. 
(3)  City Attorney. 
(4)  City Treasurer. 
(5)  Members of appointive boards and committees. 
(6)  Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional, technical, or any other services. 
(7)  Volunteer personnel. 
(8)  Emergency employees who are hired to meet the immediate requirements of an emergency condition, such as earthquake, flood, etc., which threatens life or property. 
(9)  Employees, other than those listed elsewhere in this section, who are not employed in full-time positions. 
(10)  Management employees, as designated in the management classification plan. 
(Code 1975, § 18A-4; Ord. No. 82-23, § 4, 10-21-1982; Ord. No. 88-13, § 2; Ord. No. 97-08, §§ 4, 5)  
Sec. 2-283. - Adoption or amendment of rules. 
Personnel rules shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council. The Personnel Officer shall give reasonable written notice to each recognized employee organization affected by the ordinance, rule, resolution, or regulation or amendment thereof proposed to be adopted by the City Council (optional if not within the scope of representation). The rules shall establish regulations governing the personnel system, including: 
(1)  Preparation, installation, revision, and maintenance of a position classification plan covering all positions in the competitive service, including employment standards and qualifications for each class. 
(2)  Public announcement of all open tests and acceptance of applications for employment. 
(3)  Preparation and conduct of tests and the establishment and use of resulting employment lists containing names of persons eligible for appointment. 
(4)  Certification and appointment of persons from employment lists, and the making of provisional appointments. 
(5)  Establishment of probationary periods. 
(6)  Evaluation of employees during the probationary period. 
(7)  Transfer, promotion, disciplinary action, layoff, and re-employment of employees in the competitive service. 
(8)  Dismissal of employees from City service. 
(9)  The establishment of adequate personnel records. 
(10)  The establishment of appeal procedures concerning the interpretation or application of this article and any rules adopted hereunder. 
(Code 1975, § 18A-5; Ord. No. 82-23, § 5, 10-21-1982)  
Sec. 2-284. - Appointments. 
(a)  Appointments to vacant positions in the competitive service shall be made in accordance with the personnel rules. Appointments and promotions shall be based on merit and fitness, to be ascertained so far as practicable by competitive examination. Examinations shall be used and conducted to aid in the selection of qualified employees and shall consist of selection techniques which will test fairly the qualifications of candidates, such as written tests, personal interview, performance tests, physical agility tests, evaluation of daily work performance, work samples, or any combinations of these or other tests. The probationary period shall be considered an extension of the examination process. Unless waived by the Personnel Officer, medical examination shall be given as a part of the selection process. 
(b)  In any examination, the Personnel Officer may include, in addition to competitive tests, a qualifying test or tests, and set minimum standards therefor. 
(c)  Appointments shall be subject to approval by the appointing authority or by the officer in whom the power to make appointments has been delegated. 
(d)  When appointment is to be made to a vacancy in the competitive service, the Personnel Officer shall transmit to the department head the names of all persons on the appropriate certified employment list, in the order in which they appear on the list. Such department head shall select and recommend to the appointing authority the person to fill the vacant position. 
(Code 1975, § 18A-6; Ord. No. 82-23, § 6, 10-21-1982)  
Sec. 2-285. - Probationary period. 
(a)  All regular appointments, including promotional appointments, shall be for a probationary period of not less than six months. During the probationary period, the employee may be rejected at any time without the right of appeal or hearing. 
(b)  An employee rejected during the probationary period from a position to which he or she has been promoted shall be reinstated to a position in the class from which he or she was promoted unless he or she is dismissed from the City service as provided in this article and the personnel rules. 
(Code 1975, § 18A-7; Ord. No. 82-23, § 7, 10-21-1982)  
Sec. 2-286. - Status of present employees. 
(a)  Any person holding a position included in the competitive service who, on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, shall have served continuously in such position, or in some other position in the competitive service, for a period equal to the probationary period prescribed in the rules for his or her class, shall assume regular status in the competitive service in the position held on such effective date without qualifying test, and shall thereafter be subject in all respects to the provisions of this article and the personnel rules. 
(b)  Any other persons holding positions in the competitive service shall be regarded as probationers who are serving out the balance of their probationary periods as prescribed in the rules before obtaining regular status. The probationary period shall be computed from the date of appointment or employment. 
(Code 1975, § 18A-8; Ord. No. 82-23, § 8, 10-21-1982)  
Sec. 2-287. - Demotion; reduction in pay; suspension; dismissal. 
(a)  Any department head shall have the right, for due cause, to recommend to the appointing authority, demotion, reduction in pay, suspension with or without pay, or dismissal of an employee. Such action shall first be subject to review by the Personnel Officer for the reasonableness of the disciplinary action to the cause for such action. Notice of such intended action must be in writing and served personally on such employee in advance, except where an emergency situation exists, in which case the notice in writing shall be served as soon as possible on such employee. Regular notice shall contain a statement of the reason or reasons for such intended action. The employee shall be given sufficient time to respond orally or in writing before any final disciplinary action is taken. All disciplinary action shall be subject to approval by the appointing authority. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to reductions in pay which are a part of a general plan to reduce salaries and wages or to eliminate positions as approved by the City Council. 
(Code 1975, § 18A-9; Ord. No. 82-23, § 9, 10-21-1982)  
Sec. 2-288. - Right of appeal. 
(a)  Any employee in the competitive service shall have the right to appeal to the City Manager any disciplinary action, grievance, or alleged violation of this article adopted thereunder, except in those instances where the right of appeal is specifically prohibited by this article or the rules adopted thereunder. The decision of the City Manager shall be final. 
(b)  All appeals shall be concluded as expeditiously as possible, and in accordance with the requirements and procedures as set forth in the personnel rules adopted pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1975, § 18A-10; Ord. No. 82-23, § 10, 10-21-1982)  
Sec. 2-289. - Layoff and re-employment. 
(a)  Whenever in the judgment of the City Council it becomes necessary in the interest of economy, or because the necessity for a position no longer exists, the City Council may abolish any position or employment in the competitive service; and the employee holding such position for employment may be laid off without taking disciplinary action and without the right of appeal. 
(b)  The order of layoff of employees shall be established by the Personnel Officer on the recommendation of the department head involved. Length of service shall be an important consideration; however, the department head shall also take into consideration the job performance of employees in preparing a recommended layoff list. No regular or probationary employee shall be laid off from his or her position in any department while any provisional employee is serving in the same class in that department. 
(c)  Employees to be laid off shall be given at least 14 days' prior notice. 
(d)  The names of regular and probationary employees laid off or demoted in lieu of layoff shall be placed upon re-employment lists for one year for those classes requiring basically the same qualifications, duties, and responsibilities of the class from which layoff or demotion in lieu of layoff was made. 
(e)  Persons whose names are placed on re-employment lists in accordance with this section, and who are rehired within the prescribed period, shall be regarded as having been on emergency leave of absence during this period of absence, and entitled to all benefits accruing during such leave. 
(Code 1975, § 18A-11; Ord. No. 82-23, § 11, 10-21-1982)  
Sec. 2-290. - Improper political activity. 
The political activities of City employees shall conform to pertinent provisions of State law. 
(Code 1975, § 18A-12; Ord. No. 82-23, § 12, 10-21-1982) 
State Law reference— Political activities of public employees generally, Government Code § 3201 et seq.  
Sec. 2-291. - Discrimination. 
No person in the competitive service, or seeking admission thereto, shall be employed, promoted, demoted, or dismissed, or in any way favored or discriminated against because of political opinions or affiliations, race, color, creed, national origin, religious belief, marital status, sex, citizenship, age, handicap, or because of the exercise of his or her rights under Government Code § 3502. 
(Code 1975, § 18A-13; Ord. No. 82-23, § 13, 10-21-1982) 
State Law reference— Right of public employees to form, join, and participate in the activities of employee organizations, Government Code § 3502.  
Sec. 2-292. - Right to contract for special service. 
The Personnel Officer shall consider and prepare recommendations regarding the extent to which the City should contract for the performance of technical services in connection with the establishment or operation of the personnel system. The City Council may contract with any qualified person or public or private agency for the performance of all or any of the following responsibilities and duties imposed by this article: 
(1)  The preparation of personnel rules and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof. 
(2)  The preparation of a position classification plan, and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof. 
(3)  The preparation, conduct, and grading of competitive tests. 
(4)  The conduct of employee training programs. 
(5)  Special and technical services of advisory or informational character on matters relating to personnel administration. 
(Code 1975, § 18A-14; Ord. No. 82-23, § 14, 10-21-1982) 
State Law reference— Authority of legislative body of City to contract for conducting of competitive examinations of applicants for positions and employment in the City service and performance of any other service in connection with personnel selection and administration, Government Code § 45008.  
Sec. 2-293. - Precedence of formally adopted memoranda of understanding with recognized bargaining units. 
The provision of any memorandum of understanding duly adopted by the City and the recognized employee bargaining unit shall supersede any provisions of this article which are inconsistent or in conflict with the memorandum of understanding. 
(Code 1975, § 18A-15; Ord. No. 88-12, § 1)  
Secs. 2-294—2-319. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - ENFORCEMENT[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference— Penalties for ordinance violations, Government Code § 36900, Penal Code § 19 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-320. - Purpose. 
The City Council finds that the enforcement of this Code is an important public service. It further finds that a Code enforcement system that uses a combination of judicial and administrative remedies is vital to the protection of the public's health, safety, and quality of life. 
(Code 1975, § 3-1; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 3)  
Sec. 2-321. - General enforcement authority. 
(a)  Pursuant to provisions of California Government Code § 36900 and California Penal Code § 836.5, the City Manager and authorized employees (hereinafter referred to as "Code Enforcement Officials") have the authority and powers necessary to gain compliance with the provisions of this Code. The specific authorization and designation of Code Enforcement Officials shall be made by a separate resolution of the City Council. 
(b)  Authorized Code Enforcement Officials shall have the power to issue citations, inspect public and private property, and use whatever judicial and administrative remedies are available under the Code and applicable State law. If an owner, occupant, or agent refuses the Code Enforcement Official's permission to inspect, the Code Enforcement Official may seek an administrative inspection warrant pursuant to the procedures provided for in California Code of Civil Procedure § 1822.50 et seq. 
(c)  Pursuant to Penal Code § 836.5, Code Enforcement Officials shall have the power to arrest a person without a warrant whenever the Code Enforcement Official has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a misdemeanor by violating any provision of this Code, City ordinance, or applicable State law in the presence of the Code Enforcement Official. In any case in which a person is so arrested and does not demand to be taken before a magistrate, the Code Enforcement Official making the arrest shall prepare a written notice to appear and release the person on his or her promise to appear, as prescribed by Penal Code § 853.5. 
(d)  Prior to making any arrest or preparing a written notice to appear, pursuant to subsection (c) of this section, all authorized Code Enforcement Officials, shall have received any required training or obtain the necessary certificates, as applicable under State law; however, this section shall not limit the enforcement of this Code by an authorized Code Enforcement Official pursuant to division 3, of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 3-2; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 3)  
Sec. 2-322. - Violations, misdemeanors and infractions. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this Code or any ordinance of the City. Such a violation may be prosecuted in the name of the people of the State, redressed by civil action, or resolved by imposition of an administrative fine. Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this Code or any City ordinance is guilty of a misdemeanor or an infraction. 
(b)  Violation of any provision of this Code or City ordinance shall be a misdemeanor unless by such provision it is made an infraction, provided, however, that the City Attorney has discretion to charge and the Code Enforcement Official has discretion to treat any offense in this Code as either a misdemeanor or an infraction. 
(c)  A violation of this Code or any provision of this Code does not include the failure of a City officer or City employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(Code 1975, § 3-3; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 3)  
Sec. 2-323. - Acts include causing, aiding and abetting. 
Whenever in this Code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, permitting, aiding, or abetting such act or omission. 
(Code 1975, § 3-4; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 3)  
Secs. 2-324—2-349. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL PENALTY 
 
Sec. 2-350. - Misdemeanor penalty. 
Except in cases where a different punishment is specifically prescribed elsewhere in this Code, every misdemeanor offense shall be punishable by imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months, or by fine not exceeding $1,000.00, or by both fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the court. 
(Code 1975, § 3-5; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 3)  
Sec. 2-351. - Infraction penalty. 
(a)  Except in cases where a different punishment is specifically prescribed elsewhere in this Code, every violation determined to be an infraction is punishable by: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation; 
(2)  A fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation of the same provision within one year; 
(3)  A fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation of the same provision within one year. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, a violation of the local building and safety code determined to be an infraction is punishable by: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation; 
(2)  A fine not exceeding $500.00 for a second violation of the same provision within one year; 
(3)  A fine not exceeding $1,000.00 for each additional violation of the same provision within one year. 
(Code 1975, § 3-6; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 3)  
Sec. 2-352. - Continuing violation. 
Each day any violation or failure to perform an act shall continue shall constitute a separate offense, unless otherwise specifically provided. 
(Code 1975, § 3-7; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 3)  
Secs. 2-353—2-377. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATIVE FINES, PENALTIES AND CITATIONS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference— Establishment of amounts, procedures, and appeals for administrative fines and penalties, Government Code § 53069.4. 
 
Sec. 2-378. - Findings. 
The City Council finds that there is a need for an alternative method of enforcement for any violation of this Code or City ordinance constituting an infraction ("City ordinance violation"). The City Council further finds that administrative fines are an appropriate method of enforcement. 
(Code 1975, § 3-8; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 3)  
Sec. 2-379. - Scope. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to mean that a City ordinance violation is not also a crime punishable under criminal proceedings. 
(b)  The procedures established in this article shall supplement and be in addition to any criminal, civil or other remedy established by law or under the provisions of this Code, which may be pursued to address violations of the Code. 
(Code 1975, § 3-9; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 3)  
Sec. 2-380. - Issuance of administrative citations. 
A Code Enforcement Official may, upon discovering that a person has committed a La Palma City Code Violation (hereinafter referred to as "offender"), issue an administrative citation to the offender. A Code Enforcement Official may issue an administrative citation for a violation not committed in the official's presence if the official has determined through investigation that the offender did commit the violation. The administrative citation shall be given by personal service on the offender, by registered or certified mail to the offender's last known address, or by posting a copy of the citation on the property in a conspicuous place and by mailing the citation to the property. 
(Code 1975, § 3-10; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 3)  
Sec. 2-381. - Administrative citation contents. 
To the extent the following information is reasonably available to the Code Enforcement Official, the administrative citation shall: 
(1)  State the date the administrative citation is issued; 
(2)  State the offender's name, date of birth, and current residential address and mailing address; 
(3)  State the offender's driver's license number or State issued identification number; 
(4)  Refer to the Code section violated and describe how the offender violated the Code section; 
(5)  State the date the violation was discovered by the Code Enforcement Official; 
(6)  State the amount of fine imposed for the violation; 
(7)  Explain how the offender may pay the fine, including the location and manner, as well as the time period by which the fine must be paid and the consequences of failure to pay the fine; 
(8)  Explain the procedure for obtaining an administrative hearing. Specifically, the explanation shall provide notice that the offender must make a written request within 15 days from the date the administrative citation is issued and that the offender will be notified by mail of the date of the hearing; and 
(9)  Include a warning that a failure to pay the fine or request and appear at an administrative hearing shall result in the penalties described in section 2-387, including a description of the penalties. 
(Code 1975, § 3-11; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 3)  
Sec. 2-382. - Correction period and notice. 
(a)  This section shall not apply when the City seeks to abate a nuisance under the abatement provisions set forth in this Code. 
(b)  When the City ordinance violation pertains to building, plumbing, electrical, or other similar structural or zoning issues that do not create an immediate danger to health or safety (hereinafter "correction condition"), the offender shall have no less than 30 days to correct or otherwise remedy the City ordinance violation prior to the issuance of an administrative citation and the imposition of a fine. A correction period longer than 30 days may be granted if deemed necessary by the Code Enforcement Official. 
(c)  Upon discovery of a correction condition, the Code Enforcement Official shall issue a notice ("correction notice") to the offender by personal service on the offender, by registered or certified mail to the offender's last known address, or by posting a copy of the citation on the property in a conspicuous place and by mailing the citation to the property. 
(d)  To the extent the following information is reasonably available to the Code Enforcement Official, the correction notice shall: 
(1)  State the date the correction notice is issued; 
(2)  State the offender's name, date of birth, and current residential address and mailing address; 
(3)  State the offender's driver's license number or State issued identification number; 
(4)  Refer to the Code section violated and describe how the offender violated the Code section; 
(5)  Refer to the date the violation was discovered by the Code Enforcement Official; 
(6)  Describe the action necessary to correct the violation and state the final date by which the correction must be made; 
(7)  Include a warning that failure to correct the violation will result in an administrative fine and state the amount of the fine imposed for the violation. 
(e)  At the end of the period for correcting the correction condition set forth in the correction notice ("compliance period"), the Code Enforcement Official shall inspect the site of the correction condition. If the offender remedies the correction condition within the compliance period, the Code Enforcement Official shall issue the offender a notice of compliance. If the offender does not fix the correction condition within the compliance period, the Code Enforcement Official may issue the offender an administrative citation pursuant to section 2-380. 
(Code 1975, § 3-12; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 3)  
Sec. 2-383. - Offender's obligations. 
After the issuance of an administrative citation, an offender shall do one of the following to avoid the penalty set forth in section 2-387: 
(1)  Pay the fine amount designated on the administrative citation within 21 days from the mailing, posting, or personal service of the administrative citation; or 
(2)  Make a written request for an "administrative hearing" within and including 15 days from the mailing, posting, or personal service of the administrative citation, pursuant to section 2-385. 
(Code 1975, § 3-13; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 3)  
Sec. 2-384. - Administrative fine. 
(a)  Amount. Administrative fines shall be set by separate resolution of the City Council. 
(1)  Except as specifically provided elsewhere in this Code, administrative fines shall not exceed $100.00 for a first violation, $200.00 for a second violation of the same City ordinance violation within one year, and $500.00 for each additional violation of the same City ordinance violation within one year. 
(2)  Notwithstanding subsection (a)(1) of this section, administrative fines for violations of local building and safety codes shall not exceed $100.00 for a first violation, $500.00 for a second violation of the same City ordinance violation within one year, and $1,000.00 for each additional violation of the same City ordinance violation within one year. 
(b)  Payments. If the offender does not make a timely request for an administrative hearing, he or she must pay the amount designated on the administrative citation within 21 days from the date the citation is issued. Payments of administrative fines shall be sent to the City's finance department. 
(c)  No waiver. Under no circumstances shall the payment of the fine designated in the administrative citation constitute a waiver of the offender's right to an administrative hearing. Therefore, an offender may pay the fine within the 21-day period and also obtain an administrative hearing to protest the imposition of the fine, provided that the offender makes a timely request for an administrative hearing. 
(d)  Obligation to correct violation. Nothing in this Code shall be interpreted to mean that because an offender has paid the fine that he, she or it is not required to correct the City ordinance violation. Failure to correct the City ordinance violation may result in additional citations. 
(Code 1975, § 3-14; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 3)  
Sec. 2-385. - Administrative hearing. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose and intent of the City Council to afford due process of law to any person who is issued an administrative citation. Due process of law includes adequate notice, an opportunity to participate in a hearing, and an adequate explanation of the reasons justifying the administrative fine. 
(b)  Request for hearing. Within 15 days from the date the administrative citation is issued, the offender must make a written request for an administrative hearing. 
(c)  Notification of administrative hearing. At least 20 calendar days prior to the date of the administrative hearing, the City shall, by registered or certified mail or personal service, give notice to the offender of the time, date, and location of the administrative hearing. 
(d)  Hearing officer. 
(1)  The Community Development Director or any other person designated by the City Council ("hearing officer") shall conduct the administrative hearing and hear all facts and testimony presented and deemed appropriate. 
(2)  Any person designated to serve as a hearing officer is subject to disqualification for bias, prejudice, interest, or for any other reason for which a judge may be disqualified pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure § 170.1. The offender may challenge the hearing officer's impartiality by filing a statement with the City Manager objecting to the administrative hearing before the hearing officer and setting forth the grounds for disqualification. The question of disqualification shall be heard and determined in writing by the City Manager within ten days following the date on which the disqualification statement is filed. 
(e)  Administrative hearing procedures. 
(1)  The administrative hearing is intended to be informal in nature. Formal rules of the California Evidence Code and discovery shall not apply, except that irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded at the hearing officer's discretion. 
(2)  Each party shall have the opportunity to offer testimony and evidence and cross-examine witnesses in support of his or her case. 
(3)  Pursuant to California Penal Code § 19.6, an offender shall not be entitled to a jury for an infraction charge. Nor shall an offender be entitled to have the public defender or other counsel appointed at public expense to represent him or her. 
(f)  Administrative order. 
(1)  Within ten days of the conclusion of the administrative hearing, the hearing officer shall provide the offender with his or her decision in writing ("administrative order"). The hearing officer shall provide the offender with the administrative order by personal service, or by registered or certified mail to the offender's last known address. 
(2)  The administrative order shall contain the hearing officer's findings of fact and conclusions and the procedure described in section 2-386 for seeking judicial review. 
(3)  A decision in favor of the offender shall constitute a dismissal of the City ordinance violation. The City shall return any moneys paid by the offender towards the dismissed City ordinance violation fine. 
(4)  If the hearing officer renders a decision in favor of the City, the offender must do one of the following: 
a.  Comply with the hearing officer's order including paying the administrative fine in full within 20 calendar days of service of the administrative order; or 
b.  Seek judicial review of the administrative order pursuant to section 2-386. 
(g)  Failure to attend administrative hearing. 
(1)  Penalty. If the offender requests an administrative hearing and fails to attend, the penalty in section 2-387 shall immediately be in effect if the offender has not paid the fine and 21 days has passed since the administrative citation was issued. If the offender fails to appear at the administrative hearing and 21 days from date the administrative citation was issued has not passed, the offender has until the end of the 21-day period to pay the administrative fine before the penalty in section 2-387 comes into effect. 
(2)  Waiver of right to hearing. The offender's failure to appear at the administrative hearing shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing. An offender's failure to appear at the administrative hearing shall be presumed an admission of guilt to the City ordinance violation charges as indicated on the administrative citation. 
(3)  Good cause. Upon a showing of good cause by the offender, the hearing officer may excuse the offender's failure to appear at the administrative hearing and reschedule the hearing. Under no circumstances shall the administrative hearing be rescheduled more than one time unless the offender pays a deposit in the amount of the administrative fine. Nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted to mean the offender is excused from the requirement of paying the administrative fine or appearing at an administrative hearing. 
(Code 1975, § 3-15; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 3)  
Sec. 2-386. - Judicial review. 
If an administrative order is rendered in favor of the City, the offender may seek judicial review of the administrative order by doing one of the following: 
(1)  Appeal the administrative order pursuant to California Government Code § 53069.4 within 20 calendar days after service of the administrative order. Pursuant to Government Code § 53069.4, the appealing party shall serve a copy of the appeal notice in person or by first class mail upon the City. Appeal notices shall be sent to the City Clerk. If no appeal notice is filed within the 20-calendar-day period, the decision shall be deemed confirmed; or 
(2)  File a petition for a writ of mandate pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.5 et seq. 
(Code 1975, § 3-16; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 3)  
Sec. 2-387. - Administrative penalties. 
(a)  As a penalty for the failure to comply with sections 2-383, 2-385(f)(4), or 2-385(g), the offender shall pay a fine in the amount of two times the original administrative fine (the "penalty fine"). The offender shall pay the penalty fine within 45 days from the date the administrative citation is issued. However, if the offender requests and fails to attend an administrative hearing, and the date of the administrative hearing is set later than 45 days from the date the administrative citation is issued, the offender shall pay the penalty fine within five days of the date of the administrative hearing. 
(b)  The failure to pay the penalty fine shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a maximum of a $1,000.00 fine and six months in jail, or both. 
(c)  The City at its discretion may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies for the collection of unpaid fines and penalties. Pursuit of one remedy does not preclude the pursuit of any other remedies until the total fines and penalties owed by a person under this article have been collected. 
(Code 1975, § 3-17; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 3)  
Chapter 4 - ALARM SYSTEMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Alarm Company Act, Business and Professions Code § 7590 et seq.; local authority of cities to require that alarm system companies obtain business permits, require alarm agents and operators register with the City their name and State issued identification card, regulate false alarm activations and responses, and require owners of alarm systems to obtain a permit to operate the system, Business and Professions Code § 7592.8. 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm agent means any persons employed by an alarm business whose duties include the altering, installing, maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing, selling, or servicing of an alarm system, or responding to or causing others to respond to an alarm system, in or on any building, structure or facility. This also includes a person who manages or supervises a person employed by an alarm company to perform any of the duties described in this provision or any person in training for any of the duties described in this provision. 
Alarm business means the business carried on by any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, or installing any alarm system or causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved, or installed any alarm system in or on any building, structure or facility. 
Alarm system. 
(1)  The term "alarm system" means any mechanical or electrical device which is designed or used for the detection of fire, intrusion into a building, structure or facility or for alerting others of an event within a facility, or both, which device causes a local audible alarm or transmission of a signal or message. Alarm systems include, but are not limited to, direct dial telephone devices, audible alarms, and proprietor alarms. 
(2)  Devices which are not designed or used to evoke a police or fire response, or used to register alarms that are intended to be audible, visible, or perceptible outside of the protected building, structure, or facility are not included within this definition, nor are auxiliary devices installed by a telephone company to protect its systems which might be damaged or disrupted by the use of an alarm system. 
Applicant means a person who files an application for a permit as provided in this chapter. 
Audible alarm means a device designed for the detection of fire or of an intrusion on premises, which generates an audible sound on the premises when it is activated. 
Automatic dialing device means any electrical, electronic or mechanical device capable of being programmed to send a prerecorded message, when activated, over a telephone line to the Police Department. 
Direct alarm means any alarm system connecting an authorized source to the City Police Department by a leased telephone line or any other direct line that has no intermediate station and terminates at an independent monitor module at the Police Department. 
False alarm means the activation of an alarm system, whether or not the system is a direct system, through mechanical failure, accidental tripping, mis-operation, malfunction, misuse or the neglect of the owner or lessee of an alarm system, or of his or her employees or agents. Upon failure of the Police Department or Fire Department to find any evidence of intrusion, fire, or other need or cause for activating an alarm system, a conclusive presumption of false alarm will be made. False alarm shall not include alarms caused by earthquakes, violent winds, malfunction or telephone line circuits, or external causes beyond the control of the owner or lessee of the alarm system. 
Permittee means the holder of an alarm permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
Police Department means the Police Department of the City of La Palma. 
Terminal monitor module means a device installed at the Police Department to which direct alarms are connected by means of a telephone lease line and which is maintained by the City or its licensee. 
(Code 1975, § 3A-1; Ord. No. 93-06)  
Sec. 4-2. - Registration of alarm agents and businesses. 
No person shall engage in, conduct business as, or operate as an alarm agent within the City, nor engage in or conduct an alarm business within the City, without first obtaining a City business license, and without first obtaining any and all appropriate licenses from the department of consumer affairs. 
(Code 1975, § 3A-2; Ord. No. 93-06)  
Sec. 4-3. - Notification of new alarm systems. 
Within ten days of installing any new alarm system covered by this chapter, any alarm agent or alarm business that causes such installation to occur, or assists in such installation, shall notify the Police Department of such installation. A violation of this section shall be grounds to revoke an alarm agent's or alarm business' business license. 
(Code 1975, § 3A-3; Ord. No. 93-06)  
Sec. 4-4. - Alarm system permit required. 
No person shall install or use an alarm system on any premises without first applying for and receiving an alarm permit from the City in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 3A-4; Ord. No. 93-06)  
Sec. 4-5. - Application for alarm permit. 
Applications for an alarm permit shall be filed with the Police Department on forms provided by the City, and the applicant shall at that time pay a permit fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council. 
(Code 1975, § 3A-5; Ord. No. 93-06)  
Sec. 4-6. - Information required on permit application. 
The alarm permit application shall include the names, addresses, and phone number of the alarm business and alarm agent selling or installing the alarm system. The application shall additionally provide the name, address, and phone number of the alarm business or agent proposed to provide service to the alarm system once installed, or if the permittee will not be under a service contract with an alarm business, the names, phone numbers, and addresses of at least two persons, who do not reside at the premises where installation of the alarm system is proposed, to call in event of an emergency. 
(Code 1975, § 3A-5.1; Ord. No. 93-06)  
Sec. 4-7. - Alarm permit investigation. 
Upon receiving a complete application from any person for an alarm permit, the Police Chief or his or her designee shall cause an investigation to be made of the proposed alarm system to determine if the system complies with the requirements of this chapter. If the proposed system complies with this chapter, and any other codes, rules or regulations that may be applicable, the application shall be approved by the Police Chief, and he or she shall cause a permit to be issued. 
(Code 1975, § 3A-6; Ord. No. 93-06)  
Sec. 4-8. - Direct alarm board fee. 
Subscribers of direct alarms terminating at the Police Department's terminal monitor module shall pay a fee for the service of the terminal monitor module in an amount established by resolution of the City Council. 
(Code 1975, § 3A-7; Ord. No. 93-06)  
Sec. 4-9. - Correction of application information. 
Whenever any change occurs relating to the written information required by the alarm permit application, the permittee shall give written notice of such change to the City within 20 days. 
(Code 1975, § 3A-8; Ord. No. 93-06)  
Sec. 4-10. - Separate alarm system permit required. 
A separate alarm permit shall be required for each premises on which an alarm system is used or installed. Once issued, the alarm permit shall not be transferable. 
(Code 1975, § 3A-9; Ord. No. 93-06)  
Sec. 4-11. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter are not applicable to audible alarms affixed to automobiles, boats, boat trailers, or recreational vehicles, or other motorized vehicles. 
(Code 1975, § 3A-10; Ord. No. 93-06)  
Sec. 4-12. - Application of chapter to existing alarm system. 
The permit requirements of this chapter shall apply to any person or entity that already possesses, has installed, or uses an alarm system to which this chapter applies. 
(Code 1975, § 3A-11; Ord. No. 93-06)  
Sec. 4-13. - Intentional false alarms. 
No person shall intentionally initiate a false alarm, except for purposes of testing alarm systems. Prior to testing an alarm system in such a manner that a signal will be emitted which could be construed as a false alarm, the person or entity conducting the test shall notify the Police Department that such a test will be occurring. 
(Code 1975, § 3A-12; Ord. No. 93-06)  
Sec. 4-14. - Tampering with or damaging alarm systems. 
No person shall intentionally and maliciously tamper with, render inoperative, or damage any alarm system covered by this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 3A-13; Ord. No. 93-06)  
Sec. 4-15. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or other entity to install, use or maintain any alarm system contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 3A-14; Ord. No. 93-06)  
Sec. 4-16. - False alarm prevention. 
(a)  When any emergency alarm, message, signal, or notice is received by the Police Department which evidences a failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter or a permit issued hereunder, the Police Chief or his or her designee is authorized to direct that the owner or lessee of the alarm system initiating such alarms, messages, signals or notices, or his or her representative, disconnect the alarm system until it is made to comply with such requirements. 
(b)  The owner or lessee of any alarm system which has caused more than three false alarms to be transmitted to the Police Department in any 12-month period, either by telephone or other communication, or by communication from an alarm agent, or an alarm business, or by a person responding to an audible alarm, shall pay a false alarm prevention fee, in an amount established by resolution of the City Council. 
(c)  An alarm permit may be revoked, as provided in this chapter, in addition to assessing the false alarm prevention fee in cases where in excess of three false alarms are received in a 12-month period, or in the event of failure to pay applicable false alarm prevention fees. 
(d)  Exceptions. A 30-day adjustment period to correct mechanical problems shall be allowed for any new, improved, or replaced alarm system, during which penalties for false alarms shall not apply, provided the responsible party demonstrates to the Police Chief or his or her designee that false alarms received during that period were the result of conditions beyond the control of the responsible party, and not the result of negligence on the part of that person or of his or her employees. 
(Code 1975, § 3A-15; Ord. No. 93-06)  
Sec. 4-17. - Permit revocation. 
(a)  If at any time the Police Chief or his or her designee determines that the holder of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter has violated any provision hereof, or any term or condition of an alarm permit issued hereunder, including but not limited to, being responsible for excessive false alarms as provided in section 4-16, or failing or refusing to pay the false alarm prevention fee provided for herein, the Police Chief or his or her designee may revoke said permittee's alarm permit. 
(b)  When an alarm permit is to be revoked, the Police Chief or his or her designee shall give the permittee 15 days notice of the City's intention to do so by personal service or by first class or certified mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the permittee at the address set forth on the permit application. Notice shall be deemed given upon personal service or upon placing written notice in the United States mail as provided herein. If within such 15-day period the permittee fails to present satisfactory evidence to the Police Chief or his or her designee that the system has been repaired, replaced or altered so as to conform to the requirements of this chapter, or fails to pay outstanding false alarm prevention fees, and if the permittee fails to file an appeal to the City Manager or his or her designee, the permit shall be revoked at the expiration of such 15-day period. Once a permit has been revoked, the permittee shall disconnect or otherwise render the alarm system for which the permit was issued inoperable, and shall not operate said alarm system until a new permit has been issued. 
(c)  If a permit for an alarm system connected to the terminal monitor module is revoked, said alarm system shall be disconnected from the terminal monitor module upon revocation. 
(Code 1975, § 3A-16; Ord. No. 93-06)  
Sec. 4-18. - Notice of appeal. 
A permittee may appeal any action of the Police Chief or his or her designee pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to the City Manager or his or her designee, by filing with the City Clerk a notice of appeal, setting forth the facts and circumstances regarding the appeal. The notice of appeal shall be filed not later than 15 days after the notice of revocation is given to the permittee. The City Manager or his or her designee shall within 15 days from the date on which the appeal is filed, hold a hearing, consider all relevant evidence produced by the alarm permittee, the Police Chief or his or her designee, and other interested parties, and make findings and determine the merits of the appeal. The City Manager or his or her designee may affirm, overrule, or modify the decision of the Police Chief or his or her designee and the decision on such appeal shall be final. 
(Code 1975, § 3A-17; Ord. No. 93-06)  
Sec. 4-19. - Limitations of liability. 
The City is under no obligation or duty to the permittee or any other person by reason of any provision of this chapter, including but not limited to guarding against any defects in a police or fire alarm system; and delay in transmission of an alarm message by any City officer, employee or agent; or damage caused by delay in responding to any alarm by any City employee, officer or agent. 
(Code 1975, § 3A-18; Ord. No. 93-06)  
Sec. 4-20. - Alarm standards and requirements. 
(a)  Audible alarm requirements. 
(1)  Every audible alarm system shall have a device which will limit the generation of the audible sound of the system to not longer than 15 minutes after activation, when the alarm system is protecting a residential structure, or 30 minutes when the alarm system is protecting a commercial structure. Such systems, however, shall include an automatic resetting device which shall cause the subject system to be rearmed upon automatic shutoff. 
(2)  No person shall install or maintain an audible alarm or other alarm system annunciator affixed to the exterior of a building which, upon activation, emits a sound similar to sirens in use on emergency vehicles or for civil defense purposes. 
(b)  Delay device requirements. Any alarm system that is connected to the terminal monitor module shall include a device which shall provide a minimum 30-second delay of the original transmission to the terminal monitor module, but activate a signal immediately in such a manner as to be perceptible to a person entering, leaving, or occupying the premises. Such a device is intended to provide an opportunity for the person having lawful control of the alarm system to terminate its operation after activation but prior to transmission of a false alarm to the terminal monitor module. 
(c)  Power supply. An alarm system shall be supplied with an uninterruptible power supply in such a manner that the failure or interruption of normal utility electricity will not activate the alarm system. The power supply must be capable of at least four hours of operation. 
(d)  Automatic communication device. No automatic communication device shall be programmed to a 911 emergency public safety answering point. Alternate police communication telephone lines may be utilized for this purpose only after approval of the Police Chief or his or her designee. 
(Code 1975, § 3A-19; Ord. No. 93-06)  
Sec. 4-21. - Fees. 
Fees prescribed in this chapter shall be in addition to any other lawful fees imposed by the City for doing or conducting business within the City. 
(Code 1975, § 3A-19.1; Ord. No. 93-06)  
Sec. 4-22. - Fee for connection to terminal monitor module. 
Applicants for alarm permits for any alarm system that will terminate at the terminal monitor module shall pay a fee in an amount to be established by the City Council at the time of submitting a completed application, in addition to any other fee provided for herein, to reimburse the City for additional costs incurred in investigating the proposed system. 
(Code 1975, § 3A-20; Ord. No. 93-06)  
Chapter 6 - AMBULANCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Emergency Medical Services System and the Prehospital Emergency Medical Care Personnel Act, Health and Safety Code § 1797 et seq.; local emergency medical services agencies, Health and Safety Code § 1797.200 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Intent and purpose. 
It is the intent of this chapter to establish general operating procedures and standards for medical transportation services operating within the City in both emergency and other situations, to provide a fair and impartial means of allowing responsible private operators to provide such services in the public interest, and to provide a means for the designation of exclusive operating areas. This chapter is modeled after Division 9, Article I of Title 4 of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange (County Model Ambulance Ordinance No. 3517; OCC § 4-9-1). 
(Code 1975, § 4-1; Ord. No. 2004-05, § 1)  
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Advanced life support service (ALS) and basic life support service (BLS) mean the same as defined in the California Health and Safety Code. 
Ambulance means a motor vehicle, helicopter, or similar vehicle, specifically constructed, modified, equipped, or arranged and operated for the purpose of transporting patients requiring immediate or ongoing medical services, excluding the transportation of such persons to or from locations not providing services as defined in this chapter. 
Ambulance service means the activity, business or service, for hire, profit, or otherwise, of transporting one or more persons by ambulance; provided, however, ambulance service shall not include the transportation by ambulance by an employer of his or her own employees in an ambulance owned and operated by the employer solely for this purpose. 
Ambulance service operator means any person who operates or owns an ambulance service. 
Attendant means a trained, qualified individual who, regardless of whether he or she also serves as driver, is responsible for the care of patients. 
County means the County of Orange, State of California. 
Department means the Emergency Medical Services Agency of the County of Orange or the Health Care Agency of the County of Orange, or as otherwise designated by the Orange County Board of Supervisors. 
Dispatcher means an individual employed by an ambulance service operator responsible for sending an ambulance to provide ambulance service to a patient. 
Driver means an attendant who drives or pilots an ambulance. 
Emergency means a sudden, unforeseen event giving rise to a need for ambulance service with basic or advanced life-support services and is a condition in which an individual has a need for immediate medical attention, or where the potential for such need is perceived by emergency medical personnel or a public safety agency. 
Emergency service means ambulance service performed in response to an emergency. 
Exclusive Operating Area (EOA) means the same as defined in Health and Safety Code § 1797.85, and which is established pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 1797.224. 
Fire Chief means the Fire Chief of the Orange County Fire Authority. 
Health Officer means the Orange County Health Officer or other official designated by the board of supervisors of Orange County to perform the Health Officer's functions under this chapter. 
Licensee means an ambulance service operator which has been granted a license under this chapter to provide ambulance service. 
Medical services means services provided by health care professionals licensed pursuant to the California Business and Professions Code or as specified by regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
Paramedic means the same as defined in the California Health and Safety Code. 
Patient means a wounded, injured, sick, invalid, or otherwise incapacitated person. 
Person means any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or other group or combination acting as a unit. 
Physician means a medical doctor or osteopath holding the appropriate license or certificate to practice as such within the State of California pursuant to the Business and Professions Code. 
Public safety agency means any public law enforcement agency, fire protection agency, or forest ranger operating in the County. 
(Code 1975, § 4-2; Ord. No. 2004-05, § 1)  
Sec. 6-3. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be an ambulance service operator, or to act in such a capacity, either directly or indirectly, within the City without possession of a license issued pursuant to this chapter. A license may specify the specific geographical area within the City in which it is valid; provided, however, with respect to EOAs, reference to the EOA by a specific number or similar identification shall be sufficient description of geographic limitation. A license shall be valid for not more than one calendar year or the expiration of the calendar year in which it was issued, whichever is shorter. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
(1)  Ambulances operated at the request of a public safety agency during any "State of war emergency," "State of emergency," or "local emergency," as defined in the Government Code; 
(2)  Ambulance service transporting a patient from a location outside of the City, regardless of destination; 
(3)  Ambulance service transporting a patient by a fixed-wing airplane. 
(Code 1975, § 4-3; Ord. No. 2004-05, § 1)  
Sec. 6-4. - Transfer and term of license. 
(a)  No license issued pursuant to this chapter can be transferred by operation of law or otherwise. The following shall be considered transfers for purposes of this section: 
(1)  Any change in the business structure of a licensee, including, but not limited to, changes from or to: 
a.  A sole proprietorship; 
b.  A partnership, including any change in the partners; and 
c.  A corporation, including any change in the shareholders, whether by operation of law or otherwise; 
(2)  Bankruptcy, an assignment for the benefit of creditors, or the appointment of a receiver; 
(3)  A sale or transfer of over ten percent of the assets of a licensee. 
(b)  A licensee may apply to the Health Officer for an amendment to the terms of the license, which request shall be processed in the same manner as an original application. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, licenses may be suspended, revoked, or terminated prior to the expiration date, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 4-4; Ord. No. 2004-05, § 1)  
Sec. 6-5. - Applications. 
(a)  Each application for a license shall be accompanied by an application fee, if any, set by the Orange County Board of Supervisors, and be made upon forms prescribed by the Health Officer. 
(b)  Each applicant shall submit the following: 
(1)  The names and addresses of the applicant and the owner of the ambulance and the business and any interest therein; 
(2)  The applicant's training and experience in the transportation and care of patients; 
(3)  The names under which the applicant has engaged, does engage, and proposes to engage in ambulance service; 
(4)  A description of each ambulance, including the make, model, year of manufacture, vehicle identification number, current State license number, the length of time the vehicle has been in use, and the color scheme, insignia, name, monogram and other distinguishing characteristics of the vehicles, a description of the company's program for maintenance of the vehicle, and a description of the vehicle's radio; 
(5)  Proof that the applicant has obtained all licenses and permits required by State or local law or regulation for the type of ambulance service proposed, excluding only a license to provide the service for which application is made; 
(6)  The names and qualifications of each attendant, driver, or dispatcher employed, or to be employed, in providing ambulance service; 
(7)  Proof that the applicant possesses and maintains currently valid California Highway Patrol inspection reports for each vehicle listed in the application; 
(8)  A description of the applicant company's training and orientation programs for attendants, drivers and dispatchers; 
(9)  Evidence of such financial responsibility and insurance coverage as may be required by the Health Officer pursuant to regulations adopted in accordance with this chapter; 
(10)  Identification of the geographical area to be served by the applicant, if required by the department; 
(11)  As to new applications or transfers as specified in section 6-4, a fingerprint receipt for each principal of the applicant, issued by the Orange County Sheriff-Coroner, indicating each principal of the applicant has undergone a complete criminal history check, followed by a report from the Orange County Sheriff-Coroner showing no conviction of crimes which would be violations of the provisions of section 6-7(d)(2) through (7); 
(12)  A list of all substations or offices where equipment and personnel are, or will be based, including hours of operation; 
(13)  A description of whether the service proposed by the applicant will include basic life-support services or advanced life-support service, and, if so: 
a.  The number of basic life-support service or advanced life-support service units to be deployed on each shift; 
b.  The emergency response areas to receive basic life-support service or advanced life-support service; and 
c.  The provisions, if any, for continuing education of attendants; and 
(14)  Such other information as the Health Officer may require in regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
(c)  Renewal applications shall be submitted in the same form and require the same materials as original applications, except the requirement of subsection (b)(11) of this section. 
(Code 1975, § 4-5; Ord. No. 2004-05, § 1)  
Sec. 6-6. - Investigations. 
Upon receipt of a completed application and the required fee, if any, the Health Officer shall make, or cause to be made, such investigation as the Health Officer deems necessary to determine if: 
(1)  The applicant is a responsible and proper person to conduct, operate, or engage in the provision of ambulance services; 
(2)  The applicant meets the requirements of this chapter and of other applicable laws, ordinances, or regulations. 
(Code 1975, § 4-6; Ord. No. 2004-05, § 1)  
Sec. 6-7. - Issuance or denial of license. 
(a)  The Health Officer shall issue a license to an applicant if the Health Officer, after completing any investigation required pursuant to this chapter, determines all requirements of this chapter have been met and the license fee, if any, set by the Orange County Board of Supervisors, has been paid. 
(b)  In the event of denial, the applicant shall be informed by the Health Officer in writing of the reasons therefor. 
(c)  The licensee shall obtain and keep in force during the term of a license comprehensive automobile insurance, general or professional liability insurance, and ambulance medical malpractice insurance, issued by a company authorized to do business in the State of California, acceptable to the Health Officer, insuring the owner against loss by reason of injury or damage that may result to persons or property from negligent operation or defective construction of such ambulance, or from violation of this chapter or any other law of the State of California, or the United States. Said comprehensive automobile liability policy shall be in the sum of not less than $3,000,000 for combined single limit, bodily injury, and property damage, and $5,000,000 annual aggregate. Said general or professional liability insurance shall be in the sum of not less than $3,000,000 combined single limit and $5,000,000 annual aggregate. Said ambulance medical malpractice insurance shall be in a sum of not less than $3,000,000 per occurrence and $5,000,000 annual aggregate. Workers' compensation employers' liability insurance, meeting statutory limits shall be carried covering all employees of the license holder. Before the Health Officer shall issue a license, copies of the policies, or certificates evidencing such policies shall be filed with the Health Officer. All policies shall contain a provision requiring a 30-day notice to be given to the department prior to cancellation, modification, or reduction in limits. The amount of comprehensive automobile liability insurance shall be subject to review and adjustment by the Health Officer pursuant to regulations adopted under this chapter. In the use of helicopters, the equivalent insurance requirements shall apply. 
(d)  Grounds for denial of a license application shall be: 
(1)  Failure to meet the requirements of any provision of this chapter; 
(2)  Violation by any principal of an applicant of Penal Code § 290; 
(3)  Use of narcotics or other controlled substances; 
(4)  Conviction during the preceding seven years of any crime relating to the use, sale, possession, or transportation of narcotics, or other controlled substances; 
(5)  Habitual or excessive use of intoxicating beverages; 
(6)  Conviction during the preceding seven years of any crime punishable as a felony in the State of California; 
(7)  Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude, including, but not limited to, fraud or intentional dishonesty for personal gain. 
(e)  In determining the effect of any criminal acts on the issuance or denial of a license, the Health Officer shall consider whether the criminal acts are related to the activities of an ambulance service and shall evaluate the rehabilitation of the person involved. The Health Officer shall not consider crimes of which the applicant is, or was, accused but not convicted. 
(Code 1975, § 4-7; Ord. No. 2004-05, § 1)  
Sec. 6-8. - License suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The Health Officer may suspend or revoke a license for failure by the licensee to comply with, and maintain compliance with, or for violation of, any applicable provision, standard, or requirement of State law, or regulation of this chapter, or of any regulations promulgated hereunder. Suspension of a license is not a condition precedent to revocation of a license. 
(b)  Before issuing a suspension or revocation, the Health Officer shall give written notice to the licensee. Said notice shall: 
(1)  Specify the reasons for which the proposed action is to be taken; 
(2)  Set a hearing for not more than 15 days nor less than seven days after the date of the notice; 
(3)  Specify the date, time, and place of the hearing; and 
(4)  Be served on the licensee either by delivery to its principal place of business or to its designated agent for service of such notices, if any. 
(c)  If the licensee, subsequent to service of a suspension or revocation notice under this section, remedies some or all of the conditions to which the notice refers, the Health Officer may rescind the suspension or revocation at any time. 
(d)  At the hearing, the Health Officer has the burden of proof and may present evidence as to why such action should be taken and to answer the evidence presented by the licensee. 
(e)  The Health Officer may reduce the period of time for hearing under a suspension or revocation notice to no less than 24 hours when the Health Officer makes written preliminary findings that such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. When, as a result of such an emergency proceedings, a license is suspended or revoked, the licensee may request an additional hearing at which the licensee will have the burden of establishing renewed compliance justifying reinstatement of the license. Such additional hearing will be commenced within five days of the licensee's request. The request for, and the scheduling of, an additional hearing shall not stay operation of the suspension or revocation order. 
(f)  Hearings conducted pursuant to this section shall be conducted before a hearing officer designated by the department. At the conclusion of said hearing, the hearing officer shall expeditiously prepare a written summary of the evidence and proposed findings and conclusions for consideration by the Health Care Agency Director. 
(g)  The Health Care Agency Director shall issue a written decision within 30 days after receiving the hearing officer's findings and conclusions. 
(Code 1975, § 4-8; Ord. No. 2004-05, § 1)  
Sec. 6-9. - Appeal to Orange County Board of Supervisors. 
In the event of denial, suspension, or revocation of a license, the applicant or licensee shall have the right to request a hearing before the Orange County Board of Supervisors, which hearing shall be requested and conducted in the manner specified in section 5-2-19 of the Codified Ordinances of Orange County. 
(Code 1975, § 4-9; Ord. No. 2004-05, § 1)  
Sec. 6-10. - Notification. 
The licensee shall notify the Health Officer within 24 hours after any change in ownership or management of the licensee, or any interruption of service of more than 24 hours duration, or any substantial change in staffing or equipment. For purposes of this section, the term "substantial change" shall be as defined by regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 4-10; Ord. No. 2004-05, § 1)  
Sec. 6-11. - Personnel standards. 
(a)  A licensee shall only employ personnel performing tasks described in this chapter who comply with the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Attendants shall be at least 18 years of age and trained and competent in the proper use of all equipment, and shall hold current emergency medical technician-1A (EMT-1A), or state educational equivalent, certification in compliance with all State laws, rules, and regulations. Additionally, each attendant shall hold a license from the Health Officer indicating compliance with this section. Applications for such licenses shall be in a form required by the Health Officer and shall be accompanied by the fee, if any, established therefor. All applicants for licenses as an attendant shall be subject to the same criminal history review as required for principals of ambulance companies pursuant to this chapter no less than once every four years. Certificates may be denied, suspended, or revoked in the same form and manner as that specified for ambulance service licensees in this chapter. Licenses shall be valid for two years from the date of issuance or certification as an emergency medical technician-1A, whichever is less. Renewal of a license shall be in the same manner as issuance of a new license. 
(c)  Each licensee shall have at least one dispatcher. Emergency ambulance service licensees shall have a dispatcher on a 24-hour-per-day basis and shall adequately train the dispatcher to radio operation and protocols and to the emergency response areas served before said dispatcher begins dispatching emergency calls. For purposes of this section, the term "adequate" training of a dispatcher" shall be that which meets State standards, if any, and County requirements. 
(d)  Ambulance drivers shall, in addition to the requirements of this chapter for attendants, maintain an appropriate license issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles and, if applicable, the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(Code 1975, § 4-11; Ord. No. 2004-05, § 1)  
Sec. 6-12. - Rates. 
No licensee shall charge more than the maximum BLS rates approved by the Orange County Board of Supervisors. No licensee shall charge more than the maximum ALS rates approved by the Orange County Board of Supervisors or the Orange County Fire Authority. 
(Code 1975, § 4-12; Ord. No. 2004-05, § 1)  
Sec. 6-13. - Selection of ambulance service licensees for exclusive operating areas. 
(a)  The Orange County Fire Authority shall administer the competitive process, on behalf of the local EMS agency, for the award of EOA contracts within the City. The Orange County Fire Authority shall select and shall enter into contracts with licensees for the provision of ambulance service in response to emergencies in each EOA, unless the City has provided written notification to the Orange County Fire Authority of its intention to retain licensee selection and contracting authority for itself. Such contracts shall provide for one primary contractor per EOA, with such other back-up service by other emergency ambulance service providers as deemed necessary by the Fire Chief. In awarding these contracts, the Orange County Fire Authority, or City if it elects to retain licensee selection and contracting authority, shall consider the comparative value of competing proposals in the same fashion as would be the case where the County evaluating proposals from prospective service providers for other governmental activities, including consideration of: 
(1)  The quality of service to be provided; 
(2)  The level of service to be provided; 
(3)  The rates charged for services to be provided; and 
(4)  The cost, if any, to the awarding agency. 
(b)  The Fire Chief shall administer the contracts for ambulance service awarded by the Orange County Fire Authority, or by the City if applicable, under this section. The Fire Chief shall also prepare and keep current EOA lists specifying contract providers for each EOA. The Fire Chief shall include on the list for each EOA the provider which has entered into an ambulance service agreement with the Orange County Fire Authority, or the City if applicable, as the primary contractor, as well as the emergency ambulance service provider who will provide back-up emergency ambulance service for that area. 
(c)  In the event no proposals acceptable to the Orange County Fire Authority, or to the City if it elects to retain licensee selection and contracting authority under the provisions of this section, are received for one or more EOAs, the Orange County Fire Authority, or the City if applicable, shall designate one or more licensees to provide emergency ambulance services for the EOA. From the date of such designation until a regular emergency ambulance service agreement is signed for the affected areas, provision of emergency ambulance service shall be an express condition of the license and unreasonable or unjustified refusal of such calls shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(d)  No person shall provide ambulance service in response to, or as a result of, an emergency, unless that person is a licensee specified in each instance by a physician or public safety agency. A licensee thus specified by a physician need not be a contractor selected pursuant to this section. Any ambulance service operator receiving a request for emergency ambulance service from other than a public safety agency shall immediately, by telephone, notify a public safety agency designated by regulation of the request. 
(e)  No licensee responding to an emergency shall transport a patient unless: 
(1)  A paramedic is present at the location of the patient; 
(2)  A physician is present at the location of the patient and directs transportation in the absence of a paramedic; or 
(3)  A safety-qualified employee of the Orange County Fire Authority, or an appropriate employee of a public safety agency designated by regulation, directs transportation in the absence of a paramedic. 
Unless otherwise directed by a physician present at the location of the patient, a licensee shall transport a patient pursuant to regulations adopted under section 6-14. 
(Code 1975, § 4-13; Ord. No. 2004-05, § 1) 
State Law reference— Authority of City council to contract for ambulance service to serve the residents of City, Government Code § 38794.  
Sec. 6-14. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  As to all sections of this chapter except section 6-13, the Health Officer shall make such rules and regulations and as may be necessary to implement this chapter. Prior to adoption, proposed rules and regulations shall be submitted to the Orange County Emergency Medical Care Committee for comment. 
(b)  As to section 6-13, the Fire Chief shall make such rules and regulations and as may be necessary to implement this chapter. Prior to adoption, the Fire Chief's rules and regulations shall be submitted to the Orange County Emergency Medical Care Committee for comment. 
(c)  The Health Officer or the Fire Chief or their respective designees may inspect the records, facilities, transportation units, equipment, and method of operating of each licensee whenever necessary and, by the Health Officer, at least annually. 
(Code 1975, § 4-14; Ord. No. 2004-05, § 1)  
Sec. 6-15. - Complaints. 
The department, the City, any user, subscriber, public safety agency, or consumer who believes, or has reason to believe, that an individual has been required to pay an excessive charge for services, received inadequate services, or services provided were not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, may file a written complaint with the department and the Fire Chief setting forth such allegations. The department and Fire Chief shall notify the ambulance service operator of such complaint. The ambulance service operator shall file a written response within 15 calendar days after receipt of the notification. 
(Code 1975, § 4-15; Ord. No. 2004-05, § 1)  
Sec. 6-16. - Variance. 
As to all but section 6-13, the Health Officer may grant variances from the terms of this chapter if he or she finds such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare. As to section 6-13, the Fire Chief may grant variances from the terms of this chapter if he or she finds such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare. As to the Health Officer, such variances may include the issuance of a temporary license. No temporary license shall exceed 180 days in duration. 
(Code 1975, § 4-16; Ord. No. 2004-05, § 1)  
Sec. 6-17. - Violations; penalty. 
Violation of any provision of this chapter by an ambulance service operator shall be a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1975, § 4-17; Ord. No. 2004-05, § 1)  
Chapter 8 - ANIMAL CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local regulation and licensing of dogs, Food and Agricultural Code § 30501 et seq.; authority of City to adopt and/or enforce a program for the control of potentially dangerous or vicious dogs, Food and Agricultural Code § 31683; authority of City to impose and collect a dog license fee in order to cover the cost of dog control services and programs, Government Code § 38792. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Reference to amendments. 
Whenever any reference is made to any portion of this chapter, such reference applies to all amendments and additions thereto now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-2, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-2. - Acts by deputies. 
Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon the Director of Animal Care and Control or other public officer, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy of the officer or by a person authorized, pursuant to law, by the officer, unless this chapter expressly provides otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-3, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-3. - Fees. 
Whenever provision is made in this chapter for the payment of fees, such fees shall be those which the City Council or SEAACA Board has approved, from time to time, by resolution or minute order. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-4, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-4. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal care center means a place where all animals impounded by the Animal Care and Control Agency are placed for their humane care and keeping. 
Animal menagerie means a place where wild animals are kept or maintained for any commercial purpose, including places where wild animals are boarded, trained, or kept for hire. 
Animals means and includes any beast, cat, dog, poultry, bird, reptile, fish, or any other dumb creature or animal. 
Approved canine rabies vaccine means a Canine Rabies Vaccine which is approved for use by the State of California, Department of Public Health. 
At large means any animal off the premises of its owner. 
Cat means any cat of any age, female or male. 
Cat kennel means any lot, building, structure, or premises wherein more than four cats over the age of four months are kept or maintained for any purpose. 
Director means the Director of the Animal Care and Control agency. 
Dog means any dog of any age, female or male. 
Dog kennel means any lot, building, structure, or premises wherein more than four dogs over the age of four months are kept or maintained for any purpose. 
Guide dog shall have the same meaning as defined in State law. 
Horse means any equine animal, either female or male, including: mules, burros, ponies, jacks, hinnies, or jennies. 
Impounded means that if any animal pursuant to this chapter or any State law has been received into the custody of any Animal Care Center, such animal will have been "impounded" as that word is used in this chapter. 
Owner means any person, firm, or corporation having an interest in or having control, custody, or possession of any animal. 
Pet shop means any place of business where dogs under four months of age, or cats, monkeys, birds, reptiles, fish, or any other animal to be used as pets, are kept for sale. 
SEAACA is an abbreviation for the Southeast Area Animal Control Authority. 
Unlicensed dog means any dog for which the license for the current year has not been paid, or to which the tag for the current year provided in this chapter is not attached. 
Wild animal means any wild, exotic, dangerous, or nondomestic animal, including but not limited to mammals, fowl, fish, or reptiles. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-5, 12-15-2009)  
Secs. 8-5—8-28. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CARE AND CONTROL 
 
Sec. 8-29. - Animal Care and Control Agency. 
SEAACA is hereby designated as the City of La Palma's Animal Care and Control agency under the administrative management of the Director. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-11, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-30. - Police powers. 
Consistent with chapter article XI, chapter 2 of this Code, the Director of Animal Care and Control shall be vested with the necessary police powers and duties of a Police Officer for the exclusive purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, and it shall be their duty to make arrests and issue citations for violations of any of the provisions of this chapter. The Director of Animal Care and Control shall enforce all of the laws of the City, County, and State relating to the care, treatment, and impounding of animals and to the prevention of cruelty to animals. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-12, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-31. - Duties. 
It is hereby made the duty of the Director of Animal Care and Control to enforce any other sections of this chapter whether enumerated as a duty or not. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-13, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-32. - Interference with duty. 
No person shall rescue or attempt to rescue any animal mentioned herein from the possession of the Director of Animal Care and Control or his or her deputies, or interfere with the Director of Animal Care and Control or his or her deputies in the performance of their official duties. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-14, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-33. - Entering upon premises. 
Consistent with the powers and authority under chapter 2 of this Code, the Director of Animal Care and Control or his or her deputy animal control officers, a Code Enforcement Officer, or any Police Officer is authorized to enter upon any premises upon which any animal is kept, for the purpose of taking up, seizing, or impounding any animal found running at large, staked, herded, or grazing thereon, contrary to the provisions of this chapter, for the purpose of ascertaining whether such animal is licensed as provided in this chapter; or determining whether any regulation or law of the State relating to the care, treatment, or impounding of animals or to the prevention of cruelty to animals is being violated; provided there is probable cause to believe there is such violation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-15, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-34. - Cruelty statutes. 
It shall be the duty of the Director of Animal Care and Control to enforce those sections of the Penal Code of the State of California pertaining to the inhumane treatment of animals, and to take possession of animals so abandoned or neglected, and care for or dispose of same as provided for in Penal Code § 597 of the State of California. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-16, 12-15-2009) 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals generally, Penal Code § 597 et seq.  
Sec. 8-35. - Spay and neuter clinic. 
(a)  The Director of Animal Care and Control may establish a clinic, at which members of the public may have dogs and cats spayed or neutered. A person submitting a dog or cat for the above service shall sign a consent form certifying thereon under penalty of perjury that they are the owner of said animal or setting forth facts showing that they are otherwise authorized to present the animal for the above operation and such person may be required to furnish proof of such ownership or authority. Such consent shall contain a waiver of any and all liability of the City, the Animal Care and Control Agency, and any employees thereof for any injury or death to an animal arising out of the aforementioned operation or any services provided incidental thereto. 
(b)  The Director of Animal Care and Control shall establish a return date by which a person submitting an animal for the above operation shall pick up said animal or be subject to a reasonable board and care fee to commence the day after such return date. Failure to pick up an animal within 15 days of said return date shall be deemed abandonment of such animal and the Director may dispose of it by sale or destruction. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-17, 12-15-2009)  
Secs. 8-36—8-58. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DOG LICENSING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Dog licensing and regulations generally, Food and Agricultural Code § 30801 et seq. 
 
Sec. 8-59. - License and registration required. 
No person owning, having an interest in, or having control, custody, or possession of any dog shall fail, neglect, or refuse to license and register such dog, if over four months of age, in compliance with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-21, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-60. - Exhibition of license. 
No person shall fail or refuse to exhibit the registration of any animal required to be licensed by this Code when required to do so by the Director, his or her Deputies, a Code Enforcement Officer, or any Police Officer. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-22, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-61. - Issuance of license tags and certificates. 
(a)  A metallic tag and license certificate with corresponding numbers shall be furnished by SEAACA, acting as authorized agents, to any person required by this article to obtain a license upon payment of the appropriate fee prescribed in this article. 
(b)  SEAACA, when acting as the authorized agents, shall keep a record of the name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the dog or person making payment of said license fee, and to whom a certificate and tag is issued, and the number and date of such certificate. Such metal tag issued for the current license year shall be securely fastened to the collar or harness of the dog and shall be worn by such dog at all times other than those periods when confined to the owner's house, enclosed yard, or pen. A duplicate of a lost license tag may be procured from SEAACA, when acting as the authorized agents, upon proof of loss and payment of the required fee. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-23, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-62. - Time limit; license fee. 
(a)  Any owner, with the exception herein provided, of a dog four months of age or older in the City shall obtain a dog license and pay an original or renewal license fee (as established by resolution) each year thereafter. 
(b)  License fees shall be due and payable within 30 days after any dog is acquired and comes into the care, custody, and control of any person in said City. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-24, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-63. - Penalty fees. 
(a)  Any person who fails to obtain an original license within 30 days after owning any dog or any dog coming into their care, custody, and control in this City shall pay, in addition to the original license fee, a penalty fee of 50 percent of the original license fee. 
(b)  Any person who fails to pay the required dog license fee, as set forth in section 8-62, shall pay, in addition to the original license fee, a penalty of 50 percent of the original license fee, for each year the license fee is delinquent. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-25, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-64. - License fee exemptions. 
All dogs shall be licensed pursuant to section 8-59, however, license fees shall be waived for the following: 
(1)  Guide dogs, signal dog, or service dog especially trained for that purpose, as such terms are defined in Civil Code § 54.1. 
(2)  Dogs honorably discharged from the Armed Forces of the United States. 
(3)  Dogs in the care, custody, and control of nonresidents who are traveling through the City, or temporarily staying in the City for a period not exceeding 30 days, or dogs temporarily brought into the City for the exclusive purpose of being entered in a bench show or dog exhibition, provided such dogs are so entered and not kept elsewhere in the City. 
(4)  Dogs which are owned by any governmental agency. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-26, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-65. - Tag must be shown. 
No person shall fail or refuse to show to the Director, his or her Deputies, a Code Enforcement Officer, or any Police Officer, the license certificate and the tag for any duly registered dog kept or remaining within any home or upon any enclosed premises under their immediate control. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-27, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-66. - Removal of registration tags. 
No unauthorized person shall remove from any dog, any collar, harness, or other device to which is attached a registration tag for the current year or to remove such tag therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-28, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-67. - Counterfeiting tags. 
No person shall imitate or counterfeit the tags required by this article, or shall use any imitation or counterfeit of such tag. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-29, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-68. - Nontransferable. 
No dog license is transferable. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-30, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-69. - Licensing requirements. 
Every person applying for a dog license must exhibit a certificate issued by a person licensed by the State of California, or by any State or nation, to practice veterinary medicine, which certificate shall show that the dog for which the license shall be issued, either: 
(1)  Has been vaccinated in accordance with the provisions of sections 8-99 and 8-1000 hereof; or 
(2)  Should not be so vaccinated by reason of age, infirmity, or other disability. Such exemption shall be valid for a period not to exceed one year. 
A license for any dog shall not be issued unless and until either such certificate is exhibited. Said certificate of vaccination must be valid throughout the entire licensing period. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-31, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-70. - License fee a debt. 
The amount of any license fees imposed by this article shall be deemed a debt to the City and any person keeping any animal without having obtained a license and registration certificate from the City shall be liable to an action in the name of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of the license fees and penalties imposed and required by this article to be paid for the privilege of keeping such animal and it shall be the duty of the Director to cause a complaint to be filed against any person violating any of the provisions of this article. Such action shall be cumulative and shall not be deemed a bar to, or a waiver of, the right of the City to prosecute any person for a violation of this article or any other applicable provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-32, 12-15-2009)  
Secs. 8-71—8-98. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - VACCINATION 
 
Sec. 8-99. - Rabies vaccinations. 
Every person keeping, harboring, or having a dog over the age of four months of age in the City shall cause such dog to be vaccinated with a type of rabies vaccine approved by the California State Department of Health Services within a period of 30 days from the date such dog was harbored, kept, or had within the City, or within 30 days from the date that said dog attains the age of four months, provided, however, that the aforesaid provision shall not apply so as to require the vaccination of any dog which has been vaccinated with an approved vaccine by a person licensed by the State of California, or by any other State or nation, to practice veterinary medicine where such vaccination has been completed within the period of time as hereinafter prescribed in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-41, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-100. - Rabies revaccination. 
Every person keeping, harboring, or having in the City a dog which has been vaccinated by an approved vaccine shall cause such dog to be revaccinated in accordance with the guidelines set forth by the California Department of Health Services. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-42, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-101. - Rabies certificate. 
Every person keeping, harboring, or having in the City any dog required by this article to be vaccinated shall at all times, while such dog is thus kept, harbored, or had, have in their possession a certificate issued by a person licensed by the State of California, or any other State or nation, to practice veterinary medicine, which certificate shall specify that such dog has been vaccinated in accordance with the provisions of sections 8-99 and 8-100. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-43, 12-15-2009)  
Secs. 8-102—8-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE 
 
Sec. 8-131. - Running at large prohibited; dogs. 
(a)  No person owning, having an interest in, harboring, or having charge, care, control, custody, or possession of any dog shall cause or permit such dog to be off the premises of its owner, unless such dog is securely confined by a strong leash not exceeding six feet, securely and continuously held by a competent person owning, having an interest in, harboring, or having charge, care, control, custody, or possession of such dog, or unless such dog be confined within an enclosed vehicle. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any dog being used for law enforcement purposes by any State, County, City, or City and County law enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-51, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-132. - Giving notice of captured animals. 
Any person who captures an animal at large, as defined in section 8-131, shall within 24 hours, give notice to the Director. Such notice shall include the following: 
(1)  The fact that they have such animal in their possession. 
(2)  The complete description of such animal. 
(3)  The license number of such animal, if any, and by what County or municipal corporation issued. If such animal has no license, such person shall so state. 
(4)  The place where such animal is confined and shall thereafter surrender said animal to the Director upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-52, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-133. - Running at large prohibited—Livestock. 
Notwithstanding section 44-104, no person owning or having control of any ox, steer, bull, cow, horse, colt, calf, sheep, goat, or any animal commonly referred to as "livestock" shall: 
(1)  Permit such animal to run at large in the City; 
(2)  Cause or permit any such animal to be pastured, herded, staked, or tied in any street, lane, alley, park, or other public area; 
(3)  Tie, stake, pasture, or permit the tying, staking, or pasturing of any such animal upon any private property within the limits of the City, without the consent of the owner or occupant of such property, or in such a way as to permit any such animal to trespass upon any street, public place, or upon any such private property; 
(4)  Permit any said animals to be or remain during the night time secured by a stake, or secured in any manner other than by enclosing such animal in a pen, corral, or barn sufficient and adequate to restrain such animal, or by securely fastening such animal by means of a rope, or chain of sufficient size, strength, and weight to effectively restrain such animal; or 
(5)  Fail to provide the necessary sustenance, drink, shelter, or protection from the weather, or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-53, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-134. - Running at large prohibited—Fowls and rabbits. 
Notwithstanding section 44-104, it is hereby declared to be a nuisance and no person shall suffer or permit any rabbits and/or permitted birds, and/or fowl, owned or controlled by them, to run or fly at large or to go upon the premises of any other person or entity in the City. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-54, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-135. - Running at large prohibited—Monkeys and like animals. 
(a)  Notwithstanding section 44-104, no person owning or having control of any monkey, ape, chimpanzee, or other animal of the monkey type, shall permit, allow, or suffer such animal to run at large within the City or permit, allow, or suffer such animal to be or go upon any street or public place within the City without having such animal securely fastened by an adequate chain or rope, firmly held by or attached to a competent person. 
(b)  Such animal shall be deemed and considered as running at large, within the meaning of the expression as herein used, when not confined within an enclosure or when not securely tied or chained. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-55, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-136. - Running at large prohibited—Wild or vicious animals. 
(a)  Notwithstanding section 44-104, no person owning or having charge, custody, control, or possession of any animal or reptile known by such person to be vicious or dangerous, or commonly so known, or owning or having charge, custody, control, or possession of any elephant, bear, hippopotamus, rhinoceros, lion, tiger, leopard, wolf, monkey, ape, chimpanzee, bobcat, lynx, wildcat, puma, cheetah, or any animal commonly referred to as a "wild specie" or any poisonous reptile, shall permit or allow the same to be at large upon any highway, street, lane, alley, court, or other public place or upon any private property other than within the enclosed premises of such person. 
(b)  Any dog having a disposition or propensity to attack or bite any person or animal without provocation is hereby defined as a wild or vicious animal. The Director shall notify the owner or harborer in writing to keep such animal within a substantial enclosure and/or adequately secured in a manner in compliance with State law. If such restraint is impossible or impracticable, such animal shall be impounded until the owner or harborer is able to comply with the Director's order. If, upon receiving said written notification, the owner or harborer fails to provide adequate restraint or control of said animal as ordered by the Director within a reasonable time, said animal shall be subject to summary destruction, pursuant to and in accordance with State law. 
(c)  Where the official records of the Director indicate a dog has bitten any person or persons or animal on two or more separate occasions, it shall be prima facie evidence that said dog is a wild or vicious animal. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-56, 12-15-2009)  
Secs. 8-137—8-155. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - IMPOUNDING 
 
Sec. 8-156. - Animal care center provided. 
There shall be provided by the City or by the Director upon such terms and conditions as shall be named in a contract executed by and between the Director and the legislative body of the City, a suitable building or enclosure to keep and safely hold all animals herein enumerated which are subject to be impounded, which shall be known and designated as the "Animal Care Center." 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-61, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-157. - Impounding at animal care center. 
It shall be the duty of the Director to take up, impound, and safely keep any of the animals enumerated in this article found running at large, staked, tied, or being herded or pastured in any street, lane, alley, court, square, park, or other place belonging to or under the control of the City, or upon any private property in the City, contrary to the provisions of this article or State law. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-62, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-158. - Care of animals. 
When any animal is to be impounded, it shall be provided with proper and sufficient food and water by the Director for a period of at least five working days, or such longer period as may be provided hereinafter. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-63, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-159. - Reclaiming of animals. 
The owner of any animal impounded shall have the right to reclaim the same at any time prior to the sale thereof upon payment to the Director of the costs and charges for impounding and keeping said animals. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-64, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-160. - Destruction of impounded unfit animals. 
It shall be the duty of the Director to issue and sign a death warrant for and to order the destruction of any animal lawfully taken into custody, which in the opinion of the Director is infected with a dangerous or communicable disease, or which is in an incurable crippled condition, or which is adjudged by a written report of a licensed veterinarian to be afflicted with any painful incurable disease. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-65, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-161. - Impounding and quarantine. 
It shall be the duty of the Director to take up all dogs found in violation of section 8-131. When such dog is taken up, it shall be delivered to the Director. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-66, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-162. - Fee for recovery of dog or cat. 
Subject to the other provisions of this article, any person may make application to the Director for the return of any dog or cat, and upon presentation of proof satisfactory to said Director that such person is the owner or is rightfully entitled to the possession of such dog or cat, may recover such dog or cat upon the payment of the required fee. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-67, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-163. - Release requirement. 
Prior to the release of any dog from the Animal Care Center to its owner, proof of rabies vaccination shall be required. If the owner fails to show proof, the veterinarian on duty shall administer such vaccination for such fee as shall be established by the Director. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-68, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-164. - Minimum period of impounding—Dog. 
All licensed dogs impounded at the Animal Care Center shall be provided with proper and sufficient food and water by the Director for a period of at least ten calendar days after written notice is given to the owner and all unlicensed dogs for a period of at least five working days. Deposit of a letter of impoundment with the United States Postal Service shall constitute written notice. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-69, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-165. - Same—Cat. 
All cats impounded at the Animal Care Center shall be provided with proper and sufficient food and water by the Director for a period of at least ten days after written notice is given to the owner for cats displaying some type of identification. Cats without identification shall be held for at least five working days after which time these cats may be destroyed, pursuant to State law. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-70, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-166. - Sale of impounded dogs and cats; summary destruction. 
Dogs and cats not redeemed may be sold by the Director. If any dog or cat, impounded by the Director, shall not have been redeemed and cannot be sold within a reasonable time thereafter, it may be summarily disposed of, for which the Director is responsible, in some humane way as prescribed or permitted by State law. The Director shall file at the Animal Care Center a full description of each dog and cat impounded therein, for said period beginning on the day any such dog and cat is taken or delivered into the possession of the Director. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-71, 12-15-2009)  
Secs. 8-167—8-185. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - QUARANTINE REQUIREMENT AND RABIES SUSPECTS 
 
Sec. 8-186. - Notification required regarding rabid animal. 
It shall be unlawful for any person having knowledge of the whereabouts of an animal known to have or suspected of having rabies or that has shown symptoms of rabies, to fail, refuse, or neglect to immediately notify the Director, or to fail, refuse, or neglect to allow the Director to make an inspection to the satisfaction of said official that such animal has or has not rabies. The Director shall likewise be notified of any person bitten by an animal of a species subject to rabies, whether or not the animal is suspected of having rabies. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-81, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-187. - Knowledge of bite; duty to report. 
Whenever any person having charge, care, control, custody, or possession of any dog has knowledge that such dog has bitten any person, the persons having charge, care, control, custody, or possession of such dog shall report said fact in writing forthwith to the Director. The report shall state the name and address of the person bitten and the time and place such person was bitten. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-82, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-188. - Dogs and other animals to be quarantined. 
Whenever it is shown that any dog or other animal has bitten any person, no owner or person having the custody or possession thereof, upon order of the Director, any Police Officer, or the Health Officer, shall fail, refuse, or neglect to quarantine such animal and keep it securely confined on a chain or in a closed cage or paddock for a period of ten days, or shall fail, refuse, or neglect to allow the Director to make an inspection or examination thereof at any time during said period. No such dog or animal shall be removed without written permission of the Director, any Police Officer, or the Health Officer or their deputies. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-83, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-189. - Quarantine of dogs used by law enforcement agency. 
Notwithstanding any other provision in this article, and pursuant to State law, a dog used by any State, County, City, or City and County law enforcement agency shall not be quarantined after biting any person if such bite occurred while the dog was being used for any law enforcement purpose. The law enforcement agency shall make the dog available for examination at any reasonable time. The law enforcement agency shall notify the local Health Officer if the dog exhibits any abnormal behavior. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-84, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-190. - Quarantine of guide dogs. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, and pursuant to State law, a guide dog shall not be quarantined, in the absence of evidence that it has been exposed to rabies, unless the owner fails: 
(1)  To keep it safely confined to the premises of the owner. 
(2)  To keep it available for examination at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-85, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-191. - Rabies; bites to animals. 
Whenever it is suspected that any animal shall have been bitten by another animal having, or suspected of having rabies, all rules and regulations under section 8-188 shall apply where applicable, substituting the word "animal" or "dog." 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-86, 12-15-2009)  
Secs. 8-192—8-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - GENERAL REGULATIONS OR SALES 
 
Sec. 8-221. - Spaying or altering required. 
The Animal Care Center shall not sell or give away any male or female cat or dog more than eight weeks of age that has not been spayed or neutered. The Animal Care Center shall not sell or give away any male or female cat or dog under eight weeks of age unless a deposit has been paid for the cost of spaying or neutering said dog or cat. The deposit will be held in trust with the Director. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-91, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-222. - Dog feces. 
No owner or person having charge, custody, or control of any dog shall permit, either willfully or through failure to exercise due care to control, any such dog to defecate and to allow such feces thereafter to remain on any public sidewalk, park, any other public property, or on any improved private property other than that of the owner or person who has custody or control of such dog. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-92, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-223. - Artificial treatment. 
No person shall dye, color, or otherwise artificially treat any rabbit, baby chick, duckling, or other fowl. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-93, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-224. - Sale of young. 
No person shall display, sell, offer for sale, or barter to give away any rabbit, baby chick, duckling, or other fowl which has been dyed, colored, or otherwise artificially treated. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-94, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-225. - Sanitary maintenance of animals. 
Every person owning or occupying premises where any animal, fowl, or bird is kept shall keep the stable, barn, stall, pen, coop, building, or place in which said animal is kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-95, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-226. - Veterinarian's notice of death. 
Every person owning or operating any veterinary hospital or other establishment for the treatment of animals, shall give written notice to the owner of any such animal left in the hospital or institution for treatment, of the death of such animal, provided the name and address of the owner has been filed in the office of the veterinary hospital or other institution. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-96, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-227. - Carcass of animal. 
It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and no person shall cause, suffer, or permit the carcass of any animal to remain upon any lot, premises, or place owned, controlled, or occupied by them or it for a period of more than 24 hours. For burial of animals see section 8-235. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-97, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-228. - Animals in stores or conveyances. 
No person shall bring any dog, cat, or other live animal, or permit any dog, cat, or other live animal to be brought into or remain in any room or place, other than a private home where food is not handled for commercial purposes, in which meat, fish, game, poultry, fruit, vegetables, bakery goods, or any other food or food product is stored, kept, held, prepared, exposed, offered for sale, or sold for human consumption, or permit any dog, cat, or other live animal to ride upon or get into or upon any wagon, or other vehicle in which any such articles offered or to be offered for sale for human consumption are being kept or transported, provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to a guide dogs. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-98, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-229. - Transporting animals in motor vehicles. 
No person shall transport any animal on the running board of any motor vehicle or outside the passenger compartment, tonneau, or body thereof, unless such animal is protected by a framework or other device which will prevent such animal from falling off, jumping, or being thrown from such motor vehicle whether in motion or not. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-99, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-230. - Keeping diseased animals prohibited. 
No person shall keep any animal which is known or believed by them to be infected with any dangerous or communicable disease, or which is afflicted with any painful disease believed by them to be incurable, without a permit to do so from the Health Officer of the City or other persons designated by the City. Any person having knowledge of such animal shall report such fact to the Director. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-100, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-231. - Noisy animals. 
It is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and no person shall keep, maintain, or permit upon any lot or parcel of land within the City under their control, any animal or animals including any fowl or fowls, which by any sound, or cry, shall interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by an individual. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-101, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-232. - Traps prohibited. 
No person shall set or use any spring steel trap, No. 1 or larger; in the City (this section shall not prohibit the use of gopher traps). 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-102, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-233. - Slaughter of animals. 
No person shall, within this City, willfully slaughter or cause to be slaughtered any cattle, calf, horse, mule, sheep, swine, goat, or any other animal. This section shall not apply to the slaughter of such animals within an educational institution, physician's office, or laboratory for medical research or other scientific purposes, or the slaughter of such animals by a person licensed by the State of California to practice veterinary medicine or by any commercial establishment duly licensed by the City and the United States Department of Agriculture as a slaughterhouse. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-103, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-234. - Maximum number of animals. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no person in a residential zone shall have more than four household pets or animals, in accordance with section 44-104. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-104, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-235. - Burial of animal carcasses. 
No person shall bury the carcass of any dead animal in such manner that there shall be less than three feet of soil above such carcass. 
(Code 1975, § 12-3; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Secs. 8-236—8-263. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - KENNELS 
 
Sec. 8-264. - Breeding of dogs and dog kennels. 
No person shall keep or maintain, or permit to be kept or maintained upon any premises owned or controlled by them, any dog, male or female, kept mainly for breeding purposes, except within properly zoned property pursuant to section 44-139, and then only in an approved kennel. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-111, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-265. - Breeding of cats and cat kennels. 
No person shall keep or maintain, or permit to be kept or maintained upon any premises owned or controlled by them, any cat, male or female, kept mainly for breeding purposes, except within properly zoned property pursuant to section 44-139 and then only in an approved kennel. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-112, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-266. - Cat or dog breeding permit. 
Any person owning or having control, custody, charge, or possession of any cat or dog for breeding purposes shall secure a cat or dog breeding permit from the Director. Fee for said cat or dog breeding permit shall be established by the Director. Any kitten or puppy sold from a litter for a profit over and above the cost of advertising, if any, shall be prima facie evidence of cat or dog breeding. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-113, 12-15-2009)  
Secs. 8-267—8-295. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - CATS 
 
Sec. 8-296. - Optional identification license for cats. 
In order to provide a method for identifying cats, a license may be obtained as prescribed in article III of this chapter. This section shall not require the licensing of cats, but merely provide for their optional licensing. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-121, 12-15-2009)  
Secs. 8-297—8-325. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - WILD OR VICIOUS ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 8-326. - Keeping wild or vicious animals. 
No person owning or having charge, custody, control, or possession of any animal, reptile, or serpent described in section 8-136 shall allow such animal, reptile, or serpent within the enclosed premises of such person unless and until they have first secured a permit to do so and comply with all terms and conditions of such permit and, in addition thereto, such animal, reptile, or serpent shall at all times be so confined, controlled, and restrained in such manner so the life, limb, or property of any person lawfully entering such premises shall not be endangered. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-131, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-327. - Permit for wild or vicious animal. 
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall keep, maintain, or have in their possession or under their control within the City any animal or reptile described in section 8-136 without first applying to and receiving a permit from the Director to do so. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-132, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-328. - Application for permit. 
An application for any permit required pursuant to this article shall be made to the Director in writing and upon a form furnished by the Director if so required. Said application shall be verified by the person who desires to have, keep, maintain, or have in their possession, or under their control, in the City, the animal or reptile for which a permit is required, and shall set forth the following: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  The applicant's interest in such animal or reptile. 
(3)  The proposed location, and the name, address, and telephone number of the owner of such location, and of the lessee, if any. 
(4)  The number and general description of all animals or reptiles for which the permit is sought. 
(5)  Any information known to the applicant concerning vicious or dangerous propensities of all such animals or reptiles. 
(6)  The housing arrangements for all such animals or reptiles with particular details as to safety of structure, locks, fencing, etc. 
(7)  Safety precautions proposed to be taken. 
(8)  Noises or odors anticipated in the keeping of such animals or reptiles. 
(9)  Prior history of incidents involving the public health or safety involving any of said animals or reptiles. 
(10)  Any additional information required by the Director at the time of filing such application or thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-133, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-329. - Permit fee. 
The fee for a permit application for wild or dangerous animals shall be established by the City Council, from time to time. Said fee shall be payable to the Director at the time of filing the permit application. Accretions by natural birth shall not require additional permits during the period of a valid permit. Said fees are not refundable regardless of whether or not any permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-134, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-330. - Review of application for permit. 
Copies of any application for permit under this article shall be sent by the Director to the law enforcement agency, Planning Department, and to any other department or agency from which information is sought, and no permit shall be granted without receipt of a report from the departments or agencies to which copies of the application have been sent, unless waived by the City Manager for good cause. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-135, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-331. - Permit approval. 
No permit shall be granted except with the conditions attached as shall, in the opinion of the person or agency approving such permit, reasonably ensure the public health, safety, and general welfare, and no permit shall be granted in any event for any animal, reptile, or serpent at any particular location except upon an explicit finding by the person or agency approving such permit that the issuance thereof will not be contrary to the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-136, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-332. - Temporary permits. 
The Director may, following application for a permit and pending final disposition of the same, grant a temporary permit for the maintenance within the City of any such animal or reptile upon such conditions as they shall, in their sole discretion, require when, in their opinion, there is no reasonable doubt as to the consistency thereof with the public health, safety, and general welfare, but no animal or reptile shall be otherwise kept or maintained within the City or permitted to occupy any premises within the City, except while such a regular or temporary permit is in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-137, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-333. - Appeal of permit application denied. 
(a)  Any person dissatisfied with the ruling of the Director may, within ten days thereafter, appeal said decision to the City Council; such appeal shall be a simple statement in writing setting forth in common terms the basis of said appeal. 
(b)  An appeal fee, as established by the City Council from time to time, shall be required for each appeal to the City Council. No appeal shall be placed on the agenda of any meeting of the City Council until such fee has been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-138, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-334. - Failure to obtain permit. 
The Director shall take possession of any animal or reptile described under section 8-136 for which a permit has not been issued, or if previously issued has been revoked, and keep the same until the proper permit has been secured by the owner thereof and shall release the same to the owner when all fees and costs have been paid and all laws and permit conditions complied with. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-139, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-335. - Term and renewal of permits. 
No permit required by this chapter shall be granted for a period in excess of one year. An application for renewal of any permit shall be made not less than 45 days prior to the expiration thereof, and shall be accompanied by the same fee as required upon making the original application or the payment of a lesser fee when, in the opinion of the Director, the public health, safety, and general welfare do not require further investigation prior to such renewal. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-140, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-336. - Revocation of permits. 
The Director may, for good cause, revoke any permit or modify any terms or provisions thereof except permits which have been approved by the City Council or the City's former Planning Commission after an administrative hearing, and may, in the event it is reasonably necessary to protect against an immediate threat or danger to the public health or safety, suspend any permit or portion thereof without hearing for a period not to exceed 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-141, 12-15-2009; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 5, 5-3-2016)  
Sec. 8-337. - Appeal of permit revocation. 
Any person aggrieved by such action may, upon payment of an appeal fee have such action reviewed by the City Council but the filing of an appeal shall not stay any order of suspension. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-142, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-338. - Exception for transportation of animals through City. 
The permit requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any person so keeping, maintaining, or having in their possession or control any animal or reptile defined in section 8-136 when such person is transporting such animal or reptile through the City, has taken adequate safeguards to protect the public, and has notified the local law enforcement agency of the proposed route of transportation and time thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-143, 12-15-2009)  
Sec. 8-339. - Exempt from permit requirement. 
The provision of this chapter shall not apply to animals which are kept confined in any public zoo, museum, circus, carnival, exhibition, or show. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 5-144, 12-15-2009)  
Secs. 8-340—8-366. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - FEEDING OF WILDLIFE ON CITY PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 8-367. - Feeding of birds and animals in City parks or on City-owned property prohibited. 
Except as allowed by section 8-368, all persons are prohibited from feeding, or causing to be fed, animals or birds in any City park or on any City-owned property. 
(Code 1975, § 12-32; Ord. No. 93-05, § 1)  
Sec. 8-368. - Feeding of birds and animals; exception. 
Section 8-367 shall not apply to the feeding of a household bird or animal owned or controlled by the person feeding them. 
(Code 1975, § 12-33; Ord. No. 93-05, § 1)  
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— State Housing Law, Health and Safety Code § 17910 et seq.; City authority to regulate the construction, repair, or alteration of buildings, Government Code § 38660. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Housing advisory and appeals board. 
(a)  In order to provide for final interpretation of the provisions of the codes adopted by this article and to hear appeals provided for hereunder, there is hereby established a housing advisory and appeals board consisting of five members of the City Council of the City of La Palma. The Building Official shall be an ex officio member of and shall act as secretary to the board. The board may adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its business, and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a copy to the Building Official. 
(b)  Appeals to the board shall be processed in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter 5 of the Uniform Building Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings adopted by reference in this chapter. Copies of all rules and regulations adopted by the board shall be delivered to the Building Official, who shall make them freely accessible to the public. 
(Code 1975, § 7-5; Ord. No. 85-08, § 1) 
State Law reference— Local appeals board authorized by City council to hear appeals regarding building requirements of the City, Health and Safety Code § 17920.5.  
Sec. 10-2. - Liability for damages. 
No provision of this chapter shall be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person who owns, operates, maintains or installs any facilities contrary to the provisions of this chapter for damages to persons or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the City be held as assuming any such liability by reason of any inspection, approval or certificate of inspection as provided in this chapter or by reason of the adoption of the codes in this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 7-6; Ord. No. 85-08, § 1) 
State Law reference— Authority of enforcement agency officer to enter and inspect any building or premises to secure compliance with or prevent a violation of State Building Code, Health and Safety Code § 17970; limitations on authority to enter, Health and Safety Code § 17972.  
Sec. 10-3. - Penalties and remedies. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, or corporation to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter or any of the codes hereby adopted. Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation violating any provision of this chapter or any of the codes hereby adopted or failing to comply with any of their requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(b)  Each and every person, firm, partnership, or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or any portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or the codes hereby adopted is committed, continued, or permitted by such person, firm, partnership, or corporation, and shall be deemed punishable therefor as provided in this chapter. 
(c)  In the alternative, any such hazard may be prosecuted originally as an infraction or amended thereto in the discretion of the City Attorney or any deputy district attorney, upon a determination that the circumstances warrant such action. 
(Code 1975, § 7-6.1; Ord. No. 2007-07, § 2)  
Sec. 10-4. - Civil remedies available. 
The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any of the codes hereby adopted shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the City through civil process by means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances. 
(Code 1975, § 7-6.2; Ord. No. 2007-07, § 2)  
Sec. 10-5. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter and of any code adopted by reference by this chapter to fail to comply therewith, or to violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or to build in violation of any detailed statement or specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, or to fail to comply with an order issued thereunder. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter or any code adopted thereby, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of such code or provision is committed, continued or permitted. Upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(c)  The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions under the codes of this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 7-47; Ord. No. 79-11, § 1)  
Secs. 10-6—10-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 10-31. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the term "permit" shall mean mechanical, building, plumbing, electrical, and pool and spa permits.  
Sec. 10-32. - Applications. 
(a)  Applications for permits shall be made in writing to the Building Official. The application shall be accompanied by such plans, specifications, and schedules as may be necessary to determine whether the proposed installation and equipment meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  All departments, officials, and public employees vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses, when required by law or any of the provisions of this chapter, shall comply with the provisions of the Development Code. No license or permit for uses, buildings, or other purposes shall be issued when the same would be in conflict with the provisions of the Development Code. Any license or permit, if issued in conflict with the provisions of the Development Code, shall be null and void. 
(Code 1975, § 7-7; Ord. No. 85-08, § 1)  
Sec. 10-33. - Fees. 
Permit fees shall be specified by resolution adopted by the City Council. All fees provided for within the various codes adopted in this chapter shall be superseded by the resolution adopted by the City Council. 
(Code 1975, § 7-8; Ord. No. 85-08, § 1) 
State Law reference— Authority of City to prescribe fees for required permits, certificates, or other documents and to prescribe fees to defray the costs of enforcement carried out by local enforcement officials, Health and Safety Code § 17951.  
ARTICLE IIA. - SMALL RESIDENTIAL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM PERMITS 
 
Sec. 10-34. - Intent and purpose. 
The intent and purpose of this article is to establish an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process to facilitate timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This article is designed to encourage the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the City, and expanding the ability of property owners to install solar energy systems, all while protecting the public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
Sec. 10-35. - Definitions. 
Association means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development. 
Building department means the Building and Safety Division of the City. 
Building official means the Building Official for the City. 
City means the City of La Palma. 
Common interest development means any of the following: 
(1)  A community apartment project. 
(2)  A condominium project. 
(3)  A planned development. 
(4)  A stock cooperative. 
Electronic submittal means the utilization of one or more of the following: email, the internet or facsimile. 
Expedited permitting, refers to an organized permitting process by which a majority of small, residential-sized photovoltaic (PV) systems under ten KW-DC may be permitted quickly and easily. 
Feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition or mitigation imposed by the City on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a similar permit. 
Small residential rooftop solar energy system means all of the following: 
(1)  A solar energy system that is not larger than ten kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal. 
(2)  A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the City and all State health and safety standards. 
(3)  A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling. 
(4)  A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height established by the City. 
Solar energy system means either of the following: 
(1)  Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating. 
(2)  Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating, space cooling or water heating. 
Specific, adverse impact means a significant, quantifiable, direct and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified and written public health or safety standards, policies or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
(Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
Sec. 10-36. - Applicability. 
This article applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the City. Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived are not subject to the requirements of this article unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of such system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. 
(Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
Sec. 10-37. - Solar energy system requirements. 
(a)  All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the City and the State. 
(b)  Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code. 
(c)  Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. 
(Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
Sec. 10-38. - Duties of building department and building official. 
(a)  All documents required for the submission of an expedited small residential rooftop solar energy system application shall be made available on the City's publicly accessible website. 
(b)  Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents via email, the City's website, or facsimile shall be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants. 
(c)  An applicant's electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature. 
(d)  The Building Department shall adopt a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply with to be eligible for expedited review. 
(e)  The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plans, and checklist shall substantially conform to the recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research. 
(f)  Fees for the permitting of small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall be as established by resolution of the City Council must comply with Government Code §§ 65850.55 and 66015 and Health and Safety Code § 17951. 
(Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
Sec. 10-39. - Expedited permit review and inspection requirements. 
(a)  The Building Department shall adopt an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite the approval of small residential rooftop solar energy system applications within 30 days of adoption of this article. For an application for a small residential rooftop solar energy system that meets the requirements of the approved checklist and standard plan, the Building Official shall issue a building permit or other non-discretionary permit within three business days. The Building Official may require an applicant to apply for a use permit if the official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions may be appealed to the Planning Commission within 15 calendar days following the date of the decision. 
(b)  Review of the application shall be limited to the Building Official's review of whether the system proposed in the applicant meets local, state and federal health and safety requirements. 
(c)  If a use permit is required, the Building Official may deny an application for the use permit if the official makes written findings based upon substantive evidence that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of any potential feasible alternatives for preventing the adverse impact. A denial may be appealed to the Planning Commission within 15 calendar days following the date of the denial decision. 
(d)  Any condition imposed on a small residential rooftop solar energy system shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost and without significantly increasing the cost of the system or significantly decreasing its efficiency or specified performance. For purposes of this subsection, he "significantly" shall mean the same as defined in Civil Code § 714(d)(1)(A)—(B). 
(e)  If an application for a small residential rooftop solar energy system is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permitting shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission. 
(f)  Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the Building Department for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review. The inspection shall be scheduled within two business days of a request, shall be done in a timely manner and should include consolidated inspections. 
(g)  If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 7-7-2015)  
Secs. 10-40—10-54. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TECHNICAL CODES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 10-55. - Purpose. 
The codes adopted by this article are adopted for the purpose of prescribing regulations for the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, and area of buildings or structures, subject to the regulations appearing in the zoning chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 7-1; Ord. No. 85-08, § 1)  
Sec. 10-56. - Conflicts with State law. 
Wherever the provisions of the State Housing Law (Health and Safety Code § 17910 et seq.) shall impose requirements more stringent than those established by this article, the provisions of the State Housing Law shall apply. 
(Code 1975, § 7-2; Ord. No. 85-08, § 1)  
Sec. 10-57. - Where filed. 
One copy of each of the codes adopted by reference by this article are on file in the office of the City Clerk for use and examination by the public. 
(Code 1975, § 7-3; Ord. No. 85-08, § 1)  
Sec. 10-58. - Enforcement. 
The Building Official is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 7-4; Ord. No. 85-08, § 1) 
State Law reference— City building department required to enforce State Building Standards Code, State Housing Law, and other rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to them, Health and Safety Code § 17960 et seq.  
Sec. 10-59. - References to officials in adopted technical codes. 
Unless otherwise stated in this chapter, where reference is made to the duties of certain officials named within the technical codes which are adopted by reference in this chapter, then that designated official of the City or of Orange County, California, who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said technical code, shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of that technical code are concerned.  
Secs. 10-60—10-76. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATIVE CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-08, § 1, adopted October 18, 2016, repealed div. 2, § 10-77, in its entirety; and § 5, enacted a new div. 2, to read as set out herein. Former div. 2, pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Ord. No. 2010-05, § 2, adopted December 7, 2010 and Ord. No. 2013-04, § 3, adopted November 19, 2013. 
 
Sec. 10-77. - Adopted. 
The California Administrative Code, 2016 Edition, is hereby adopted, in its entirety, as the Administrative Code of the City, as set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08, § 5, 10-18-2016)  
DIVISION 3. - BUILDING CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-08, § 1, adopted October 18, 2016, repealed div. 3, §§ 10-98, 10-99, in its entirety; and § 4, enacted a new div. 3, to read as set out herein. Former div. 3, pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Ord. No. 2010-05, § 3, adopted December 7, 2010 and Ord. No. 2013-04, § 4, adopted November 19, 2013. 
 
Sec. 10-98. - Adopted. 
The California Building Code, 2016 Edition, is hereby adopted, in its entirety, as the Administrative Code of the City, as set forth in this division, subject to the modifications set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08, § 4, 10-18-2016)  
Sec. 10-99. - Additions, amendments, and deletions. 
The following additions, amendments, and deletions are hereby made to the 2016 Edition of the California Building Code adopted by this division: 
Section 104.8 Liability of Chapter 1 of the California Building Code is hereby amended by adding a sentence to the end of the paragraph as follows: 
The provisions of this section shall apply if the Building Official or his/her authorized representatives are employees of this jurisdiction and shall also apply if the Building Official or his/her authorized representative are acting under contract as agents of this jurisdiction. 
Section 105 Permits The following revisions are hereby added to Section 105 to read, in its entirety, as follows: 
Section 105.2 — Work Exempt from permit. Subsections 1 and 2 of Section 105.2 are hereby amended to read, in their entirety, as follows: 
1.  One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses, and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet (11m 2 ), and provided that such structures must comply with setback and height requirements of the City Zoning Code. 
2.  Fences not over 6 feet high. Masonry or concrete fences not over 36 inches in height above lowest adjacent grade. 
Section 105.2 is hereby amended by adding Subsection 14 to read, in its entirety, as follows: 
14.  Television and radio receiving and transmitting antennas over 15 feet in height measured from the highest point on the structure on the same lot require a Conditional Use Permit and shall be designed as per standard plans on file in the Building Division of the City of La Palma. 
Section 105.5 is hereby amended to add a second paragraph that reads as follows: 
105.5 Expiration. Before such work can be re-commenced a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee therefore shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work; provided, however, that: 
1.  No changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; and 
2.  Such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one (1) year; and 
3.  A re-endorsement of the compliance of the plans with the applicable regulations, by the Building Official, shall be obtained. 
Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which work may commence under that permit when the permittee is unable to commence work within the time required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The Building Official may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days upon written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. No permit shall be extended more than once. 
A new Subsection 105.8 entitled "Maintenance of property during construction" is hereby added to Section 105 to read, in its entirety, as follows: 
Section 105.8 Maintenance of property during construction. During construction, all property shall be maintained in a reasonably clean and well-kept manner. All lumber and building materials shall be neatly piled or stacked in a safe manner and stored in the rear yard of the residential property or inside the building construction perimeter, except that building materials may be stored in a front yard for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. A waiver of this requirement may be obtained from the Building Official or his/her designated representative if the construction is screened from view from adjacent occupied or public property with fencing materials approved by city zoning and building regulations. 
Section 107 SUBMITTAL DOCUMENTS The following revisions are hereby added to Section 107 to read, in its entirety, as follows: 
A new Subsection 107.2.6 is hereby added to Section 107 to read, in its entirety, as follows: 
107.2.6 Soil Report. A Soil report shall be submitted with all permit applications for new construction and additions. Soil Reports shall be prepared by a professional engineer licensed by the State to prepare such reports. The Building Official may waive this requirement if they find that the scope of work applied for does not necessitate a soil report. 
Section 107.3 of Section 107 is hereby amended to add a second paragraph that reads as follows: 
When submittal documents are required by Section 107.1, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting the submittal documents for plan review. Said plan review fees are separate fees from the permit fees specified in Section 109.2 and are in addition to the permit fees. Said plan review fee shall be as set forth in the City Council Fee Resolution. The initial plan review fee is for one complete review and one re-check review. Reviews beyond the initial and the re-check shall require addition fees as set forth in the City Council Fee Resolution. 
Section 107.5 of Section 107 is hereby amended to add a second paragraph that reads as follows: 
The approved plans permit application, and inspection card, and other construction documents required by the Building Official shall be imaged after the final inspection and will be a permanent record in the City. The applicant shall pay the cost of imaging at the time of permit. Said imaging fee shall be as set forth in the City Council Fee Resolution. 
SECTION 109 FEES The following revisions are hereby added to Section 109 to read, in its entirety, as follows: 
Section 109.2 is hereby amended by adding a sentence at the end to read as follows: 
The fee for each permit shall be as set forth in the City Council Fee Resolution unless otherwise specified by the code. 
Section 109.3 is hereby amended to add a second paragraph that reads as follows: 
The Building Official shall make the determination of value or valuation under any provisions of this code. The valuation shall be determined by using rational methods established by the Building Official that reasonably establish the construction value or the contract price of the actual construction cost. The value of work to be used in computing the Building Permit and Building Plan Review fees shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued, as well as all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire extinguishing systems, and any other permanent equipment. 
Section 109.6 is hereby amended to read, in its entirety, as follows: 
109.6 Refunds. The Building Official may authorize refunding of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. 
The Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code. 
The Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan reviewing is done. 
The Building Official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except on written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of payment. No refund will be made for less than $25.00. Permit and plan check fees will be refunded in their entirety when collected in error. 
SECTION 110 INSPECTIONS. The following revisions are hereby added to Section 110 to read, in its entirety, as follows: 
A new Subsection 110.7 is hereby added to Section 110 to read in its entirety as follows: 
110.7 Re-inspection. A re-inspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or re-inspection when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete or when corrections called for are not made. 
This subsection is not to be interpreted as requiring re-inspection fees the first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of this Code, but as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before the job is ready for such inspection or re-inspection. 
Re-inspection fees may be assessed when the inspection record card is not posted or otherwise made available on the work site; the approved plans are not readily available to the inspector, for failure to provide access on the date for which inspection is requested, or for deviating from plans requiring the approval of the Building Official. 
To obtain a re-inspection, the applicant shall file an application therefore in writing upon a form furnished for that purpose and pay the re-inspection fee as established by the City Council Fee Resolution. 
In instances where re-inspection fees have been assessed, no additional inspection of the work will be performed until the required fees have been paid. 
Section 111.3 is hereby amended to add a second paragraph that reads as follows: 
The application fee for such Temporary Certificate of Occupancy shall be as established by the City Council Fee Resolution. The Temporary Certificate of Occupancy may be subject to such conditions as deemed necessary by the Building Official. The Temporary Certificate of Occupancy expires 30 days after issuance and may be renewed for additional 30 day periods upon providing acceptable justification, the payment of a new application fee for each 30 day period and approval by the Building Official. The violation or failure of any such condition imposed shall be grounds for revocation of such Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. 
Section 113.1 is amended to read as follows: 
113.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall consist of five members, composed of the mayor and the other members of the City Council. Said members shall hold their respective membership on said board of appeals by reason of, and concurrently with their terms of service as Council members and shall cease to be such members upon their ceasing to be Council members. The building official shall be the secretary of the board. The board may adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its investigations and shall render all its decisions and findings on contested matters in writing to the building official, with duplicative copy thereof to any appellant or contestant affected by any such decision of finding. 
Three members of the board shall constitute a quorum. The mayor shall be the presiding officer of the board. Meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the Brown Act. 
The board shall have the right, subject to such limits as the City Council may prescribe by resolution, to employ at the cost and expense of the City, such qualified individuals as the board, in its discretion, may deem reasonably necessary in order to assist it in its investigations and making its findings and decisions. 
(b)  Section 113.3 is deleted in its entirety without replacement. 
Sections 202 General Definitions is hereby revised by adding "Spark Arrester" as follows: 
SPARK ARRESTER. A listed device constructed of noncombustible material specifically for the purpose of meeting one of the following conditions: 
1.  Removing and retaining carbon and other flammable particles/debris from the exhaust flow of an internal combustion engine in accordance with California Vehicle Code Section 38366. 
2.  Fireplaces that burn solid fuel in accordance with California Building Code Chapter 28. 
Section 701A.3 is hereby revised to read as follows: 
701A.3 Application. New buildings located in any Fire Hazard Severity Zone or any Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Area designated by the enforcing agency constructed after the application date, and additions to and remodel of buildings constructed before 2012 located in areas currently designated as such, shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. The provisions shall also apply to additions, remodels, and accessory structures located within 100 feet of a fuel modification zone, vegetation management area, or similar area containing hazardous combustible vegetation, regardless of whether the property is currently located in a designated Fire Hazard Severity Zone or Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Area, when materials and/or construction methods for exterior wildfire exposure were previously required at the property by the Building or Fire Code Official. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Buildings of an accessory character classified as a Group U occupancy and not exceeding 120 square feet in floor area, when located at least 30 feet from the applicable building. 
2.  Buildings of an accessory character classified as a Group U occupancy of any size located least 50 feet from an applicable building. 
3.  Buildings classified as a Group U Agricultural Building, as defined in Section 202 of this code (see also Appendix C — Group U Agricultural Buildings), when located at least 50 feet from an applicable building. 
Section 710A.3.2 is hereby revised to read as follows: 
710A.3.2 Detached accessory structures within 50 feet of an applicable building shall comply with the requirements of this section. 
Section 710A.4 is hereby revised to read as follows: 
710A.4 Requirements. Accessory structures shall be constructed of non-combustible or ignition-resistant materials. 
Section 903.2 is hereby revised to read as follows: 
903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in buildings and structures shall be provided when one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  New buildings: Notwithstanding any applicable provisions of Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.19, an automatic fire-extinguishing system shall also be installed in all occupancies when the total building area exceeds 5,000 square feet as defined in Section 202, regardless of fire areas or allowable area, or is more than two stories in height. 
Exception: Subject to approval by the Fire Code Official, open parking garages in accordance with Section 406.5 of the California Building Code. 
2.  Existing Buildings: Notwithstanding any applicable provisions of this code, an automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in an existing building when an addition occurs and one of the following conditions exists: 
a.  When an addition is 33% or more of the existing building area, and the resulting building area exceeds 5000 square feet. 
b.  When an addition exceeds 2000 square feet and the resulting building area exceeds 5000 square feet. 
c.  An additional story is added above the second floor regardless of fire areas or allowable area. 
Exception: 
Additions to Group R-3 occupancies shall comply with Section 903.2.8 (2). 
Section 903.2.8 is hereby revised to read as follows: 
903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a Group R fire area as follows: 
1.  New Buildings: An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all new buildings. 
2.  Existing R-3 Buildings: An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout when an addition is 51% or more of the existing building area as defined in Section 202, and/or greater than 1,000 square feet within a two year period. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Existing Group R-3 occupancies converted to Group R-3.1 occupancies and not housing bedridden clients, not housing non-ambulatory clients above the first floor, and not housing clients above the second floor. 
2.  Existing Group R-3 occupancies converted to Group R-3.1 occupancies housing only one bedridden client and complying with Section 435.8.3.3 of the California Building Code. 
3.  Pursuant to Health and Safety Code, Section 13113, occupancies housing ambulatory children only, none of whom are mentally ill children or children with intellectual disabilities, and the buildings or portions thereof in which such children are housed are not more than two stories in height, and building or portions thereof housing such children have an automatic fire alarm system activated by approved smoke detectors. 
4.  Pursuant to Health and Safety Code, Section 13143.6, occupancies licensed for protective social care which house ambulatory clients only, none of whom is a child (under the age of 18 years), or who is elderly (65 years of age or over). 
When not used in accordance with Section 504.2 or 506.3 of the California Building Code, an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2 shall be allowed in Group R-2.1 occupancies. 
An automatic sprinkler system designed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.3 shall not be utilized in Group R-2.1 or R-4 occupancies. 
Section 903.3.5.3 Hydraulically calculated systems is hereby added as follows: 
903.3.5.3 Hydraulically calculated systems. The design of hydraulically calculated fire sprinkler systems shall not exceed 90% of the water supply capacity. 
Exception: 
When static pressure exceeds 100 psi, and when required by the fire code official, the fire sprinkler system shall not exceed the water supply capacity specified by Table 903.3.5.3. 
  
Chapter 35 Referenced Standards is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments: 
NFPA 13, 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems is hereby amended as follows: 
Section 6.7.3 is hereby revised to read as follows: 
6.7.3 Fire department connections (FDC) shall be of an approved type. The location shall be approved and be no more than 150 feet from a public hydrant. The FDC may be located within 150 feet of a private fire hydrant when approved by the fire code official. The size of piping and the number of 2½" inlets shall be approved by the fire code official. If acceptable to the water authority, it may be installed on the backflow assembly. Fire department inlet connections shall be painted OSHA safety red or as approved. When the fire sprinkler density design requires more than 500 gpm (including inside hose stream demand), or a standpipe system is included, four 2½" inlets shall be provided. 
Section 8.3.3.1 is hereby revised to read as follows: 
8.3.3.1 When fire sprinkler systems are installed in shell buildings of undetermined use (Spec Buildings) other than warehouses (S occupancies), fire sprinklers of the quick-response type shall be used. Use is considered undetermined if a specific tenant/occupant is not identified at the time the fire sprinkler plan is submitted. Sprinklers in light hazard occupancies shall be one of the following: 
1.  Quick-response type as defined in 3.6.4.8 
2.  Residential sprinklers in accordance with the requirements of 8.4.5 
3.  Quick response CMSA sprinklers 
4.  ESFR sprinklers 
5.  Standard-response sprinklers used for modifications or additions to existing light hazard systems equipped with standard-response sprinklers 
6.  Standard-response sprinklers used where individual standard-response sprinklers are replaced in existing light hazard systems 
Section 11.1.1.1 is hereby added as follows: 
11.1.1.1 When fire sprinkler systems are required in buildings of undetermined use other than warehouses, they shall be designed and installed to have a fire sprinkler density of not less than that required for an Ordinary Hazard Group 2 use, with no reduction(s) in density or design area. Warehouse fire sprinkler systems shall be designed to Figure 16.2.1.3.2(d) curve "G". Use is considered undetermined if a specific tenant/occupant is not identified at the time the sprinkler plan is submitted. Where a subsequent use or occupancy requires a system with greater capability, it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to upgrade the system to the required density for the new use or occupancy. 
Section 11.2.3.1.1.1 is hereby added as follows: 
11.2.3.1.1.1 The available water supply for fire sprinkler system design shall be determined by one of the following methods, as approved by the fire code official: 
1)  Subtract the project site elevation from the low water level for the appropriate pressure zone and multiply the result by 0.433; 
2)  Use a maximum of 40 psi, if available; 
3)  Utilize the OCFA water-flow test form/directions to document a flow test conducted by the local water agency or an approved third party licensed in the State of California. 
NFPA 13D 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes is hereby amended as follows: 
Section 7.1.2 is hereby revised to read as follows: 
7.1.2 The sprinkler system piping shall not have separate control valves installed unless supervised by a central station, proprietary, or remote station alarm service. 
NFPA 14, 2013 Edition, Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems is hereby amended as follows: 
Section 7.3.1.1 is hereby revised to read as follows: 
7.3.1.1 Class I and III Standpipe hose connections shall be unobstructed and shall be located not less than 18 inches or more than 24 inches above the finished floor. Class II Standpipe hose connections shall be unobstructed and shall be located not less than 3 feet or more than 5 feet above the finished floor. 
NFPA 24, 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Private Fire Service Mains and Their Appurtenances is hereby amended as follows: 
Section 6.2.8.1 is hereby added as follows: 
6.2.8.1 All indicating valves controlling fire suppression water supplies shall be painted OSHA red. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Brass or bronze valves on sprinkler risers mounted to the exterior of the building may be left unpainted. 
2.  Where OS&Y valves on the detector check assembly are the only control valves, at least one OS&Y valve shall be painted red. 
Section 6.2.9 is hereby revised to read as follows: 
All connections to private fire service mains for fire protection systems shall be arranged in accordance with one of the following so that they can be isolated: 
(1)  A post indicator valve installed not less than 40 ft (12 m) from the building 
(a)  For buildings less than 40 ft (12 m) in height, a post indicator valve shall be permitted to be installed closer than 40 ft (12 m) but at least as far from the building as the height of the wall facing the post indicator valve. 
(2)  A wall post indicator valve 
(3)  An indicating valve in a pit, installed in accordance with Section 6.4 
(4)  A backflow preventer with at least one indicating valve not less than 40 ft (12 m) from the building 
(a)  For buildings less than 40 ft (12 m) in height, a backflow preventer with at least one indicating valve shall be permitted to be installed closer than 40 ft (12 m) but at least as far from the building as the height of the wall facing the backflow preventer. 
(5)  Control valves installed in a fire-rated room accessible from the exterior 
(6)  Control valves in a fire-rated stair enclosure accessible from the exterior 
Section 10.1.5 is hereby added as follows: 
10.1.5 All ferrous pipe and joints shall be polyethylene encased per AWWA C150, Method A, B, or C. All fittings shall be protected with a loose 8-mil polyethylene tube or sheet. The ends of the tube or sheet shall extend past the joint by a minimum of 12 inches and be sealed with 2 inch wide tape approved for underground use. Galvanizing does not meet the requirements of this section. 
Exception: 304 or 316 Stainless Steel pipe and fittings 
Section 10.4.1.1 is hereby revised to read as follows: 
10.4.1.1 All bolted joint accessories shall be cleaned and thoroughly coated with asphalt or other corrosion-retarding material after installation. 
Exception: Bolted joint accessories made from 304 or 316 stainless steel. 
Section 10.4.1.1.1 is hereby added as follows: 
10.4.1.1.1 All bolts used in pipe-joint assembly shall be 316 stainless steel. 
Section 10.4.3.2 is hereby revised to read as follows: 
10.4.3.2 Where fire service mains enter the building adjacent to the foundation, the pipe may run under a building to a maximum of 24 inches, as measured from the interior face of the exterior wall to the center of the vertical pipe. The pipe under the building or building foundation shall be 304 or 316 stainless steel and shall not contain mechanical joints or it shall comply with 10.4.3.2.1 through 10.4.3.2.4. 
SECTION 1505 — Fire Classification. Section 1505 is hereby amended to add the following definitions to read as follows: 
Table 1505.1 is amended, by the deletion of Table 1505.1 and the addition of a new Table 1505.1 thereto, to read as follows: 
TABLE 1505.1 a 
MINIMUM ROOF COVERING CLASSIFICATIONS 
TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION 
IA 	IB 	IIA 	IIB 	IIIA 	IIIB 	IV 	VA 	VB 
B 	B 	B 	B 	B 	B 	B 	B 	B 
 
For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m 2 . 
a.  Unless otherwise required in accordance with Chapter 10A. 
Section 1505.1.3 is amended, by the deletion of the entire section and the addition of a new section thereto, to read as follows: 
1505.1.3 Roof coverings within all other areas. The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than 50 percent of the total roof area is replaced within any one-year period, the entire roof covering of every new structure, and any roof covering applied in the alteration, repair or replacement of the roof of every existing structure, shall be a fire-retardant roof covering that is at least Class A. 
Section 1505.5 is amended, by the deletion of the entire section. 
Section 1505.7 is amended, by the deletion of the entire section. 
Section 1807.1.6 is amended to read as follows: 
1807.1.6 Prescriptive design of concrete and masonry foundation walls. Concrete and masonry foundation walls that are laterally supported at the top and bottom shall be permitted to be designed and constructed in accordance with this section. Prescriptive design of foundation walls shall not be used for structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F. 
SECTION 3109 — Swimming Pool Enclosures and Safety Devices. Section 3109 is hereby amended to add the following definitions to read as follows: 
Section 3109.4.1 is amended by deleting 48 inches and replacing with 60 inches. 
Section 3109.4.4 is amended to clarify that pool barriers which are already in the Code are scoped so as to apply on all private swimming pools and is to read as follows: 
PRIVATE POOL, is any constructed pool, permanent or portable, and over 18 inches deep which is intended for non-commercial use as swimming pool by not more than three owner families and their guests. 
Section 3109.4.4.2 is modified by deleting the first paragraph in its entirety and a new paragraph is substituted to read as follows: 
3109.4.4.2 Construction permit; safety features required. Commencing January 1, 1998, except as provided in Section 3109.4.4.5, whenever a construction permit is issued for construction of a new private pool at a residence, it shall have an enclosure complying with 3109.4.4.3 and, it shall be equipped with at least one of the following safety features: 
A new Subsection 3109.6 is hereby added to Section 3109 of California Building Code to read as follows: 
3109.6 Sound Attenuation. Filters, heating systems, and pumps installed to serve pool, spa, hot tub, waterfall, or any body of water, shall be enclosed and soundproofed. An acoustical report prepared by a licensed or approved acoustical professional can be used to substitute for sound wall enclosures as long as the report demonstrates the compliance of the requirements specified in Section 44-267 of the La Palma City Code." 
Chapter 35 Referenced Standards is hereby adopted and revised as follows: 
NFPA 13, 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems is hereby amended as follows: 
Section 6.8.3 is hereby revised as follows: 
6.8.3 Fire department connections (FDC) shall be of an approved type. The FDC shall contain a minimum of two 2 ½" inlets. The location shall be approved and be no more than 150 feet from a public hydrant. The FDC may be located within 150 feet of a private fire hydrant when approved by the fire code official. The size of piping and the number of inlets shall be approved by the fire code official. If acceptable to the water authority, it may be installed on the backflow assembly. Fire department inlet connections shall be painted OSHA safety red. When the fire sprinkler density design requires 500 gpm (including inside hose stream demand) or greater, or a standpipe system is included, four 2 ½" inlets shall be provided. 
Section 8.3.3.1 is hereby revised as follows: 
8.3.3.1. When fire sprinkler systems are installed in shell buildings of undetermined use (Spec Buildings) other than warehouses (S occupancies), fire sprinklers of the quick-response type shall be used. Use is considered undetermined if a specific tenant/occupant is not identified at the time the fire sprinkler plan is submitted. Sprinklers in light hazard occupancies shall be one of the following: 
7.  Quick-response type as defined in 3.6.4.7 
8.  Residential sprinklers in accordance with the requirements of 8.4.5 
9.  Standard-response sprinklers used for modifications or additions to existing light hazard systems equipped with standard-response sprinklers 
10.  Standard-response sprinklers used where individual standard-response sprinklers are replaced in existing light hazard systems 
Section 8.17.1.1.1 is hereby added as follows 
8.17.1.1.1 Residential Waterflow Alarms. A local water-flow alarm shall be provided on all sprinkler systems and shall be connected to the building fire alarm or water-flow monitoring system, where provided. Group R occupancies not requiring a fire alarm system by the California Fire Code shall be provided with a minimum of one approved interior alarm device in each unit. Interior alarm devices shall be required to provide 55 dBA or 15 dBA above ambient, whichever is greater, throughout all living spaces within each unit. Sound levels in all sleeping areas with all intervening doors closed shall be a minimum of 15 dBA above the average ambient sound level but not less than 75 dBA, whichever is greater. When not connected to a fire alarm or water-flow monitoring system, audible devices shall be powered from an uninterruptible circuit (except for over-current protection) serving normally operated appliances in the residence. 
Section 11.1.1.2 is hereby added as follows: 
11.1.1.2 When fire sprinkler systems are required in buildings of undetermined use other than warehouses, they shall be designed and installed to have a fire sprinkler density of not less than that required for an Ordinary Hazard Group 2 use, with no reduction(s) in density or design area. Warehouse fire sprinkler systems shall be designed to Figure 16.2.1.3.2(d) curve "G". Use is considered undetermined if a specific tenant/occupant is not identified at the time the sprinkler plan is submitted. Where a subsequent occupancy requires a system with greater capability, it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to upgrade the system to the required density for the new occupancy. 
Section 11.2.3.1.1.1 is hereby added as follows: 
11.2.3.1.1.1 The available water supply for fire sprinkler system design shall be determined by one of the following methods, as approved by the Fire Code Official: 
4)  Subtract the project site elevation from the low water level for the appropriate pressure zone and multiply the result by 0.433; 
5)  Use a maximum of 40 psi, if available; 
6)  Utilize the Orange County Fire Authority water-flow test form/directions to document a flow test conducted by the local water agency or an approved third party licensed in the State of California. 
Section 23.2.1.1 is hereby revised as follows: 
Section 23.2.1.1 Where a waterflow test is used for the purposes of system design, the test shall be conducted no more than 6 months prior to working plan submittal unless otherwise approved by the authority having jurisdiction. 
NFPA 13R 2016 Edition, Installation of Sprinkler System in Residential Occupancies up to and Including Four Stories in Height is hereby amended as follows: 
Section 6.16.1 is hereby revised as follows: 
6.16.1 A local water-flow alarm shall be provided on all sprinkler systems and shall be connected to the building fire alarm or water-flow monitoring system where provided. Group R occupancies containing less than the number of stories, dwelling units or occupant load specified in the California Fire Code as requiring a fire alarm system shall be provided with a minimum of one approved interior alarm device in each unit. Interior alarm devices shall be required to provide 55 dBA or 15 dBA above ambient, whichever is greater, throughout all living spaces within each dwelling unit. Sound levels in all sleeping areas with all intervening doors closed shall be a minimum of 15 dBA above the average ambient sound level but not less than 75 dBA, whichever is greater. When not connected to a fire alarm or water-flow monitoring system, audible devices shall be powered from an uninterruptible circuit (except for over-current protection) serving normally operated appliances in the residence. 
There shall also be a minimum of one exterior alarm indicating device, listed for outside service and audible from the access roadway that serves that building. 
NFPA 13D 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes is hereby amended as follows: 
Section 4.1.3 is hereby added as follows: 
4.1.3 Stock of Spare Sprinklers 
Section 4.1.3.1 is hereby added as follows: 
4.1.3.1. A supply of at least two sprinklers for each type shall be maintained on the premises so that any sprinklers that have operated or been damaged in any way can be promptly replaced. 
Section 4.1.3.2 is hereby added as follows: 
4.1.3.2 The sprinklers shall correspond to the types and temperature ratings of the sprinklers in the property. 
Section 4.1.3.3 is hereby added as follows: 
4.1.3.3 The sprinklers shall be kept in a cabinet located where the temperature to which they are subjected will at no time exceed 100 o F (38 o C). 
Section 4.1.3.4 is hereby added as follows: 
4.1.3.4 A special sprinkler wrench shall be provided and kept in the cabinet to be used in the removal and installation of sprinklers. One sprinkler wrench shall be provided for each type of sprinkler installed. 
Section 7.1.2 is hereby revised as follows: 
7.1.2 The system piping shall not have a separate control valve unless supervised by a central station, proprietary or remote station alarm service. 
Section 7.6 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced as follows: 
7.6 Alarms. Exterior alarm indicating device shall be listed for outside service and audible from the street from which the house is addressed. Exterior audible devices shall be placed on the front or side of the structure and the location is subject to final approval by the fire code official. Additional interior alarm devices shall be required to provide 55 dBA or 15 dBA above ambient, whichever is greater, throughout all living spaces. Sound levels in all sleeping areas with all intervening doors closed shall be a minimum of 15 dBA above the average ambient sound level but not less than 75 dBA, whichever is greater. Audible devices shall be powered from an uninterruptible circuit (except for over-current protection) serving normally operated appliances in the residence. 
Exceptions: 
1.  When an approved water flow monitoring system is installed, interior audible devices may be powered through the fire alarm control panel. 
2.  When smoke detectors specified under CBC Section 907.2.11 are used to sound an alarm upon waterflow switch activation. 
NFPA 14, 2016 Edition, Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems is hereby amended as follows: 
Section 7.3.1.1 is hereby is deleted in its entirety and replaced as follows: 
7.3.1.1 Class I and III Standpipe hose connections shall be unobstructed and shall be located not less than 18 inches or more than 24 inches above the finished floor. Class II Standpipe hose connections shall be unobstructed and shall be located not less than 3 feet or more than 5 feet above the finished floor. 
NFPA 24, 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Private Fire Service Mains and Their Appurtenances is hereby amended as follows: 
Section 6.2.1.1 is hereby added as follows: 
6.2.1.1 The closest upstream indicating valve to the riser shall be painted OSHA red. 
Section 6.2.11(5) is hereby deleted without replacement and (6) and (7) renumbered: 
(5)  Control Valves installed in a fire-rated room accessible from the exterior. 
(6)  Control valves in a fire-rated stair enclosure accessible from the exterior as permitted by the authority having jurisdiction. 
Section 6.3.3 is hereby added as follows: 
Section 6.3.3 All post indicator valves controlling fire suppression water supplies shall be painted OSHA red. 
Section 10.1.6.3 is hereby added as follows: 
10.1.6.3 All ferrous pipe shall be coated and wrapped. Joints shall be coated and wrapped after assembly. All fittings shall be protected with a loose 8-mil polyethylene tube. The ends of the tube shall extend past the joint by a minimum of 12 inches and be sealed with 2 inch wide tape approved for underground use. Galvanizing does not meet the requirements of this section. 
Exception: 304 or 316 Stainless Steel pipe and fittings 
Section 10.3.6.2 is hereby revised as follows: 
10.3.6.2 All bolted joint accessories shall be cleaned and thoroughly coated with asphalt or other corrosion-retarding material, prior to poly-tube, and after installation. 
Exception: Bolted joint accessories made from 304 or 316 stainless steel. 
Section 10.3.6.3 is hereby added as follows: 
10.3.6.3 All bolts used in pipe-joint assembly shall be 316 stainless steel. 
Section 10.6.3.1 is hereby deleted and replaced as follows: 
10.6.3.1 Where fire service mains enter the building adjacent to the foundation, the pipe may run under a building to a maximum of 24 inches, as measured from the interior face of the exterior wall to the center of the vertical pipe. The pipe under the building or building foundation shall be 304 or 316 stainless steel and shall not contain mechanical joints or it shall comply with 10.6.2. 
Section 10.6.4 is hereby revised as follows: 
10.6.4 Pipe joints shall not be located under foundation footings. The pipe under the building or building foundation shall be 304 or 316 stainless steel and shall not contain mechanical joints. 
Appendix G Flood Resistant Construction, Appendix J Grading, based on the 2015 International Building Code as published by the International Code Council are added to Article III, Division 4 of Chapter 10 in their entirety. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08, § 4, 10-18-2016)  
Secs. 10-100—10-126. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - MECHANICAL CODE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-08, § 1, adopted October 18, 2016, repealed div. 4, § 10-127, in its entirety; and § 5, enacted a new div. 4, to read as set out herein. Former div. 4, pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Ord. No. 2010-05, § 4, adopted December 7, 2010 and Ord. No. 2013-04, § 5, adopted November 19, 2013. 
 
Sec. 10-127. - Adopted. 
The California Mechanical Code, 2016 Edition, based on the 2015 Uniform Mechanical Code, as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, is hereby adopted, in its entirety, as the Mechanical Code of the City, as set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08, § 5, 10-18-2016)  
Secs. 10-128—10-152. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - PLUMBING CODE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-08, § 1, adopted October 18, 2016, repealed div. 5, §§ 10-153, 10-154, in its entirety; and § 6, enacted a new div. 5, to read as set out herein. Former div. 5, pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Ord. No. 2010-05, § 5, adopted December 7, 2010 and Ord. No. 2013-04, § 6, adopted November 19, 2013. 
 
Sec. 10-153. - Adopted. 
The California Plumbing Code, 2016 Edition, based on the 2015 Uniform Plumbing Code as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials is hereby adopted, in its entirety, as the Plumbing Code of the City, together with the amendments, additions, and deletions thereto set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08, § 6, 10-18-2016)  
DIVISION 6. - ELECTRICAL CODE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-08, § 1, adopted October 18, 2016, repealed div. 6, §§ 10-177, 10-178, in its entirety; and § 7, enacted a new div. 6, to read as set out herein. Former div. 6, pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Ord. No. 2010-05, § 6, adopted December 7, 2010 and Ord. No. 2013-04, § 7, adopted November 19, 2013. 
 
Sec. 10-177. - Adopted. 
The California Electrical Code, 2016 Edition, based on the 2014 National Electrical Code as published by the National Fire Protection Association is hereby adopted, in its entirety, as the Electrical Code of the City, together with the amendments, additions, and deletions thereto as set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08, § 7, 10-18-2016)  
Sec. 10-178. - Additions, amendments, and deletions. 
The following additions, amendments, and deletions are hereby made to the California Electrical Code adopted by this division: 
Article 310.106(B) Conductor Material is amended by the addition of a second paragraph to read as follows: 
Copper wire shall be used for wiring No. 6 and smaller in all installations. Consideration for use of aluminum wiring can be made by the Building Official for feeder lines only on an individual basis where adequate safety measures can be ensured. 
Article 310 Conductors for General Wiring is amended by the addition of Article 310.121 to read as follows: 
310.121 Continuous inspection of aluminum wiring. Aluminum conductors of No. six (6) or smaller used for branch circuits shall require continuous inspection by an independent testing agency approved by the Building Official for proper torque of connections at their termination point. 
Article 690.13 Building or Other Structure Supplied by a Photovoltaic System is amended by the addition to read as follows: 
(A)  Location. The PV disconnecting means shall be installed at a readily accessible location either on the outside of a building or structure or inside nearest the point of entrance of the system conductors. A single, visible-open, lockable AC disconnect shall be within 3 feet of meter on the exterior of the building. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08, § 7, 10-18-2016)  
DIVISION 7. - RESIDENTIAL CODE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-08, § 1, adopted October 18, 2016, repealed div. 7, §§ 10-210, 10-211, in its entirety; and § 8, enacted a new div. 7, to read as set out herein. Former div. 7, pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Ord. No. 2010-05, § 7, adopted December 7, 2010 and Ord. No. 2013-04, § 8, adopted November 19, 2013. 
 
Sec. 10-210. - Adopted. 
The California Residential Code, 2016 Edition, based on the 2015 International Residential Code is hereby adopted, in its entirety, as the Residential Code of the City, together with the amendments, additions, and deletions thereto as set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08, § 8, 10-18-2016)  
Sec. 10-211. - Amendments, additions, and deletions. 
The following additions, amendments, and deletions are hereby made to the California Residential Code adopted by this division: 
SECTION 105 Permits The following revisions are hereby added to Section 105 to read, in its entirety, as follows: 
Section R105.2 — Work Exempt from permit. Subsections 1 and 2 of Section R105.2 are hereby amended to read, in their entirety, as follows: 
3.  One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses, and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet (11m 2 ), and provided that such structures must comply with setback and height requirements of the City Zoning Code. 
4.  Fences not over 6 feet high. Masonry or concrete fences not over 36 inches in height above lowest adjacent grade. 
Section R105.2 is hereby amended by adding Subsection 14 to read, in its entirety, as follows: 
14.  Television and radio receiving and transmitting antennas over 15 feet in height measured from the highest point on the structure on the same lot require a Conditional Use Permit and shall be designed as per standard plans on file in the Building Division of the City of La Palma. 
Section R105.3.2 Time limitation of application. Subsection R105.3.2 of Section R105 is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
R105.3.2. Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or permit has been issued; except that the Building Official is authorized to grant one extension of time for an additional period not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. In order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan check fee. 
Section R105.5 Expiration. Subsection R105.5 of Section R105 is hereby amended to read in its entirety as follows: 
R105.5. Expiration. Every permit issued by the Building Official under the provisions of this Code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of such permit, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days. Before such work can be recommenced a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee therefore shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work; provided, however, that: 
1.  No changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; and 
2.  Such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one (1) year; and 
3.  A reendorsement of the compliance of the plans with the applicable regulations, by the Building Official, shall be obtained. 
Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which work may commence under that permit when the permittee is unable to commence work within the time required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The Building Official may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days upon written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. No permit shall be extended more than once. 
Section R105.10 Maintenance of property during construction. A new Subsection R105.10 is hereby added to Section R105 to read in its entirety as follows: 
R105.10. During construction, all property shall be maintained in a reasonably clean and well-kept manner. All lumber and building materials shall be neatly piled or stacked in a safe manner and stored in the rear yard of the residential property or inside the building construction perimeter, except that building materials may be stored in a front yard for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. A waiver of this requirement may be obtained from the Building Official or their designated representative if the construction is screened from view from adjacent occupied or public property with fencing materials approved by city zoning and building regulations. 
Section R106.3 — Examination of documents. Subsection R106.3 of Section R106 is hereby amended to add a second paragraph that reads as follows: 
R106.3 Examination of documents. When submittal documents are required by Section R106.1, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting the submittal documents for plan review. Said plan review fees are separate fees from the permit fees specified in Section R108.2 and are in addition to the permit fees. Said plan review fee shall be as set forth in the City Council Fee Resolution. The initial plan review fee is for one complete review and one re-check review. Reviews beyond the initial and the re-check shall require addition fees as set forth in the City Council Fee Resolution. 
Section R106.5 — Retention of construction documents. Subsection R106.5 of Section R106 is hereby amended to add a second paragraph that reads as follows: 
R106.5 Retention of construction documents. The approved plans, permit application, and inspection card, and other construction documents required by the Building Official shall be imaged after the final inspection and will be a permanent record in the City. The applicant shall pay the cost of imaging at the time of permit. Said imaging fee shall be as set forth in the City Council Fee Resolution. 
Section R108.3 — Building permit valuations. Subsection R108.3 of Section R108 is hereby amended to add a second paragraph that reads as follows: 
R108.3. Building permit valuation. The Building Official shall make the determination of value or valuation under any provisions of this code. The valuation shall be determined by using rational methods established by the Building Official that reasonably establish the construction value or the contract price of the actual construction cost. The value of work to be used in computing the Building Permit and Building Plan Review fees shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued, as well as all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire extinguishing systems, and any other permanent equipment. 
Section R108.5 — Refunds. Section 108.5 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
R108.5 Refunds. The Building Official may authorize refunding of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. 
The Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code. 
The Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan reviewing is done. 
The Building Official shall not authorize refunding of any fee paid except on written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of payment. No refund will be made for less than $25.00. Permit and plan check fees will be refunded in their entirety then collected in error. 
Section R109.5 — Reinspections. A new Subsection R109.5 is hereby added to Section R109 to read in its entirety as follows: 
R109.5 Reinspections. A reinspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or reinspection when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete or when corrections called for are not made. 
This subsection is not to be interpreted as requiring re-inspection fees the first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of this Code, but as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before the job is ready for such inspection or reinspection. 
Reinspection fees may be assessed when the inspection record card is not posted or otherwise made available on the work site, the approved plans are not readily available to the inspector, for failure to provide access on the date for which inspection is requested, or for deviating from plans requiring the approval of the Building Official. 
To obtain a reinspection, the applicant shall file an application therefore in writing upon a form furnished for that purpose and pay the re-inspection fee as established by the City Council Fee Resolution. 
In instances where reinspection fees have been assessed, no additional inspection of the work will be performed until the required fees have been paid. 
Section R110.4 — Temporary occupancy. Subsection R110.4 of Section R110 is hereby amended to add a second paragraph that reads as follows: 
R110.4 Temporary occupancy. The application fee for such Temporary Certificate of Occupancy shall be as established by the City Council Fee Resolution. The Temporary Certificate of Occupancy may be subject to such conditions as deemed necessary by the Building Official. The Temporary Certificate of Occupancy expires 30 days after issuance and may be renewed for additional 30 day periods upon providing acceptable justification, the payment of a new application fee for each 30 day period and approval by the Building Official. The violation or failure of any such condition imposed shall be grounds for revocation of such Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. 
Section R112.1 is amended to read as follows: 
113.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall consist of five members, composed of the mayor and the other members of the City Council. Said members shall hold their respective membership on said board of appeals by reason of, and concurrently with their terms of service as Council members and shall cease to be such members upon their ceasing to be Council members. The building official shall be the secretary of the board. The board may adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its investigations and shall render all its decisions and findings on contested matters in writing to the building official, with duplicative copy thereof to any appellant or contestant affected by any such decision of finding. 
Three members of the board shall constitute a quorum. The mayor shall be the presiding officer of the board. Meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the Brown Act. 
The board shall have the right, subject to such limits as the City Council may prescribe by resolution, to employ at the cost and expense of the City, such qualified individuals as the board, in its discretion, may deem reasonably necessary in order to assist it in its investigations and making its findings and decisions. 
Section R112.3 is deleted in its entirety without replacement. 
Chapter 2 Definitions is adopted in its entirety with the following amendment: 
Section 202 Definitions is hereby revised by adding "OCFA" and "Spark Arrester" as follows: 
OCFA: Orange County Fire Authority, fire authority having jurisdiction. 
SPARK ARRESTER. A listed device constructed of noncombustible material specifically for the purpose of meeting one of the following conditions: 
1.  Removing and retaining carbon and other flammable particles/debris from the exhaust flow of an internal combustion engine in accordance with California Vehicle Code Section 38366. 
2.  Fireplaces that burn solid fuel in accordance with California Building Code Chapter 28. 
Chapter 3 Building Planning is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments and additions: 
TABLE R301.2 (1) is revised to read: 
TABLE R301.2(1)
CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA 
GROUND
SNOW
LOAD 	WIND DESIGN 	SEISMIC 
DESIGN 
CATEGORY f 	SUBJECT TO
DAMAGE FROM 	WINTER 
DESIGN 
TEMP e 	ICE BARRIER 
UNDERLAYMENT 
REQUIRED h 	FLOOD 
HAZARDS g 	AIR 
FREEZING 
INDEX i 	MEAN 
ANNUAL 
TEMP j 
	Speed 
d (mph) 	Topographic
effects 	Special
Wind
Region 	Wind
Borne
Debris
Zone 		Weathering a 	Frost 
line 
Depth b 	Termite c 					
Zero 	85 	No 	No 	No 	D 2 or E 	Negligible 	12-24" 	Very Heavy 	43 	No 	No 	0 	60 
 
For SI: 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s. 
a.  Weathering may require a higher strength concrete or grade of masonry than necessary to satisfy the structural requirements of this code. The weathering column shall be filled in with the weathering index (i.e., "negligible," "moderate" or "severe") for concrete as determined from the Weathering Probability Map [Figure R301.2(3)]. The grade of masonry units shall be determined from ASTM C 34, C 55, C 62, C 73, C 90, C 129, C 145, C 216 or C 652. 
b.  The frost line depth may require deeper footings than indicated in Figure R403.1(1). The jurisdiction shall fill in the frost line depth column with the minimum depth of footing below finish grade. 
c.  The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table to indicate the need for protection depending on whether there has been a history of local subterranean termite damage. 
d.  The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the wind speed from the basic wind speed map [Figure R30l.2( 4)].Wind exposure category shall be determined on a site-specific basis in accordance with Section R301.2.1.4. 
e.  The outdoor design dry-bulb temperature shall be selected from the columns of 971/2-percent values for winter from Appendix D of the California Plumbing Code. Deviations from the Appendix D temperatures shall be permitted to reflect local climates or local weather experience as determined by the building official. 
f.  The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the seismic design category determined from Section R301.2.2.1. 
g.  The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with (a) the date of the jurisdiction's entry into the National Flood Insurance Program (date of adoption of the first code or ordinance for management of flood hazard areas), (b) the date(s) of the Flood Insurance Study and (c) the panel numbers and dates of all currently effective FIRMs and FBFMs or other flood hazard map adopted by the authority having jurisdiction, as amended. 
h.  In accordance with Sections R905.2.7.1, R905.4.3.1, R905.5.3.1, R905.6.3.1, R905.7.3.1 and R905.8.3.1, where there has been a history of local damage from the effects of ice damming, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "YES." Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "NO." 
i.  The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the 100-year return period air freezing index (BF-days) from Figure R403.3(2) or from the 100-year (99%) value on the National Climatic Data Center data table "Air Freezing Index- USA Method (Base 32°)" at www.ncdc.noaa.gov/fpsf.htrnl. 
j.  The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the mean annual temperature from the National Climatic Data Center data table "Air Freezing Index-USA Method (Base 32°F)" at www.ncdc.noaa.gov/fpsf.html. 
k.  In accordance with Section R301.2.1.5, where there is local historical data documenting structural damage to buildings due to topographic wind speed-up effects, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "YES." Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate "NO" in this part of the table. 
l.  In accordance with Figure R301.2(4)A, where there is local historical data documenting unusual wind conditions, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "YES" and identify any specific requirements. Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate "NO" in this part of the table. ? 
m.  In accordance with Section R301.2.1.2.1, the jurisdiction shall indicate the wind-borne debris wind zone(s). Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate "NO" in this part of the table. 
Section R301.9 Fuel Modification Requirements for New Construction is hereby added as follows: 
R301.9 Fuel Modification Requirements for New Construction. All new structures and facilities adjoining land containing hazardous combustible vegetation shall be approved and in accordance with the requirements of OCFA Guideline C-05 "Vegetation Management Guideline — Technical Design for new Construction Fuel Modification Plans and Maintenance Program." 
Section R309.6 Fire sprinkler attached garages, and carports with habitable space above is hereby amended by modifying the exception to read as follows: 
Exception: An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required when additions or alterations are made to existing carports and/or garages that do not have an automatic fire sprinkler system installed unless a sprinkler system is required in accordance with California Fire Code Section 903.2.8 as amended. 
Section R313.1 Townhouse automatic fire sprinkler systems is hereby amended by modifying the exception to read as follows: 
Exception: An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required when additions or alterations are made to existing townhouses that do not have an automatic fire sprinkler system installed unless a sprinkler system is required in accordance with California Fire Code Section 903.2.8 as amended. 
Section R313.2 One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire sprinkler systems is hereby amended by modifying the exception to read as follows: 
Exception: An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required for additions or alterations to existing buildings that are not already provided with an automatic sprinkler system unless a sprinkler system is required in accordance with California Fire Code Section 903.2.8 as amended. 
Section R313.3.6.2.2 Calculation procedure is hereby revised to read as follows: 
Section R313.3.6.2.2 Calculation procedure. Determination of the required size for water distribution piping shall be in accordance with the following procedure and California Fire Code Section 903.3.5.3. 
Section R319.1 Address identification is hereby revised to read as follows: 
R319 Site Address. New and existing buildings shall be provided with approved address identification. The address identification shall be legible and placed in a position that is visible from the street or road fronting the property. Address identification characters shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. Numbers shall not be spelled out. Each character shall be not less than 4 inches in height with a stroke width of not less than 0.5 inch. Where required by the fire code official, address identification shall be provided in additional approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Where access is by means of a private road and the building address cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be used to identify the structure. Address identification shall be maintained. 
Section R337.1.3 Application is hereby revised to read as follows: 
R337.1.3 Application. New buildings located in any Fire Hazard Severity Zone or any Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Area designated by the enforcing agency constructed after the application date, and additions to and remodel of buildings constructed before 2012 located in areas currently designated as such, shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. The provisions shall also apply to additions, remodels, and accessory structures located within 100 feet of a fuel modification zone, vegetation management area, or similar area containing hazardous combustible vegetation, regardless of whether the property is currently located in a designated Fire Hazard Severity Zone or Wildland-Urban Interface Area, when materials and/or construction methods for exterior wildfire exposure were previously required at the property by the Building or Fire Code Official. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Buildings of an accessory character classified as a Group U occupancy and not exceeding 120 square feet in floor area, when located at least 30 feet from an applicable building. 
2.  Buildings of an accessory character classified as a Group U occupancy of any size located at least 50 feet from an applicable building. 
3.  Buildings classified as a Group U Agricultural Building, as defined in Section 202 of this code (see also Appendix C — Group U Agricultural Buildings), when located at least 50 feet from an applicable building. 
Section R337.1.6 Fuel Modification Requirements for New Construction is hereby added as follows: 
R337.1.6 Fuel Modification Requirements for New Construction. All new buildings to be built or installed in a Wildfire Risk Area shall comply with the following: 
1.  Preliminary fuel modification plans shall be submitted to and approved by the fire code official prior to or concurrently with the approval of any tentative map. 
2.  Final fuel modification plans shall be submitted to and approved by the fire code official prior to the issuance of a grading permit. 
3.  The fuel modification plans shall meet the criteria set forth in the Fuel Modification Section of OCFA Guideline C-05 "Vegetation Management Guideline — Technical Design for New Construction Fuel Modification Plans and Maintenance Program." 
3.1.  The fuel modification plan shall include provisions for the maintenance of the fuel modification in perpetuity. 
4.  The fuel modification plan may be altered if conditions change. Any alterations to the fuel modification areas shall have prior approval from the fire code official. 
5.  All elements of the fuel modification plan shall be maintained in accordance with the approved plan and are subject to the enforcement process outlined in the Fire Code. 
Section R403.1.3 is modified by deleting the exception for masonry stem walls: 
In Seismic Design Categories D 0 , D 1 and D 2 masonry stem walls without solid grout and vertical reinforcing are not permitted. 
Section R405.1 shall be modified to read as follows: 
…at least one sieve size larger than the tile joint opening or perforation and covered with not less than 6 inches (152 mm) of the same material. 
Section R902.1 is amended by revising it to allow only class A or B roofs as follows: 
R902.1 Roofing covering materials. Roofs shall be covered with materials as set forth in Sections R904 and R905. A minimum Class A or B roofing shall be installed in areas designated by this section. Classes A or B roofing required by this section to be listed shall be tested in accordance with UL 790 or ASTM E 108. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Class A roof assemblies include those with coverings of brick, masonry and exposed concrete roof deck. 
2.  Class A roof assemblies also include ferrous or copper shingles or sheets, metal sheets and shingles, clay or concrete roof tile, or slate installed on noncombustible decks. 
Section R902.1.3 is amended by revising it to require a minimum Class B roof as follows: 
R902.1.3 Roof coverings within all other areas. The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than 50 percent of the total roof area is replaced within any one-year period, the entire roof covering of every new structure, and any roof covering applied in the alteration, repair or replacement of the roof of every existing structure, shall be a fire-retardant roof covering that is at least Class B. 
Section R902.2, first paragraph is amended by revising it to allow only Class A or B treated wood roofs as follows: 
R902.2 Fire-retardant-treated shingles and shakes. Fire-retardant-treated wood shakes and shingles are wood shakes and shingles complying with UBC Standard 15-3 or 15-4 which are impregnated by the full-cell vacuum-pressure process with fire-retardant chemicals, and which have been qualified by UBC Standard 15-2 for use on Class A or B roofs. 
Chapter 10 Chimneys and Fireplaces is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments: 
Section R1001.13 Outdoor Fireplaces, Fire Pits, Fire Rings, or similar devices is hereby added as follows: 
Section R1001.13.1 Gas-fueled devices is hereby added as follows: 
R1001.13.1 Gas-fueled devices. Outdoor fireplaces, fire pits and similar devices fueled by natural gas or liquefied-petroleum gas are allowed when approved by the Building Department and the device is designed to only burn a gas flame and not wood or other solid fuel. At R-3 occupancies, combustible construction shall not be located within three feet of an atmospheric column that extends vertically from the perimeter of the device. Where a permanent Building Department approved hood and vent is installed, combustible construction may encroach upon this column between the bottom of the hood and the vent opening. Where chimneys or vents are installed, they shall have a spark arrester in accordance with Section R1003.9.2. 
Section R1001.13.2 Devices using wood or fuels other than natural gas or liquefied-petroleum gas is hereby added as follows: 
R1001.13.2 Devices using wood or fuels other than natural gas or liquefied-petroleum gas. Fireplaces burning wood or other solid fuel shall be constructed in accordance with Section R1001. Fires in a fireplace shall be contained within a firebox with an attached chimney. The opening in the face of the firebox shall have an installed and maintained method of arresting sparks. The burning of wood or other solid fuel in a device is not allowed within 15 feet of combustible structures, unless within a permanent or portable fireplace. 
Section R1001.13.3 Devices using wood or fuels other than natural gas or liquefied-petroleum gas is hereby added as follows: 
R1001.13.3 Where prohibited. The burning of wood and other solid fuels shall not be conducted within a fuel modification zone. Wood and other solid fuel burning fires in devices other than permanent fireplaces are not allowed within Wildfire Risk Areas (WRA) and adopted Fire Hazard Severity Zones (FHSZ) or in locations where conditions could cause the spread of fire to the WRA or FHSZ, unless determined by the Fire Code Official that the location or design of the device should reasonably prevent the start of a wildfire. 
R1001.14 Outdoor Fireplaces, Fire Pits, Fire Rings, or similar devices. Outdoor fireplaces, fire pits, fire rings, or similar exterior devices shall comply with this section. 
Exception: 
Barbeques, grills, and other portable devices intended solely for cooking 
Chapter 44 Referenced Standards is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments: 
NFPA 13, 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems is hereby amended as follows: 
Section 6.7.3 is hereby revised to read as follows: 
6.7.3 Fire department connections (FDC) shall be of an approved type. The location shall be approved and be no more than 150 feet from a public hydrant. The FDC may be located within 150 feet of a private fire hydrant when approved by the fire code official. The size of piping and the number of 2½" inlets shall be approved by the fire code official. If acceptable to the water authority, it may be installed on the backflow assembly. Fire department inlet connections shall be painted OSHA safety red or as approved. When the fire sprinkler density design requires more than 500 gpm (including inside hose stream demand), or a standpipe system is included, four 2½" inlets shall be provided. 
Section 8.3.3.1 is hereby revised to read as follows: 
8.3.3.1 When fire sprinkler systems are installed in shell buildings of undetermined use (Spec Buildings) other than warehouses (S occupancies), fire sprinklers of the quick-response type shall be used. Use is considered undetermined if a specific tenant/occupant is not identified at the time the fire sprinkler plan is submitted. Sprinklers in light hazard occupancies shall be one of the following: 
1.  Quick-response type as defined in 3.6.4.8 
2.  Residential sprinklers in accordance with the requirements of 8.4.5 
3.  Quick response CMSA sprinklers 
4.  ESFR sprinklers 
5.  Standard-response sprinklers used for modifications or additions to existing light hazard systems equipped with standard-response sprinklers 
6.  Standard-response sprinklers used where individual standard-response sprinklers are replaced in existing light hazard systems 
Section 11.1.1.1 is hereby added as follows: 
11.1.1.1 When fire sprinkler systems are required in buildings of undetermined use other than warehouses, they shall be designed and installed to have a fire sprinkler density of not less than that required for an Ordinary Hazard Group 2 use, with no reduction(s) in density or design area. Warehouse fire sprinkler systems shall be designed to Figure 16.2.1.3.2(d) curve "G". Use is considered undetermined if a specific tenant/occupant is not identified at the time the sprinkler plan is submitted. Where a subsequent use or occupancy requires a system with greater capability, it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to upgrade the system to the required density for the new use or occupancy. 
Section 11.2.3.1.1.1 is hereby added as follows: 
11.2.3.1.1.1 The available water supply for fire sprinkler system design shall be determined by one of the following methods, as approved by the fire code official: 
1)  Subtract the project site elevation from the low water level for the appropriate pressure zone and multiply the result by 0.433; 
2)  Use a maximum of 40 psi, if available; 
3)  Utilize the OCFA water-flow test form/directions to document a flow test conducted by the local water agency or an approved third party licensed in the State of California. 
NFPA 13D 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes is hereby amended as follows: 
Section 7.1.2 is hereby revised to read as follows: 
7.1.2 The sprinkler system piping shall not have separate control valves installed unless supervised by a central station, proprietary, or remote station alarm service. 
Appendix O Vehicular Gates is adopted with only the section indicated below: 
SECTION AO103.3 Vehicular gates or other barriers across required fire apparatus access roads is hereby added as follows: 
AO103.3 Vehicular gates or other barriers across required fire apparatus access roads. The installation of gates or other barriers across a required fire apparatus access road shall be approved by the fire code official. Gates or barriers shall be in accordance with Orange County Fire Authority Guideline B-09 "Fire Master Plans for Commercial and Residential Development". 
Appendix V Swimming Pools is added to Article III, Division 7 of Chapter 10 in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08, § 8, 10-18-2016)  
Secs. 10-212—10-230. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - ENERGY CODE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-08, § 1, adopted October 18, 2016, repealed div. 8, § 10-231, in its entirety; and § 9, enacted a new div. 8, to read as set out herein. Former div. 8, pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Ord. No. 2010-05, § 8, adopted December 7, 2010 and Ord. No. 2013-04, § 9, adopted November 19, 2013. 
 
Sec. 10-231. - Adopted. 
The California Energy Code, 2016 Edition, is hereby adopted, in its entirety, as the Energy Code of the City, as set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08, § 9, 10-18-2016)  
Secs. 10-232—10-255. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-08, § 1, adopted October 18, 2016, repealed div. 9, §§ 10-256, 10-257, in its entirety; and § 10, enacted a new div. 9, to read as set out herein. Former div. 9, pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Ord. No. 2010-05, § 9, adopted December 7, 2010 and Ord. No. 2013-04, § 10, adopted November 19, 2013. 
 
Sec. 10-256. - Adopted. 
The California Green Building Standards Code, 2016 Edition, is hereby adopted in its entirety as the Green Building Standards Code for the City, together with the amendments, additions, and deletions thereto as set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08, § 10, 10-18-2016)  
Sec. 10-257. - Additions, amendments, and deletions. 
Section 301.1 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
301.1 Scope. Buildings shall be designed to include the green building measures specified as mandatory in this code. Voluntary green building measures are also included in this code the application checklists and may be included in the design and construction of structures covered by this code, but are not required unless they are adopted by a city or county as specified in Section 101.7. 
Section 301.1.1 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 301.1.1 Additions and alterations. [HCD] The mandatory provisions of Chapter 4 shall be applied to additions or alterations of existing residential buildings. Code sections relevant to additions and alterations shall only apply to the portions of the building being added or altered within the scope of the permitted work. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08, § 10, 10-18-2016)  
Secs. 10-258—10-277. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-08, § 1, adopted October 18, 2016, repealed div. 10, § 10-278, in its entirety; and § 11, enacted a new div. 10, to read as set out herein. Former div. 10, pertained to "Reference Standards Code," and was derived from Ord. No. 2010-05, § 10, adopted December 7, 2010 and Ord. No. 2013-04, § 11, adopted November 19, 2013. 
 
Sec. 10-278. - Adopted. 
The California Referenced Standards Code, 2016 Edition, is hereby adopted, in its entirety, as the Referenced Standards Code of the City, as set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08, § 11, 10-18-2016)  
Secs. 10-279—10-304. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-08, § 1, adopted October 18, 2016, repealed div. 11, § 10-278, in its entirety; and § 12, enacted a new div. 11, to read as set out herein. Former div. 11, pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Code 1975, § 7-33; Ord. No. 2007-07, § 11 and Ord. No. 2013-04, § 12, adopted November 19, 2013. 
 
Sec. 10-305. - Adopted. 
The International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition, is hereby adopted, in its entirety, as the Reference Standards Code of the City, as set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08, § 12, 10-18-2016)  
Secs. 10-306—10-328. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SECURITY[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference— Duty of local law enforcement officers and fire officials to consult with chief officer of City and develop local security standards for the erection, construction, or alteration of buildings that adhere to State building standards, Penal Code § 14051. 
 
Sec. 10-329. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide minimum standards, as required in the California Penal Code § 14051, to safeguard property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, use and occupancy and maintenance of all buildings and structures within this City and certain equipment specifically regulated herein. 
(Code 1975, § 7-36; Ord. No. 79-11, § 1)  
Sec. 10-330. - Scope. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply to new construction and construction to buildings or structures to which additions, alterations or repairs are made except as specifically provided in this article. 
(b)  When additions, alterations or repairs within any 12-month period exceed 25 percent of the value of the existing building or structure, such building or structure shall be made to conform to the requirements of this article. 
(c)  When additions, alterations or repairs made within any 12-month period do not exceed 25 percent of the value of the existing building or structure, only the new construction shall be required to conform with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 7-37; Ord. No. 79-11, § 1)  
Sec. 10-331. - Limitations. 
Any building as defined in this Code and Title 19, California Administrative Code, requiring special-type releasing, latching or locking devices, other than described therein, shall be exempt from the provisions hereof relating to locking devices of interior and/or exterior doors. 
(Code 1975, § 7-38; Ord. No. 79-11, § 1)  
Chapter 12 - COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEMS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— City authority to grant and regulate franchises for public utilities or other businesses, Cal. Const. Art. 12, § 8; Cable Television and Video Provider Customer Service and Information Act, Government Code § 53054 et seq.; City may authorize by franchise or license the construction of a community antenna television system, Government Code § 53066; Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006, Public Utilities Code § 5800 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 12-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations, and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense; words in the plural number include the singular number; and words in the singular number include the plural number. 
Annual gross receipts means any and all compensation, in whatever form, grant, subsidy, exchange, or otherwise, directly or indirectly received by a grantee in connection with the operation of the cable system, not including any taxes on services furnished by such grantee imposed directly on any subscriber or user by a City, County, State or other governmental unit, and collected by the grantee for such activity, and shall specifically include gross annual basic service receipts, gross annual nonbasic service receipts, gross annual advertising receipts and gross annual leased channel receipts. 
CATV means community antenna television system as defined in this section. 
City means the City of La Palma, a municipal corporation of the State of California, in its present incorporated form or in later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form. 
City Clerk means the City Clerk of the City, or his or her designee. 
City Engineer means the City Engineer of the City, or his or her designee. 
City Manager means the City Manager of the City, or his or her designee. 
Community antenna television system (CATV) means a system of antenna, satellite receiving and transmitting apparatus, coaxial cables, fiber optics, wires, wave guides and/or other conductors, amplifiers, electronic processors, equipment and facilities designed, constructed or used for the purpose of providing over-the-air, satellite-delivered, and locally-originated television or FM radio service by cable within the City. Such a definition does not include those services which are classified as MDS (multiple distribution systems), DBS (direct broadcast satellite), or STV (subscription television) services, all of which are delivered without wires from a central originating point directly to a subscriber without the use of wires. 
Council means the present governing body of the City or any future board constituting the legislative body of the City. 
Day means a calendar day. 
Franchise means and includes any authorization granted under this chapter in terms of a franchise, privilege, permit, license or otherwise to construct, operate and maintain a CATV system in the City. Any such authorization, in whatever term granted, shall not mean or include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the City in accordance with any other provision of this Code, or any amendment thereto, or any supplemental provisions, sections or articles. Any such authorization, in whatever term granted, shall not relieve the grantee from any type of tax or fee now or hereafter imposed by the City; provided, that franchise payments shall be determined pursuant to this chapter. 
Grantee means a person, firm or corporation to whom or to which a franchise is granted by the Council under this chapter, and the lawful successor, transferee or assignee of such person, firm or corporation. 
Property of grantee means all property owned, installed or used by a grantee in the conduct of a CATV business in the City under the authority of a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter. 
Street or public street means only a street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway or drive which is owned by a public entity in fee or as to which a public entity has an easement for street purposes, and with respect to which, and to the extent that, the City has a right to grant the use of the surface of, and space above and below in connection with, a franchise for a CATV system. 
Subscriber means any person or entity receiving for any purpose the CATV services of a grantee. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-1; Ord. No. 86-14, § 1; Ord. No. 88-02, § 1(a))  
Sec. 12-2. - Franchise to install a CATV system. 
(a)  A nonexclusive franchise to install, construct, operate, and maintain a CATV system on streets within all or a specific portion of the City may be granted by the Council to any person, whether or not operating under an existing franchise, who or which offers to furnish and provide such system under and pursuant to the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  When and in the event that the grantee of any franchise granted hereunder uses in its CATV system distribution channels furnished to the grantee by a telephone company pursuant to tariff or contract on file with a regulatory body having jurisdiction, and such grantee makes no use of the streets independent of such telephone-company furnished facilities, such grantee shall be required to comply with all of the provisions of this chapter as a "licensee," and in such event, whenever the term "grantee" is used in this chapter, it means and includes "licensee." No provision of this chapter shall be deemed or construed as requiring the granting of a franchise hereunder to a telephone company furnishing such a channel service. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-2; Ord. No. 86-14, § 1)  
Sec. 12-3. - Uses permitted to grantee. 
Any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall authorize and permit the grantee to engage in the business of operating and providing a CATV system within all or a specific portion of the City, and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain and retain in, on, under, upon, across, and along any public street, such wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to the CATV system; and, in addition, so to use, operate and provide similar facilities or properties rented or leased from other persons, firms or corporations, including but not limited to any public utility or other grantee franchised or permitted to do business in the City. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-3; Ord. No. 86-14, § 1)  
Sec. 12-4. - Limitations of franchise. 
(a)  Every franchise granted under this chapter shall be nonexclusive. Neither the granting of any franchise under this chapter nor any of the provisions contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the City from granting any identical or similar franchise to any other person, firm or corporation within all or any portion of the City. 
(b)  No privilege or exemption shall be granted or conferred by any franchise granted under this chapter except those specifically prescribed in this chapter. 
(c)  Any privilege claimed under any such franchise by the grantee in any public street or other public property shall be subordinate to any prior or subsequent lawful occupancy or use thereof by the City or any other governmental entity, and shall be subordinate to any easements therein, whether created prior or subsequent to the granting of any franchise hereunder. 
(d)  Any such franchise shall be a privilege to be held in personal trust by the original grantee. It cannot in any event be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, without the prior consent of the Council expressed by resolution, after receipt of any proposed contractual documents directly related to the franchise, and then only under such conditions as may in such resolution be prescribed. Any such transfer or assignment shall be made only by an instrument in writing, a duly executed copy of which shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk within 30 days after any such transfer or assignment. The consent of the Council, except as to assignment or transfers as specified in section 12-9, may not be unreasonably withheld; provided, however, the proposed assignee must show financial responsibility and must agree to comply with all provisions of this chapter and of the franchise; and provided further, that no consent shall be required for a transfer in trust, mortgage or other hypothecation to secure an indebtedness unless it shall have been made to avoid or evade the other provisions of this chapter affecting transfers. Consistent with applicable law, a request for Council consent must be accompanied with a fee reasonably determined by the Council to recover City expenses connected with processing the change. 
(e)  Grantee shall promptly notify the City of any proposed change in control of the grantee. Such change in control shall make the franchise null and void unless and until the City shall have consented thereto. Failure of the City to act upon the grantee's notification within 90 days of the receipt by the grantor of all relevant information shall be deemed the City's consent thereto. The City may condition the transfer upon reasonable terms and conditions. For the purposes of this subsection, a presumptive change in control exists, upon the sale or transfer of 20 percent or more in any given year of the grantee's stock, or the cumulative sale of 50 percent or more of the City's stock. However, notwithstanding anything to the contrary provided in this subsection, stock sales or transfers to: 
(1)  Existing shareholders; 
(2)  Members of families of persons in the foregoing subsection (e)(1); and 
(3)  Trusts for the benefit of persons in the foregoing subsections (e)(1) and (2); 
shall not require consent under the provisions of this section or be counted in determining percentages under the provisions of this subsection. In addition, a presumptive change in control will exist when the grantee causes a change in the identity of the managing agent (operator) of the grantee's system; provided, that if the existing managing agent (operator) is terminated for cause, consent for such termination shall not be required but consent shall be required for the selection of a new managing agent (operator). 
(f)  Time shall be of the essence of any such franchise granted hereunder. The grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply promptly with any of the provisions of this chapter or by any failure of the City to enforce prompt compliance. 
(g)  Any right or power in, or duty impressed upon, any officer, employee, department or board of the City shall be subject to transfer by the City to any other officer, employee, department or board of the City. 
(h)  The grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the City for any loss, cost, expense, or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of this chapter or of any franchise issued hereunder or because of its enforcement. 
(i)  The grantee shall be subject to all requirements of City ordinances, rules, regulations and specifications heretofore or hereafter enacted or established to protect the public safety and general welfare and/or which apply generally to persons or businesses in the community, and shall comply with all applicable State and federal laws and regulations heretofore or hereafter enacted or established. 
(j)  Any such franchise shall not relieve the grantee of any obligation involved in obtaining pole space from any department of the City, utility company, or from others maintaining poles in the streets. 
(k)  Any franchise granted hereunder shall be in lieu of any and all other rights, privileges, powers, immunities, and authorities owned, possessed, controlled or exercisable by the grantee, or any successor to any interest of the grantee, or pertaining to the construction, operation, or maintenance of any CATV system in the City; and the acceptance of any franchise hereunder shall operate, as between a grantee and the City, as an abandonment of any and all of such rights, privileges, powers, immunities, and authorities within the City, to the effect that, as between the grantee and the City, any and all construction, operation and maintenance by any grantee of any CATV system in the City shall be, and shall be deemed and construed in all instances and respects to be, under and pursuant to such franchise, and not under or pursuant to any other right, privilege, power, immunity or authority whatsoever. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-4; Ord. No. 86-14, § 1; Ord. No. 88-02, § 1(b))  
Sec. 12-5. - Rights reserved to the City. 
(a)  Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to impair or affect, in any way, to any extent, the right of the City to acquire the property of a grantee, either by a mutually agreed purchase or through the exercise of the right of eminent domain, at the then fair market value, and nothing in this chapter contained shall be construed to contract away or to modify or abridge, either for a term or in perpetuity, the City's right of eminent domain. 
(b)  In the event the City desires to acquire all or a part of the CATV system (acquisition of part of the CATV system is restricted to those portions of the system, which if owned by the City, would not substantially undermine the economic viability of the remainder of the system), fair market value shall include consideration of the cable television system as a going concern. 
(c)  In the event of purchase by the City, or a change of the grantee, the current grantee shall cooperate with the City, or with a representative appointed by the City, to operate the system for a temporary period in maintaining continuity of service. 
(d)  There is reserved to the City every right and power which is required to be in this chapter reserved or provided by any ordinance of the City, and a grantee, by its acceptance of any franchise, agrees to be bound thereby and to comply with any action or requirements of the City in its exercise of such rights or power heretofore or hereafter enacted or established. 
(e)  Neither the granting of any franchise under this chapter nor any of the provisions contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the City from granting any identical or similar franchise to any other person, firm or corporation within all or any portion of the City. 
(f)  There is reserved to the City the power to amend any section or part of this chapter so as to require additional or greater standards of construction, operation or maintenance or otherwise, on the part of a grantee. Such additional or greater standards shall apply only to additions to existing systems of a grantee unless mutually agreed to by the City and a grantee or as dictated by the public safety and welfare. 
(g)  Neither the granting of any franchise nor any provision hereof shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power of the City, now existing or hereafter granted. 
(h)  The Council may do all things which are necessary and convenient in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this chapter and may determine any question of fact which may arise during the existence of any franchise granted hereunder. The City Manager is authorized and empowered to adjust, settle, or compromise any controversy or charge arising from the operations of any grantee under this chapter, either on behalf of the City, the grantee, or any subscriber, in the best interest of the public. Either the grantee or any member of the public who may be dissatisfied with the decision of the City Manager may appeal the matter to the Council for hearing and determination. The Council may accept, reject, or modify the decision of the City Manager, and the Council may adjust, settle, or compromise any controversy or cancel any charge arising from the operations of any grantee or from any provision of the chapter. All actions by the Council under this section shall be after hearing, upon ten days' advance written notice to the grantee at its address on file with the City. Such actions may be by either resolution or minute order, except that revocation of a franchise pursuant to section 12-9 shall be by ordinance. 
(i)  The City reserves the right, in special circumstances, to construct such portion of a grantee's proposed facilities and equipment as public safety and convenience may dictate, at the grantee's sole expense. 
(j)  The City reserves the right to remove any portion of a grantee's equipment and facilities as may be required in any emergency, as determined by the City, without liability for interruption of service, and the City shall not be obligated to restore service or to pay the costs of expenses of restoring service. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-5; Ord. No. 86-14, § 1; Ord. No. 88-02, § 1(e))  
Sec. 12-6. - Incorporation by reference. 
This chapter shall be incorporated by reference in any franchise award, and any and every provision hereof shall be incorporated as though the same were set out in full, except for those provisions of the award which expressly alter or modify this chapter, and all provisions shall be binding upon the grantee. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-7; Ord. No. 86-14, § 1)  
Sec. 12-7. - Minimum standards. 
(a)  Any and all CATV systems for the City shall be designed and installed to meet all of the standards set forth in the franchise agreement. 
(b)  It is the City's desire that the CATV system be a State-of-the-art system and include an operational institutional network when it is technologically and economically feasible. The grantee shall make every reasonable effort to develop such institutional services and provide them as a part of the CATV system within the above-stated constraints. When requested by the City, and not more than annually, the grantee shall submit to the City a report concerning the State-of-the-art with regard to institutional networks and the grantee's ability to provide and market the same. Such institutional services shall be provided by the grantee when such services are being provided by the grantee: 
(1)  As a part of other comparable cable television franchises in Southern California on a nonexperimental basis; or 
(2)  As a part of any cable television system for which the City's system is a line extension. 
(c)  As part of its proposal to the City, the franchise applicant shall indicate a proposed construction schedule for the completion of the installation of the cable television system throughout the entire City, or the portion thereof for which a franchise is being requested. Service to the areas prescribed in that proposal or as modified in the franchise agreement shall be provided within the periods stated, and failure on the part of the grantee to complete each of the matters set forth therein shall be grounds for termination of the franchise, as well as invocation of the penalties prescribed in sections 12-11 and 12-22 and any other penalties specified in this chapter or in the franchise agreement. The proposed construction schedule shall not, in any event, exceed two years, except that by resolution the Council, in its discretion, may extend the time for the commencement and completion of installation and construction for additional periods in the event the grantee, acting in good faith, experiences delays by reason of circumstances beyond its control. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-8; Ord. No. 86-14, § 1)  
Sec. 12-8. - Duration of franchise. 
(a)  No franchise granted by the Council under this chapter shall be for a term longer than 15 years following the date of acceptance of such franchise, or the renewal thereof, by the grantee. Any such franchise shall terminate in whole if the City acquires the CATV system, or proportionately if the City acquires a portion thereof. 
(b)  Any such franchise granted hereunder may be terminated prior to its date of expiration by the Council in the event that: 
(1)  The City acquires the CATV system property of the grantee; 
(2)  The grantee has failed to comply with any material provision of this chapter or has by act or omission violated any material term or condition of any franchise or permit issued hereunder; or 
(3)  The application of the grantee, including accompanying reports or data, contains a material misrepresentation, whether intentional or not. 
(c)  The City Manager shall make written demand that the grantee comply with any such term or condition of the franchise or permit issued thereunder. If the failure, refusal or neglect of the grantee continues for a period of 30 days following such written demand, the City Manager may place his or her request for termination of the franchise upon the next regular Council meeting agenda. The City Manager shall cause to be served upon such grantee, at least ten days prior to the date of such Council meeting, a written notice of his or her intent to request such termination and the reason therefor, and the time and place of the meeting, notice of which shall be published by the City Clerk at least once ten days before such meeting in the newspaper utilized by the City for publication of its public hearing notices and other legal notices. 
(d)  The Council shall consider the request of the City Manager and shall hear any persons interested therein, and shall determine whether or not the failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just cause. 
(e)  If such failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just cause, the Council shall direct the grantee to comply within such time and manner and upon such terms and conditions as are reasonable. 
(f)  If the Council finds there has been such failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee, the Council may declare that the franchise is terminated and forfeited. The Council may impose any other remedy it deems appropriate unless there is compliance by the grantee within such periods as the Council may fix. 
(g)  A franchise granted hereunder shall, at the option of the Council, cease and terminate 120 days after the appointment of a receiver or receivers or trustee or trustees to take over and conduct the business of the grantee whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding unless such receivership shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of the 120 days, or unless: 
(1)  Such receivers or trustees shall have, within 120 days after their election or appointment, fully complied with all the terms and provisions of this chapter and the franchise granted pursuant hereto, and the receivers or trustees within such 120 days shall have remedied all defaults under the franchise; and 
(2)  Such receivers or trustees shall, within such 120 days, execute an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises, whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision, and limitation of the franchise granted under this chapter. 
(h)  In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the plant, property and equipment of a grantee, or any part thereof, including or excluding its franchise, the Council may serve notice of termination upon the grantee and the successful bidder at such sale, in which event the franchise and all rights and privileges of the grantee thereunder shall cease and terminate 30 days after service of such notice, unless: 
(1)  The Council shall have approved the transfer of the franchise, as and in the manner provided in this chapter; and 
(2)  Such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with the City to assume and be bound by all the terms and conditions of the franchise. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-9; Ord. No. 86-14, § 1)  
Sec. 12-9. - Franchise fee. 
(a)  Any grantee granted a franchise under this chapter shall pay to the City, during the life of such franchise, a franchise fee equal to five percent of the grantee's annual gross receipts. If, during any part of the franchise term, there is in effect a federal or State limit regulating the franchise fee percentage to a different amount, the maximum rate allowed thereby shall apply, but only to the extent required by law and only for that time period such limit is legally operational. Franchise fee payment by the grantee to the City shall be made quarterly by delivery of the same to the City Clerk not later than April 15, July 15, October 15, and January 15 for the preceding quarter. 
(b)  The grantee shall file with the City Clerk, within 90 days after the expiration of the grantee's fiscal year or portion thereof during which such franchise is in force, a statement showing in detail the annual gross receipts, as defined in this chapter, of the grantee during the preceding fiscal year, or portion thereof. It shall be the duty of the grantee to pay to the City, within 15 days after the time for filing such statement, any unpaid balance thereof for the fiscal year or portion thereof covered by such statements. 
(c)  The City shall have the right to inspect and audit a grantee's fiscal records. If an independent audit of a grantee's records directed by the City shows a franchise fee error in excess of two percent in the City's favor, the grantee shall assume all reasonable costs for the audit. No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the City may have for further additional sums payable under this section or for the performance of any other obligation under this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-10; Ord. No. 86-14, § 1; Ord. No. 88-02, § 1(d))  
Sec. 12-11. - Permits, installation and service. 
(a)  Within 60 days after acceptance of a franchise, the grantee shall apply for and proceed with due diligence to obtain all necessary permits and authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business, including but not limited to, any utility joint use attachment agreements, microwave carrier licenses, and any other permits, licenses and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of CATV systems, or their associated microwave transmission facilities. 
(b)  Within 180 days after obtaining all necessary permits, licenses and authorizations, the grantee shall commence construction and installation of the CATV system. 
(c)  Within 90 days after the commencement of construction and installation of the system, the grantee shall proceed to render service to subscribers, and the completion of the construction and installation shall be pursued with reasonable diligence thereafter, so that service to all areas designated on the map accompanying the application for franchise or as modified in the franchise agreement shall be provided within one year from the date on which service was first provided. 
(d)  For failure either to apply for all necessary permits and approvals or to commence construction in accordance with this section, unless the Council approves the delay because of reasons beyond the control of the grantee, the franchise term shall be reduced four days for each day of delay. 
(e)  For failure to begin service to subscribers or complete construction and installation of the system as provided for in this section, or as provided for in the grantee's proposal to the City and adopted or amended in the franchise agreement, unless the Council approves the delay because of reasons beyond the control of the grantee, the franchise term shall be reduced four days for each day of delay. 
(f)  By acceptance of the franchise granted hereunder, the grantee agrees that, in the event of its failure to comply with any time requirements referred to in subsections (a) through (e) of this section, or as may be extended by the Council, in addition to the liquidated damages provisions specified elsewhere in this chapter, the grantee will pay to the City the sum of $1,000.00, or such other amount as set forth in the franchise agreement, per day for each and every day's delay beyond the time prescribed, plus authorized extensions therefor, for completion of any of the acts required to be done by this section. 
(g)  Any requests for extensions of the proposed construction deadlines proposed by a grantee, due to acts of God, acts of the public enemy, fires, floods, epidemics, quarantine restrictions, strikes, lockouts, freight embargoes, unusually severe weather, or from any other cause beyond the reasonable control of the grantee and/or its employees, agents, or contractors, must be submitted to the City Manager in writing within 14 days after the cause for such delay first occurs. Such request must specify the exact reason for the delay and the total number of extension days requested. Whenever and wherever possible, such requests for extensions of the proposed or required construction deadlines should be supported with written justification of the cause for such delay, such as newspaper articles, letters from vendors, agents, contractors, etc. Within 14 days of receipt of such a request, the City Manager will reply in writing, approving, partially approving, or denying the request. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-11; Ord. No. 86-14, § 1)  
Sec. 12-12. - Location of property of grantee. 
(a)  Any wires, cable lines, conduits, or other properties of a grantee to be constructed or installed in streets shall be so constructed or installed only at such locations and in such manner as shall be approved by the City Engineer acting in the exercise of his or her reasonable discretion within the general guidelines of CATV construction standards approved by the Council. 
(b)  A grantee shall utilize existing poles, conduits and other facilities whenever possible and shall not install or erect any facilities or apparatus in or on other public property, places or rights-of-way, or within any privately owned area within the City which has not yet become a public street but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision map approved by the City, except those installed or erected upon public utility facilities then existing, without obtaining the prior written approval of the City Engineer. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter or any franchise granted pursuant thereto, all facilities of a grantee in any public street or in any public or private easement, and services lines to subscribers off the main lines, shall be located underground at such depths and locations as required by the City Engineer, except where a grantee uses existing poles, with permission from the owner, and as to such service lines where and so long as electric and telephone lines to the subscribers are overhead. Upon the undergrounding of the utility lines of the owner using such poles, the grantee shall concurrently (or earlier) place its facilities underground at depths and locations approved by the City Engineer at no expense to the City or to the customer. All underground wires or cables of a grantee shall be placed in conduits. 
(d)  Amplifiers in a grantee's underground transmission and distribution lines shall be in appropriate low profile housing, and at locations as approved by the City Engineer. 
(e)  All transmission lines, equipment and structures shall be so installed and located as to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners and at all times shall be kept and maintained in a safe, adequate and substantial condition and in good order and repair. A grantee shall, at all times, employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use, commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failure and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries or nuisances to the public. Suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares or other devices shall be used at such times and places as are reasonably required for the safety of all members of the public. Any poles or other fixtures placed in the public right-of-way by a grantee shall be placed in such a manner so as not to interfere with the usual travel on such public right-of-way. 
(f)  The grantee shall use boring augur techniques in lieu of transverse cuts for crossing arterial streets and driveways. Exceptions may be authorized by the City Engineer when conditions such as street contours, utilities or other factors make boring techniques impractical. If any paved surface is disturbed during the construction or installation of CATV facilities, the surface shall be replaced by the grantee in conformance with the City's specifications. 
(g)  The grantee shall not place any transmission lines or fixtures where the same will interfere with any gas, electric or telephone fixtures, water hydrant or main, and all such transmission lines or fixtures placed in any street shall be placed within the areas specified by the City Engineer, and those placed in alleys shall be placed close to the line of the lot abutting on such alley, and then in such manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on such streets, alleys and public ways. 
(h)  The grantee shall make every reasonable effort during the course of construction to maintain all streets, driveways, sidewalks and other paved surfaces in a usable condition. 
(i)  The grantee shall perform all backfilling and return property to original condition within 24 hours except by specified written approval of the City Engineer. 
(j)  All landscaped public and private areas shall be returned to a condition as existed prior to the construction work, and the grantee shall maintain such area until, in the opinion of the City Engineer, the plant materials are reestablished. 
(k)  The grantee shall not remove any tree or trim any portion, either above, at, or below ground level, or any tree within any public place without the prior consent of the City. The City shall have the right to do the work with the actual cost thereof to be paid by the grantee. If such trimming is not performed by City, the grantee shall be responsible for any and all damages to any tree as a result of trimming, or to the land surrounding any tree, whether such tree is trimmed or removed. 
(l)  Any grantee awarded a franchise within the City agrees to the City's acceptance and approval of any and all subcontracting firms employed by the grantee within the City. Such acceptance and approval by the City shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(m)  In the event the City determines that any subcontractor employed by the grantee is performing unsatisfactory or inferior work, as determined by the City Engineer, or is the cause of numerous citizens' complaints, the City Manager shall notify the grantee in writing of such determination and the grantee shall, within 30 days of such notice, correct such problem with the subcontractor. If such problems are not corrected within 30 days, then grantee shall employ another subcontractor that meets the provisions of this subsection. If the City invokes its rights hereunder regarding any subcontractor employed by the grantee, then the grantee shall be given an extension on any construction deadlines for 30 additional days from the date of receipt of written notification of any such action by the City. 
(n)  The grantee shall notify the City at least ten days prior to the intention of the grantee to commence any construction in any streets. The City shall cooperate with the grantee in issuing any permits required, provided such grant and subsequent construction by the grantee shall not unduly interfere with the use of such streets and that proposed construction shall be done in accordance with the pertinent provisions of the ordinances of the City. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-12; Ord. No. 86-14, § 1; Ord. No. 88-02, § 1(e))  
Sec. 12-13. - Removal and abandonment of property of grantee. 
(a)  In the event that the use of any part of the CATV system is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of 12 months, or in the event such system or property has been installed in any street or public place without complying with the requirements of the grantee's franchise or this chapter, or the franchise has been terminated, cancelled or has expired, the grantee shall promptly, upon being given 30 days' written notice, initiate removal from the streets or public places all such property of such system other than any which the City Engineer may permit to be abandoned in place. In the event of such removal, the grantee shall promptly restore the street or other area from which such property has been removed to a condition satisfactory to the City Engineer. 
(b)  Any such property of the grantee on public property or in the public rights-of-way remaining in place 180 days after the termination or expiration of the franchise shall be considered permanently abandoned. The City Engineer may extend such time not to exceed an additional 60 days. 
(c)  Any such property of the grantee to be abandoned in place shall be abandoned in such manner as the City Engineer shall prescribe. Upon permanent abandonment of the property of the grantee in place, the property shall become that of the City, and the grantee shall submit to the City Engineer an instrument in writing, to be approved by the City Attorney, transferring to the City the ownership within the provisions of any utility joint-use attachment agreements. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-13; Ord. No. 86-14, § 1)  
Sec. 12-14. - Changes required by public improvements. 
The grantee shall from time to time protect, support, dislocate, temporarily or permanently as may be required, remove or relocate, without expense to the City or any other government entity, any facilities installed, used, and maintained under the franchise if and when made necessary by any lawful change of grade, alignment, or width of any public street, including the construction of any storm drain, sewer, subway or viaduct, by the City or any other government entity, or made necessary by any other governmental entity, or made necessary by any other public improvement or alteration in, under, on, upon or about any public street or the public property, whether such public improvements or alteration is at the instance of the City or another governmental entity, and whether such improvement or alteration is for a governmental or proprietary function, or made necessary by traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation or any other public project or purpose of City or any other governmental entity. The decision of the City Engineer under this section shall be final and binding on the grantee. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-14; Ord. No. 86-14, § 1)  
Sec. 12-15. - Failure to perform street work. 
Upon failure of the grantee to commence, pursue, or complete any work required by law or by the provisions of this chapter or by its franchise to be done in any street or other public place within the time prescribed, and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, the City may, at its option, cause such work to be done and the grantee shall pay to the City the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the City Engineer, to the grantee within ten days after receipt of such itemized report. In the alternative, at the City's option, the City may demand of grantee the estimated cost of such work as estimated by the City Engineer, and such shall be paid by grantee to the City within ten days of such demand. Upon award of any contract or contracts therefor, the grantee shall pay to the City within ten days of demand any additional amount necessary to provide for cost of such work. Upon completion of such work, the grantee shall pay to the City or the City shall refund to the grantee such sums so that the total received and retained by the City shall equal the cost of such work. The term "cost," as used in this section, includes 15 percent of other costs for the City's overhead. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-15; Ord. No. 86-14, § 1)  
Sec. 12-16. - Security for performance. 
(a)  In order to secure the faithful performance of each and all of its obligations under and pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and the applicable franchise agreement, concurrently with the filing and acceptance of award of a franchise granted hereunder, the grantee shall deposit with the City Clerk cash, a negotiable certificate of deposit payable to the City, and/or a letter of credit in an aggregate amount equal to $1,000,000.00, or such other amount as may be specified in the franchise agreement. Any such certificate of deposit or letter of credit shall be in a form acceptable to the City Attorney and shall be issued by a bank or savings and loan association whose most recently issued unsecured long-term debt securities are rated not less than AA or its equivalent by Standard and Poor's Corporation or Moody's Investors Service, Inc.; provided, however, that a certificate of deposit may be issued by any bank which is a member of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) or by any savings and loan association which is a member of the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation (FSLIC) if the principal amount of such certificate does not exceed the limits of the deposit insurance provided by FDIC or FSLIC, as the case may be. Unless otherwise specified in the franchise agreement, such amount shall be maintained on deposit with the City Clerk throughout the period of construction of the system; and in the event such amount is reduced by reason of any drawing thereof by the City, the grantee shall restore the deposit to the original principal amount thereof within 30 days after such drawing. 
(b)  Subsequent to the completion of construction of the system to the satisfaction of the City, the aggregate amount so deposited with the City Clerk may be reduced to $100,000.00 or such other amount as may be specified in the franchise agreement. Such amount shall be maintained on deposit with the City Clerk throughout the remainder of the terms of the franchise and any renewal thereof and thereafter until the grantee shall have liquidated all of its obligations arising from its acceptance of the franchise or the renewal thereof or from its exercise of any privilege therein granted. In the event such amount is reduced by reason of any drawing thereof by the City, the grantee shall restore the deposit to the original principal amount thereof within 30 days after such drawing. 
(c)  In the event that the grantee fails to comply with any one or more of the provisions of this chapter or of the franchise agreement, the City shall be entitled, after five working days' written notice to the grantee prior to a withdrawal, to recover from the grantee, and may draw from the amount deposited by the grantee pursuant hereto, the following: 
(1)  Any amounts payable to (pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or otherwise) or expended by the City by reason of such failure of grantee; 
(2)  Any damages or loss suffered by the City as a result of any such failure; 
(3)  Interest at ten percent per year, or such other rates as may be established by resolution of the Council, from the date due as to the amount finally determined, whether liquidated or not in amount when due; and 
(4)  In the event of litigation, the reasonable attorney's fees, court costs and other expenses of the City, in the event the City is the prevailing party. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-16; Ord. No. 86-14, § 1; Ord. No. 88-02, § 1(f))  
Sec. 12-17. - Indemnification of City. 
The grantee shall, concurrently with the filing of an acceptance of award of any franchise granted under this chapter, furnish to the City and file with the City Clerk a certificate of insurance, and at all times during the existence of any franchise granted hereunder, maintain in full force and effect, at its own cost and expense, a liability insurance policy in the amount and in a company approved by the City Manager, and in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney, indemnifying and saving harmless the City, its officers and employees from and against any and all claims, demands, actions, suits, and proceedings by others, against all liability to others related in any manner to the exercise or failure to exercise or the enjoyment or use of the franchise, including but not limited to any liability for damages by reason of or arising out of any failure by the grantee to secure consents from others, authorized distributors or licensees of programs to be delivered by grantee's CATV system, and against any loss, cost, expense and damages resulting therefrom, including reasonable attorney's fees, irrespective of the amount of the comprehensive liability insurance policy required hereunder. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-17; Ord. No. 86-14, § 1; Ord. No. 88-02, § 1(g))  
Sec. 12-18. - Acceptance and effective date of franchise. 
(a)  No franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall become effective for any purpose unless and until written acceptance thereof shall have been filed with the City Clerk, and unless and until all things required in this section and section 12-17 are done and completed in the time and manner required, the Council may declare the franchise null and void. 
(b)  Within 20 days after the effective date of the resolution awarding a franchise, or within such extended period of time as the Council in its discretion may authorize, the grantee shall file with the City Clerk its written acceptance, in form satisfactory to the City Attorney, of the franchise, together with the security and certificate of insurance specified in this chapter and his or her agreement to be bound by and to comply with and to do all things required of him or her by the provisions of this chapter and the franchise. Such acceptance and agreement shall be acknowledged by the grantee before a notary public, and shall in form and content be satisfactory to and approved by the City Attorney. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-18; Ord. No. 86-14, § 1; Ord. No. 88-02, § 1(h))  
Sec. 12-19. - Effect on existing franchise; system installed. 
In the event any territory located outside the boundaries of the City which is covered by an existing cable system franchise or license granted by the governmental entity having jurisdiction over such territory is annexed to the City after the franchise thereof has commenced or completed construction and installation of a cable system within such territory, the rights reserved under such franchise or license to such governmental entity or to any officer thereof shall inure to the benefit of the City; and all regulatory provisions of this chapter and any rules and regulations applicable to CATV systems operating within the City, whether then in effect or subsequently adopted, shall be applicable to and binding upon the grantee. In addition, the grantee shall be obligated to pay annually to the City the percentage of gross receipts established by the governmental entity in the franchise or license which is derived from its operations within the annexed territory for three years (or until termination of the franchise if the franchise is terminated, by expiration thereof or otherwise, prior to the expiration of the period), at which time the same percentage of gross receipts required by franchises granted pursuant to this chapter will apply. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-19; Ord. No. 86-14, § 1)  
Sec. 12-20. - Costs to be borne by grantee. 
The grantee shall assume the following costs associated with a franchise: 
(1)  Costs of publication of any and all notices and ordinances relating to the franchise as such publication is required by law; 
(2)  Reasonable and customary costs associated with the City employing an independent consultant to assist with the development of the franchise ordinance and any negotiations required to grant or amend (at the request of the grantee) the franchise; 
(3)  Reasonable and customary costs of an independent engineering firm to witness the initial design, installation and proof of performance testing of the system as a verification of the grantee's adherence to the terms and conditions of the franchise; 
(4)  All fees related to construction of the CATV facilities, including, but not limited to, City excavation permit fees, construction inspection fees, and other City costs related to CATV installation and construction; 
(5)  City costs of advertising and noticing for any public hearings related to rate increases or changes in this franchise; 
(6)  All City administrative costs associated with the granting of the franchise, including, but not limited to, the public hearings established for community needs assessments, costs associated with the performance of a cable television advisory committee, attorney fees, and City staff time committed to the franchising process, and award and negotiation of the franchise. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-20; Ord. No. 86-14, § 1; Ord. No. 88-02, § 1(i))  
Sec. 12-21. - Services. 
Services shall be offered to all City residents in accordance with the provisions of the franchise agreement. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-21; Ord. No. 86-14, § 1)  
Sec. 12-22. - Technical performance standards. 
(a)  The CATV system shall be designed, installed, maintained and tested in accordance with the CATV system technical performance standards imposed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), or any other State or federal authority having jurisdiction. 
(b)  Thirty days prior to the last regular working day of each of the first three operating quarters of each year, the City Manager may request the grantee to submit system performance data taken within the previous seven days. Measurements for such data shall be taken at the same test points selected to satisfy subsection (c) of this section during the last annual system performance test that the data has been submitted to the City. Quarterly test data shall be limited to: 
(1)  Visual signal level for all channels carried; 
(2)  Visual signal-to-noise measurements on one active low-band and one active high-band VHF channel; and 
(3)  Visual hum modulation on one channel or pilot carrier. 
Quarterly tests shall be performed on a requested basis. A representative of the City shall be permitted to accompany the grantee during quarterly measurement activities. The grantee shall not be permitted to make any system adjustments during quarterly measurement activities without noting such adjustments on the test data form. 
(c)  The grantee shall, during the last month of the fourth operating quarter of each year, perform annual CATV system performance tests. Such tests shall be in full compliance with FCC regulations and such tests shall be performed by a qualified engineer and the resultant data analyzed by a representative of the City if directed by the City Manager. All necessary test instrumentation shall be supplied by the grantee. A current certificate of calibration by an independent calibration laboratory shall be supplied for each test instrument upon request of the City Manager. All costs for instrumentation and calibration shall be borne by grantee. Measurement locations for system compliance with subsection (b) of this section, except those requirements regarding 24-hour visual signal amplitude and channel amplitude characteristics, shall include: 
(1)  End of each system major trunk; and 
(2)  End of each system trunk branch four or more trunk amplifiers deep. 
Actual test locations shall be selected to measure performance of the system in the franchise area and shall be (or as closely as possible to simulate) actual subscriber locations. Measurements requiring 24-hour visual signal level and channel amplitude characteristics shall be made as required by the FCC. Measurement for system compliance with subsection (b) of this section shall be made as required by the FCC. Measurement for system compliance with subsection (b) of this section shall be made where practical on all origination equipment employed in the system. Measurement techniques shall be those suggested by the FCC. If such agreement is not reached prior to testing, the City shall prescribe acceptable methods of measurement. Concurrent with annual performance tests, the City representative may inspect all system headend facilities and outside plant for adherence to best industry installation, workmanship and safety practice. 
(d)  In the event that service to any subscriber is interrupted for 24 consecutive hours, the grantee shall provide a pro rata rebate of the monthly fees for each such period of 24 consecutive hours during which the interruption occurs, to all affected subscribers. 
(e)  In the event that the system fails to meet any technical performance standards specified in the franchise agreement for a full three-month period, the grantee shall reduce all subscribers' fees by 25 percent until all performance standards are met. The City Manager shall notify the grantee in writing during the first month of the three-month period that the system has failed to meet performance standards. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-22; Ord. No. 86-14, § 1; Ord. No. 88-02, § 1(j))  
Sec. 12-23. - Complaint procedure; remedies for inadequate service; notices. 
(a)  Pursuant to FCC rules, the following procedure shall be adhered to in the event of subscriber complaints by City residents: 
(1)  Each grantee shall establish procedures for receiving, acting upon, and resolving subscriber complaints to the satisfaction of the City Manager. The grantee shall furnish a notice of such procedure to each subscriber at the time of initial subscription of the system. 
(2)  Each grantee shall maintain a written record, or log, listing date and time of customer complaints, identifying the subscriber and determining the nature of the complaints and when and what action was taken by the grantee in response thereto; such record shall be kept at the grantee's local office, reflecting the operations to date for a period of at least three years, and shall be available for inspection during regular business hours without further notice or demand by the City Manager. 
(3)  In the event that a customer complaint is not resolved to the mutual satisfaction of the customer or the grantee, either the customer or the grantee, may request that the matter be presented to the City Manager for a hearing and resolution. 
(4)  When there have been similar complaints made or where there exists other evidence which, in the judgment of the City Manager, casts doubt on the reliability or quality of cable service, or the grantee's ability to meet the technical standards adopted in this chapter, the City Manager shall have the right and authority to compel the grantee to test, analyze, and report on the performance of that part of the system involved in the problem. Such test or tests shall be made and the reports of such test or tests shall be delivered to the City no later than 14 days after the City formally notifies the grantee. Such report shall include the following information: 
a.  The nature of the complaint which precipitated the special test; 
b.  What system component was tested; 
c.  The equipment used and procedures employed in such testing; 
d.  The names of the individuals performing and witnessing the testing; 
e.  The date, time and location of testing; 
f.  The results of such test; and 
g.  The method in which such complaints were resolved. 
(5)  Any other information pertinent to the special test shall also be recorded. The resultant report shall be submitted to the City Manager and will form the basis for resolution. In the event either the subscriber or grantee determines that the resolution was unsatisfactory, either may appeal the issue to the Council for a final and binding resolution. 
(6)  If, in the judgment of the City Manager and/or Council, the resultant tests indicate the service problems are preventable and within the grantee's control, the City Manager shall file such a written notice to the grantee to remedy the problem within a reasonable period agreed to by both the City and the grantee. 
(b)  Prior to construction of the cable system, the grantee shall notify in writing each resident in the area in which construction is to commence, and shall deliver to each resident notice of such construction either in person, by a representative of the grantee, or by mail, at least 48 hours in advance of such construction work. 
(c)  Each grantee will provide a method of employee/subcontractor identification acceptable to the City, for all such individuals who may make personal contact with residents of the City for the purposes of construction, marketing, or other services of the cable television system. 
(d)  Unless otherwise specified in the franchise agreement, each grantee shall provide services to the entire residential area of the City, including future annexations, referred to in this chapter as the "subscriber network." Any limitation on system extensions, or exclusions, shall be approved by the Council and referenced as part of the grantee's proposal, or adopted by resolution of the Council and attached thereto as additional exhibits. 
(e)  The grantee shall furnish the City with as-built drawings of the entire cable television system. Within 30 days of completion of construction of the system, the grantee shall file as-built drawings, and upon request, all equipment operational manuals with the City Manager. In the event any changes or modifications are made to the cable system that would alter the City's as-built plans, the grantee shall, after seeking City approval of such changes, file revised plans to reflect the changes within 30 days of completion of the changes. 
(f)  The grantee shall exercise its best efforts to limit any interruptions of service for the purpose of maintaining, repairing, or construction of the system to periods of minimum use. Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by reasonable notice to subscribers and shall occur during periods of minimum system use. Except in an emergency or other situation necessitating a more expedited or alternative notification procedure, the grantee may schedule an interruption of service for a period of more than four hours during any 24-hour period only after the City and each affected subscriber have been given 48 hours' prior notice of the proposed interruption. 
(g)  All notice which the City may give to a grantee or which grantee may give to the City shall be given in writing and may be given by first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the grantee's most recent address on file with the City, and addressed to the City at the official City hall address. Such notices, so sent by mail, shall be deemed given one business day after deposit in the United States mail if so deposited in Orange County or Los Angeles County; otherwise they will be deemed given upon receipt. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-23; Ord. No. 86-14, § 1; Ord. No. 88-02, § 1(k))  
Sec. 12-24. - Inspection of property and records. 
(a)  At all reasonable times, and upon reasonable notice, the grantee shall permit any duly authorized representative of the City to examine all property of the grantee together with any appurtenant property of the grantee situated within or without the City, and to examine and transcribe any and all maps and other records kept or maintained by the grantee or under its control which deal with the operations, affairs, transactions or property of the grantee with respect to its franchise and which reasonably relates to the enforcement and administration of this chapter or the franchise agreement. If such maps or records are not kept in the City, or upon reasonable request not made available in the City, and if the Council determines an examination thereof is necessary or appropriate, all travel and maintenance expense necessarily incurred in making such an examination shall be paid by the grantee. 
(b)  The grantee shall prepare and furnish to the City Manager and the Director of Finance at the time and in the form prescribed by either of the officers, such reports with respect to its operations, affairs, transactions or property, as may be reasonably necessary or appropriate to the performance of any of the rights, functions, or duties of the City or any of its officers in connection with the franchise. 
(c)  The grantee shall at all times make and keep in the City full and complete plans and records showing the exact location of all CATV system equipment installed or in use in streets and other public places in the City. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-24; Ord. No. 86-14, § 1; Ord. No. 88-02, § 1(l))  
Sec. 12-25. - Use of utility poles and facilities; agreement. 
When any portion of the CATV system is to be installed on public utility poles and facilities, copies of the agreements for such joint use of poles and facilities shall be made available to the City Manager upon his or her request. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-25; Ord. No. 86-14, § 1)  
Sec. 12-26. - Rates and charges. 
(a)  For informational purposes, grantee shall maintain and file with the City a complete schedule of subscriber rates, fees and charges for service. 
(b)  If a grantee fails to provide any service request by a subscriber or programmer, the grantee shall, after adequate notification and being afforded the opportunity to provide the service, promptly refund all deposits or advance charges paid for the service in question by the subscriber or programmer. 
(c)  In the event that any subscriber has made an annual payment in advance, a pro rata portion of the monthly payments shall be refunded by the grantee where the subscriber terminates service because of a failure of the grantee to render the service in accordance with the standards set forth in the permit. 
(d)  Loss of or damage to the property of the grantee in the possession of or located on the property of any subscriber is the responsibility of the subscriber but only in amounts approved by the Council and clearly stated in the grantee subscriber agreement. Subscribers suffering a loss or damage to the property of the grantee due to acts or events which are beyond the control of the subscriber will be exempt from any loss, damage or replacement charges. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-26; Ord. No. 86-14, § 1; Ord. No. 88-02, § 1(m))  
Sec. 12-27. - Interconnection. 
(a)  The grantee shall make all reasonable efforts to electrically interconnect the City CATV system with CATV systems in adjacent communities for the purposes of sharing programming and services of a local or regional nature. Such an interconnect shall be effected by coaxial cable, fiber optic cable, microwave, or other bidirectional signal transportation means as appropriate to permit programming interchange in compliance with the technical provisions hereof. At the end of every two-year period from the date of the franchise agreement, the grantee shall file a report with the City Manager showing it has contacted all franchised operators in the communities adjacent to the City for the purposes of exploring an interconnect agreement. The report shall state each contacted operator's name, City, and response, list all programming activity available to City residents via such an interconnect agreement as well as any additional information as required by the City Manager. 
(b)  If an adjacent operator is responsive to the grantee's inquiry, the grantee shall proceed with all details, plans and agreements necessary for implementation. The interconnect shall be fully operational within two years of such report. 
(c)  If an adjacent operator is not responsive to the grantee's inquiry, a letter report, stating that all reasonable attempts to gain an interconnect agreement were made but unsuccessfully, shall similarly be filed with the City. 
(d)  In the case of adjacent CATV systems operated by the grantee, the grantee shall have two years from acceptance of this franchise in which to proceed with all details, plans and agreements necessary for implementation. In the event that the grantee acquires existing franchises in adjacent communities, the grantee shall have two years from the date of that community's franchise award in which to proceed with all details, plans and agreements necessary for interconnection. In either case, the interconnect shall be fully operational within four years of the acceptance of the franchise agreement. 
(e)  By acceptance of this franchise, grantee agrees to cooperate with the City and the County of Orange to implement a County-wide interconnection plan. Such plans and the costs for implementation of the plan must be mutually agreed to by all parties prior to such inception. 
(f)  Revenue realized by the grantee, including any affiliate corporation indirect revenues from interconnection activity involving the City's CATV system shall be reported as gross receipts and will be subject to the current franchise fees. All affiliate corporation interconnect service agreement revenue which includes the City's CATV system will be reported and the City's interconnect indirect system revenue will be calculated from the total affiliate corporation revenue based on the pro rata share of grantee's subscribers to all interconnected systems subscribers or other amounts as approved by the Council. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-27; Ord. No. 86-14, § 1)  
Sec. 12-28. - System and services review. 
(a)  On or about the third anniversary date of the franchise agreement and each three years thereafter, the City and the grantee shall hold a system and services review session. The purposes of the review session shall be: 
(1)  To study technological, economic and regulatory change in cable communications; to assess cable system performance; 
(2)  To facilitate renewal procedures; 
(3)  To promote the maximum degree of flexibility in the cable system; and 
(4)  To maintain an advanced, modern, economically viable cable system. 
(b)  Topics for discussion and review at the system and services review sessions may include, but are not limited to, new developments in technology; condition and operation of equipment and facilities; compliance with this chapter and the franchise agreement; services provided to subscribers, institutions and community groups; programming; rate structure; market conditions; the financial condition of the grantee; subscriber complaints; user complaints; possible amendments to the franchise agreement; and developments in the law and regulation. Either the City or the grantee may select additional topics for discussion at any system and services review session. 
(c)  Sixty days prior to the scheduled system and services review, the grantee shall provide to the City the following reports: 
(1)  All cable system services that are being provided on an operational basis, excluding tests and demonstrations, to cities in the County of Orange with populations above 10,000 or other such levels of population or numbers of subscribers as the City may establish from time to time, that are not provided to the City; 
(2)  A plan for provision of such services, or a justification indicating why such services are not feasible for the franchise area; 
(3)  The results of an opinion survey report which identify satisfaction or dissatisfaction among subscribers with cable communication services offered by the grantee. These surveys required to make the report shall be in a format mutually approved by the City and grantee; 
(4)  Other reports documenting the grantee's compliance with the provisions of this chapter and/or the franchise agreement as requested by the City in writing 120 days prior to the scheduled review. 
(d)  The City and the grantee shall discuss new developments in technology and the desirability and feasibility of incorporating such new technological developments into the cable system. Technical factors, market conditions and economical viability shall be considered. The City and the grantee shall equally share the costs of any independent studies conducted by the mutual agreement of the parties. Either the City or the grantee may conduct its own studies at its own expense. 
(e)  At the conclusion of such system and services review session, the City shall issue a report summarizing the discussions and setting forth its findings. The grantee shall submit to the City a plan and schedule for the implementation of any improvements mutually agreed by the City and the grantee. After mutual agreement to such plan and schedule by the City and the grantee, the franchise agreement shall be amended to incorporate the plan and schedule for improvement. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-28; Ord. No. 86-14, § 1)  
Sec. 12-29. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  When not otherwise prescribed in this chapter, all matters herein required to be filed with the City shall be filed with the City Clerk. 
(b)  A grantee shall have no financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any TV or radio sales or repair business, nor shall a grantee or any of such persons accept or receive referral fees or gratuities from any such sales or repair business. Any violation of this subsection, unknown to the grantee, by an employee of a grantee who is not an officer, shall not constitute a breach of this subsection unless the grantee fails to take disciplinary action against any such person upon discovery thereof. 
(c)  Within 180 days following award of franchise or prior to the start of system construction, the grantee will establish and maintain a local business office within 20 miles of the City for the purposes of conducting its local activities. The grantee will also maintain a 24-hour toll-free answering service for service-related problem calls, as well as separate toll-free telephone numbers for the system manager, the sales/marketing department, and service department. A minimum of three lines (which may serve other franchises held by the grantee) shall be maintained for service, and in the event the City determines through subscriber complaints that those are insufficient to meet current demands, grantee agrees to add such additional lines as may be deemed necessary by the City Manager to provide prompt, efficient response to subscriber inquiries. All such telephone numbers indicated in this subsection shall be listed in directories of the telephone company serving the City, and be so operated that complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments may be received at any time, day or night, seven days a week. All complaints shall be acknowledged within 24 hours of receipt. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-29; Ord. No. 86-14, § 1; Ord. No. 88-02, § 1(n))  
Sec. 12-30. - Violations. 
(a)  From and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, it is unlawful for any person to establish, operate or to carry on the business of distributing to any persons in this City any television signals or radio signals by means of a CATV system unless a franchise thereafter has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. 
(b)  From and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, it is unlawful for any person to construct, install, or maintain within any public street in the City, or within any other public property of the City, or within any privately owned area within the City which has not yet become a public street but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on an adopted general plan of arterial highways or on any tentative subdivision may approved by the City, and equipment or facilities for distributing any television signals or radio signals through a CATV system unless a franchise authorizing such use of such street or property or area has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a franchised CATV system within this City for the purpose of enabling himself/herself or others to receive any television signal, radio signal, picture, program or sound, without payment to the owner of the system. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner, to willfully tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires or equipment used for distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or sound. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-31; Ord. No. 86-14, § 1; Ord. No. 88-02, § 1(o))  
Sec. 12-31. - Cable Television and Video Provider Customer Service and Information Act. 
(a)  No person shall violate the terms and provisions of the Cable Television and Video Provider Customer Service and Information Act, Government Code § 53054 et seq. All grantees and any cable television and video provider within the City shall comply with all of the terms and provisions of said Act. In the event of the failure of any grantee or cable television operator or video provider to distribute the annual notice required by Government Code § 53055.1, the City Manager shall give written notice thereof to the operator or provider to comply within 60 days, and upon failure of the operator or provider to so comply, a penalty in the sum of $500.00 for each year in which the notice is not distributed shall be imposed by the City Manager. The penalties shall be due and owing immediately upon notice of its disposition and, in the case of a grantee of the City, may be collected at the same time franchise fees are collected. Nonpayment of the penalty shall be grounds for termination of the franchise. 
(b)  The annual notice as used herein, and as required by said Act, shall be given at least 60 days after the effective date of the ordinance enacting this section and, thereafter, on or about January 1 of each year. The notice given to the City shall be delivered to the City Manager and shall include a verbatim copy of the customer service standards established by each cable television operator or video provider within the City. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-32; Ord. No. 94-02, § 2)  
Sec. 12-32. - Video Customer Service Act. 
No person shall violate the terms and provisions of the Video Customer Service Act, Government Code § 53088 et seq. In the event any person should claim that a video provider, as defined in Section 53088.1 of said Act, is not complying with the terms and provisions of said Act, or any person should have a dispute with the video provider under the provisions of said Act, written notice thereof may be filed with the City Clerk. 
(1)  Any person having a dispute with a video provider or having a complaint that the video provider is not complying with the terms and provisions of said Act shall reduce the complaint or dispute in writing before the City Clerk is required to act thereon. Upon receipt of the written notice, the City Clerk shall, within ten days, make a tentative determination of whether the matter set forth in the notice is within the terms and provisions of said Act. 
(2)  If the City Clerk should determine that the matter set forth in the notice is not within the terms and provisions of said Act within ten days, the City Clerk shall return the written notice to the person providing the same with a written explanation of why the same is not covered under said Act. 
(3)  If the City Clerk determines that the notice appears to be under the terms and provisions of said Act, he or she shall give the video provider written notice of any alleged material breaches of the consumer service standards of said Act and allow the video provider at least 30 days from receipt of the notice to remedy the specified breach. 
(4)  If, in the opinion of the City Manager, or his or her duly authorized representative, the breach is material and not remedied within 30 days, the City Manager or representative shall give the video operator a ten-day written notice of the penalties assessed for the breach as provided in Government Code § 53088.2(r). 
(5)  Pursuant to Government Code § 53088.2(r), the City Manager, or his or her authorized representative, is authorized to impose the penalties therein set forth. The penalties shall not exceed the amounts therein set forth and shall be assessed in accordance with the terms and provisions of Government Code § 53088.2. In the event any grantee should fail to pay the penalty when assessed, on written notice to the grantee, the same may be grounds for the revocation of the franchise. However, any monetary penalty assessed under the provisions of this section, shall be reduced dollar for dollar to the extent any liquidated damages or penalty provision of the franchise documents imposes a monetary obligation upon the video provider for customer service failures, and no other monetary damages may be imposed in such a case. 
(6)  Any person directly affected by any ruling or determination of the City Clerk or the City Manager or his or her representative may, by written notice filed within ten days of receipt of written notice of the decision complained of, appeal the decision to the City Council. The City Clerk shall thereafter schedule a public hearing on the appeal before the City Council within 60 days of the receipt of the appeal. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-33; Ord. No. 94-02, § 3) 
State Law reference— Video Customer Service Act, Government Code § 53088.1 et seq.  
Sec. 12-33. - CATV consumer protection. 
In addition to the provisions of the franchise documents pertaining to consumer protection incorporated herein, the following consumer protection standards are adopted and, where inconsistent with the franchise documents, shall govern: 
(1)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Company means the grantee of the City. 
Customer service representative means the representative of said company. 
Consumer or customer means that person to whom company provides CATV services within the City. 
Systems means the cable television system of the company. 
(2)  Each grantee of the City shall comply with the following consumer standards: 
a.  Require that knowledgeable, qualified company representatives will be available to respond to customer's or PEG channel programmer's telephone inquiries Monday through Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 6:30 p.m. and on Saturday from 9:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. Holidays are excluded. Company's customer service center at the company's main place of business shall also be open during these hours; 
b.  Telephone answering time by a customer service representative, including wait time and the time required to transfer the call, shall not exceed 30 seconds. The number of routine rings shall be limited to four or fewer. This standard shall be met no less than 90 percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis and in accordance to a methodology proposed by company and approved by City; 
c.  Each of the following standards will be met no less than 90 percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis in accordance to methodology proposed by company and approved by City: 
1.  Standard installations will be performed within seven business days after an order has been placed. Standard installations are up to 175 feet from the existing distribution system; 
2.  Excluding those situations reasonably beyond the control of the cable operator, the company will respond to service interruptions, defined as service area outages, promptly and in no event later than three hours if reported during office hours or within 12 hours if reported after office hours. Other service problems will be responded to by the close of business on the next working day of the company; 
3.  The in-home appointment window alternatives for installations and service calls, including converter or remote control replacement, will be: 
(i)  Morning; 
(ii)  Afternoon; or 
(iii)  All day during normal business hours. 
The customer may choose the appointment window most convenient for them. The company shall attempt to respond on same-day basis to service calls for converter and remote repair if the call is received by 3:00 p.m.; 
d.  Company billing statements shall be clear, concise and understandable. The company shall consult with City on any changes to company's statement and will consider City suggestions for modifications; 
e.  In 90 percent of cases, refund checks will be issued within 30 days, but, in no event, later than 45 days following the resolution of the request and the return of the equipment supplied by company if service is terminated; 
f.  Customers will be notified a minimum of 30 days in advance of any rate or channel realignment change, as provided in Government Code § 53088.2(h); 
g.  Company shall provide City upon request with a quarterly report on the number of service interruptions longer than 30 minutes (on subscriber and institutional networks); service requests, complaints and service calls; their breakdown and resolution and comparison on a year-to-date and previous quarter/last-year basis. The report shall be in a format proposed by company and approved by the City; 
h.  Customers and local PEG channel programmers shall be afforded access to company's management structure including the customer service manager and general manager. System management staff will respond to PEG channel programmers and customer complaints or inquiries within one working day of the initial request. Customers will, at least annually, be informed of this option via written notice; 
i.  Company shall file all general customer communications with the City. Company's filing with City shall be at least concurrent with its initial distribution to customers. General customer communications include, but are not limited to, marketing materials, rate increase correspondence, marketing promotions and service contract door knob hangers; 
j.  Company will prepare and submit to the City a policy with respect of procedures for access to subscriber's property; 
k.  If the company personnel do not arrive for installation or service calls within a designated four-hour time frame agreed to by the consumer, the consumer may request and is entitled to receive a $10.00 credit. If the company fails to provide such credit, and the request was made by the consumer within 60 days of the missed appointment, the City may direct the company to issue a $20.00 credit; 
l.  If the company does not mail a check for a refund (including applicable interest) to any consumer disconnecting service with an outstanding credit within 45 days of the date it is ended, and the consumer has returned all company-owned equipment, the consumer may request and is entitled to receive a $10.00 payment. In addition to the initial refund (and applicable interest) due, if the company fails to provide the $10.00 payment and the request was made by the consumer within 60 days after failure to receive the refund, the City may direct the company to provide a $20.00 payment as well as any outstanding refund (and applicable interest) due; 
m.  If the company cannot perform standard installations within seven calendar days of request by a consumer, the consumer may request and is entitled to receive a $10.00 credit. If the company fails to provide the $10.00 credit and the request was made by the consumer within 60 days of the installation request, the City may direct the company to issue a $20.00 credit; 
n.  The company shall provide an automatic credit to all consumers where there is an outage of all channels for a period of 24 consecutive hours or more which affects the entire franchise area, regardless of the cause of the outage. The credit for such an outage shall equal, at a minimum, the value of 1/30 of each customer's monthly bill for the first 24-consecutive-hour period and prorated for each additional four-hour period or portion thereof that the outage continues. The company shall provide an automatic credit to all affected consumers when there is an outage of any premium service for a period of 24 consecutive hours or more which affects the entire franchise area, regardless of the cause of the outage. The credit shall equal, at a minimum, the value of 1/30 of each consumer's monthly bill for the first 24-consecutive-hour period and prorated for each additional four-hour period or portion thereof that the outage continues; 
o.  Upon request of the consumer, the company shall provide a credit to a consumer whenever an outage or outages of one or more hours in a 24-hour period has affected any of the nonpremium channels received by a consumer as part of their cable television service. The credit shall equal the value of 1/30 of each consumer's monthly bill for the outages of four hours or greater duration occurring in a 24-hour period. In the event that a premium channel is affected by the outage, the credit shall equal the value of 1/30 of the consumer's monthly premium rate for each outage of four hours or greater duration occurring in a 24-hour period; 
p.  During hours when phones are staffed, consumer calls to the company shall receive a busy signal no more than three percent of the time or less; 
q.  Consumers will be given at least 30 days' notice of any rate change; 
r.  Consumers will be given at least 30 days' notice of any scrambling of channels or the addition or deletion of channels that are within the company's control. However, descrambling for the purposes of "previewing" a particular channel or channels is not subject to such notice; 
s.  The company shall offer consumers the option to receive an A/B switch at the time of initial cable service installation for no additional installation cost, and shall provide consumers with written information as to how to use such a switch. The company may charge a reasonable price for such switch. Upon consumer request, the company shall provide an A/B switch after the initial installation of cable service. If the consumer requests installation of such a switch (to receive broadcast television without cable hookup), the company may charge reasonable fees for such installation and equipment; 
t.  If, in the opinion of the City Manager, there has been a material violation of the terms and provisions of this section which has not been remedied despite notices to do so or the assessment of fees and fines, a written notice may be given to the company setting forth in detail the nature of the violation and proceedings commenced as provided in the franchise documents for the revocation of the franchise. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-34; Ord. No. 94-02, § 4)  
Sec. 12-34. - Applicability of sections 12-1 through 12-34. 
Sections 12-1 through 12-33, shall apply to any cable system franchise in force prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-35; Ord. No. 2006-02)  
Secs. 12-35—12-56. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CABLE SYSTEM REGULATORY ORDINANCE 
 
Sec. 12-57. - Applicability of sections 12-57 through 12-74. 
Sections 12-57 through 12-74 are hereby enacted to apply to any cable system franchise granted or renewed subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-36; Ord. No. 2006-02)  
Sec. 12-58. - Intent. 
The City Council finds that the development of cable systems has the potential of having great benefit and impact upon the residents of the City. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable systems, the City Council further finds that the public convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers which should be vested in the City or such persons as the City may designate. It is the intent of this chapter and subsequent amendments to provide for and specify the means to attain the best possible cable service to the public and any franchises issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to include this as an integral finding thereof. It is the further intent of this chapter to establish regulatory provisions that permit the City to regulate cable system franchises to the extent permitted by applicable law, including but not limited to the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the Telecommunications Act of 1996, as amended or hereafter amended, applicable Federal Communications Commission rules and regulations and applicable California law. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-37; Ord. No. 2006-02)  
Sec. 12-59. - Short title. 
This article shall constitute the "Cable System Regulatory Ordinance" of the City of La Palma and may be referred to as such. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-38; Ord. No. 2006-02)  
Sec. 12-60. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
Affiliate or affiliated person means each person who falls into one or more of the following categories: 
(1)  Each person having, directly or indirectly a controlling interest in grantee; 
(2)  Each person in which grantee has, directly or indirectly a controlling interest; 
(3)  Each officer, director, general partner, limited partner holding an interest of 35 percent or more, joint venturer, or joint venture partner in grantee's cable system in the City; and 
(4)  Each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common control with grantee; 
provided that the term "affiliated person" excludes the grantor, any limited partner holding an interest of less than 35 percent in the grantee, or any creditor of grantee, solely by virtue of its status of creditor, and which is not otherwise an affiliated person by reason of owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being under common ownership, common management, or common control with grantee. The term "controlling interest" shall have the same meaning as "control," as defined in section 12-61(g)(2). 
Applicable law means all lawfully enacted federal, State and local laws, ordinances, codes, rules, regulations, orders and any amendments or successors thereto. 
Basic cable service means any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals. 
Cable operator means any person or group of persons who: 
(1)  Provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system; or 
(2)  Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such cable system. 
Cable service means: 
(1)  The one-way transmission to subscribers of: 
a.  Video programming; or 
b.  Other programming service; and 
(2)  Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. 
Cable system or system. 
(1)  The term "cable system" or "system" means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community. 
(2)  The term "cable system" or "system" does not include: 
a.  A facility that serves only to retransmit television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; 
b.  A facility that serves subscribers without using any public rights-of-way; 
c.  A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for the purposes of 47 USC 541) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; 
d.  An open video system that complies with Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 USC 573) as amended; or 
e.  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system. 
Channel or cable channel means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system which is capable of delivering a standard video signal as defined by the Federal Communications Commission. 
City Manager means the City Manager of the City of La Palma, or his or her designee. 
Council or City Council means the City Council of the City of La Palma. 
Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the Council, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not supersede the requirement to obtain any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting business within the City as required by the other ordinances and laws of the City. 
Franchise agreement means a franchise grant ordinance or a contractual agreement, containing the specific provisions of the franchise granted, including references, specifications, requirements and other related matters. 
Franchise fee. 
(1)  The term "franchise fee" means any fee or assessment of any kind imposed by the City on a grantee or affiliated person as compensation for the grantee's use of the public rights-of-way. 
(2)  The term "franchise fee" does not include: 
a.  Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services, but not including a tax, fee or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or cable subscribers); 
b.  Capital costs which are required by the franchise to be incurred by grantee for public, educational, or governmental access facilities; 
c.  Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or 
d.  Any fee imposed under Title 17, United States Code. 
Grantee or franchisee means any person receiving a franchise pursuant to this chapter and under the granting franchise ordinance or agreement, and its lawful successor, transferee or assignee. 
Grantor or City means the City of La Palma as represented by the Council or such representative as the Council may designate to act on cable matters on its behalf. 
Gross annual revenue or gross annual receipts or gross receipts. 
(1)  The term "gross annual revenue" or "gross annual receipts" or "gross receipts" means all revenue which is received, directly or indirectly, by grantee and by each affiliated person from or in connection with the distribution of any cable service, and any other service which may, under now or then applicable federal law, shall be included in the revenue base definition for the purpose of calculating and collecting the maximum allowable franchise fee for operation of the system whether or not authorized by a franchise. It is intended that all revenue collected by the grantee or any affiliated person from the provision of cable service over the system, whether or not authorized by the franchise, shall be included in this definition. 
(2)  The term "gross annual revenue" also specifically includes any revenue received, as reasonably determined from time to time by the grantor, through any means which is intended to have the effect of avoiding the payment of compensation that would otherwise be paid to the grantor for the franchise granted. 
(3)  The term "gross annual revenue" does not include: 
a.  The revenue of any person to the extent that said revenue is also included in the gross annual revenue of grantee; 
b.  Taxes imposed by law on subscribers which grantee is obligated to collect; 
c.  Amounts which must be excluded pursuant to applicable law. 
If grantee, or any affiliated person, offers to individual subscribers cable services subject to the franchise fee that are bundled or combined with non-cable services that are not subject to the franchise fee, grantee shall not structure the pricing of any bundled or combined services so as to cause a reduction in the gross annual revenue against which the grantor may lawfully impose the franchise fee or any otherwise lawful tax. Additionally, the revenue from those bundled or combined services must be allocated on the basis of proportionality so that the percentage that the price for all bundled services is discounted from the established retail rates for the individual services, as those rates are advertised by grantee in its marketing materials or published rate cards, will be proportionately prorated across all services in the bundled package. 
Installation means the connection of the system to subscribers' terminals and the provision of service. 
Normal operating conditions means those service conditions which are within the control of grantee. Those conditions which are not within the control of the grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system. 
Person means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation, proprietorship or governmental entity. 
Prime or prime rate means the base rate on corporate loans posted by at least 75 percent of the nation's 30 largest banks, which base rate is published in the Money Rates column of the Wall Street Journal on the date nearest to the applicable due date of a payment obligation of the grantee that is subject to an interest charge determined, in whole or in part, by reference to the prime rate. 
Public, educational or government access facilities or PEG access facilities means the total of the following: 
(1)  Channel capacity designated for public, educational, or government use; and 
(2)  Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity. 
Section means any section, subsection or provision of this chapter. 
Service area or franchise area means the entire geographic area within the municipal boundaries of the City as it is now constituted or may in the future be constituted, unless otherwise specified in the franchise. 
Service tier means a category of cable service or other services provided by a cable operator and for which a separate rate is charged. 
State means the State of California. 
Street or public way or public rights-of-way means each of the following which have been dedicated to the public or are hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by others and located within the service area: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way and similar public property. 
Subscriber or customer or consumer means any person who or which elects to subscribe to, for any purpose, cable service provided by the grantee by means of or in connection with the cable system, and who pays the charges therefor. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-39; Ord. No. 2006-02)  
Sec. 12-61. - Franchise terms and conditions. 
(a)  Franchise purposes. A franchise granted by the City under the provisions of this chapter shall encompass the following purposes: 
(1)  To permit the grantee to engage in the business of providing cable service to subscribers within the designated service area; 
(2)  To identify and specify those conditions, definitions, itemizations, specifications and other particulars of the franchise agreement between the grantor and grantee; 
(3)  To identify and authorize the grantee to erect, install, construct, repair, rebuild, reconstruct, replace, maintain, and retain, cable lines, related electronic equipment, supporting structures, appurtenances, and other property in connection with the operation of the cable system in, on, over, under, upon, along and across streets or other public places within the designated service area; 
(4)  To permit the grantee to maintain and operate said franchise properties for the origination, reception, transmission, amplification, and distribution of television and radio signals and for the delivery of cable services; 
(5)  To set forth the obligations of the grantee under the franchise. 
(b)  Franchise required. After the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or operate a cable system in the City within any public way without a properly granted franchise awarded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(1)  Any person who violates this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $5,000.00, or by imprisonment in the County jail for a term not to exceed 12 months, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(2)  In addition to subsection (b)(1) of this section, failure to obtain a franchise as required may result in any or all of the following: 
a.  Forfeiture of the person's facilities located in the public right-of-way; 
b.  The removal at the person's expense any facilities from the public rights-of-way; or 
c.  Damage awards. 
(c)  Term of the franchise. 
(1)  A franchise granted hereunder shall be for a term established in the franchise agreement, commencing on the grantor's adoption of an ordinance or resolution authorizing the franchise. 
(2)  A franchise granted hereunder may be renewed upon application by the grantee pursuant to the provisions of applicable law. 
(d)  Franchise territory. Any franchise shall be valid within all the municipal limits of the City, and within any area added to the City during the term of the franchise, unless otherwise specified in the franchise agreement. 
(e)  Federal or State jurisdiction. This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable law, and shall apply to all franchises granted or renewed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived to the extent permitted by applicable law. 
(f)  Applicable law; police power. 
(1)  Except as specified in any franchise, the grantee shall be subject to all applicable law. 
(2)  The City retains every power and right that the City has under applicable law. 
(3)  Nothing in any franchise shall be deemed to waive any of the City's governmental rights or police powers. 
(g)  Franchise nontransferable. 
(1)  The grantee shall not sell, transfer, assign or dispose of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, contract, consolidation or otherwise (collectively "transfer"), the franchise or any of the rights or privileges therein granted, or the cable system, without the prior written consent of the Council. The granting of consent for a transfer in one instance will not render unnecessary approval of any subsequent transfer. 
(2)  The requirements of subsection (g)(1) of this section shall apply to any change in control of grantee. The word "control," as used herein, includes ownership interest of 35 percent or more, and actual working control in whatever manner exercised. In the event that grantee is a corporation, prior consent of the Council shall be required where ownership or control of more than 35 percent of the ownership or voting stock of the grantee, or grantee's immediate, intermediate or ultimate parent is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom already own or control the voting stock of the grantee as of the effective date of the franchise, singularly or collectively. 
(3)  The grantee shall notify the grantor in writing of any foreclosure or any other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the franchise property of the grantee or upon the termination of any lease or interest covering all or a substantial part of said franchise property. Such notification shall be considered by the grantor as notice that a change in control or ownership of the franchise has taken place and the provisions under this section governing the consent of the grantor to such change in control or ownership shall apply. 
(4)  The grantee shall promptly notify the grantor of any proposed transfer. If any transfer should take place without prior notice to the grantor, grantee shall promptly notify the grantor that such a transfer has occurred. At least 120 calendar days before the contemplated effective date of a transfer, grantee will submit to the grantor application (hereinafter "application") for approving the transfer. Such application will provide the required complete information on the proposed transaction. 
(5)  The following information must be included in the application, provided that grantee is not required to duplicate information that it submits to the grantor to comply with its obligations under applicable law. No application shall be considered complete until all required information is received by the grantor. 
a.  All information and forms required under applicable law, including Federal Communications Commission Form 394 or equivalent; 
b.  All information required in this section for franchise grants, renewals, modifications or transfers; 
c.  A detailed statement of the corporate or other business entity organization and management structure of the proposed transferee, together with an explanation of how decisions regarding the cable system will be made if the proposed transaction is approved; 
d.  Any contracts or other documents that relate to the proposed transaction, including unredacted copies of all documents, schedules, exhibits or the like referred to therein; 
e.  Any shareholder reports or filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission that discuss the transaction; 
f.  Complete information regarding any potential impact of the transfer on subscriber rates and services; 
g.  A summary of the proposed transferee's plans for at least the next five years regarding line extension, plant and equipment upgrades, channel capacity, maintenance, expansion or elimination of services, customer service and any other changes affecting or enhancing the performance of the cable system; and 
h.  Legal, technical and financial qualifications of the prospective transferee. 
(6)  The grantor may require grantee, or any prospective transferee, to provide additional information as it may deem necessary to determine whether the transfer is in the public interest and should be approved, denied or conditioned. The grantee and any prospective transferees shall assist the grantor in any such inquiry and provide information requested. Failure to do so may result in the request for transfer being denied. 
(7)  In determining whether to grant, deny or grant subject to conditions an application for a transfer of a franchise, the grantor's consideration may include, but is not necessarily limited to: 
a.  The legal, financial and technical qualifications of the transferee to operate the cable system; 
b.  Any potential impact of the transfer on subscriber rates or services; 
c.  Whether the incumbent grantee is in compliance with its franchise and applicable law and, if not, the proposed transferee's written commitment to cure such noncompliance; 
d.  Whether the transferee owns or controls any other cable system in the service area and whether operation by the transferee may eliminate or reduce competition in the delivery of the cable service in the service area; and 
e.  Whether operation by the transferee or approval of the transfer would adversely affect subscribers, the public or the grantor's interest in the cable system and/or franchise. 
(8)  Any transfer without the grantor's prior written approval constitutes a material breach of a franchise and will make a franchise subject to revocation and to any other remedies available under the franchise or applicable law, except where a request for approval or sale is subject to a deadline for action under 47 USC 537 and the grantor fails to act by the time required under 47 USC 537. 
(9)  The grantor shall not approve a transfer request unless the transferee agrees in writing that it will abide by and accept all terms of the cable franchise grant and applicable law and that the transferee will assume the obligations, liabilities and responsibility for all acts and omissions of the previous grantee under the franchise grant and applicable law for all purposes, including renewal, unless the grantor, in its sole discretion, expressly waives this requirement in whole or in part. 
(10)  Any submission of an application for transfer of a franchise shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable franchise processing fee in the amount of $5,000.00 per proposed transfer. Upon transfer, grantee shall reimburse the grantor for the grantor's processing and review expenses in connection with the transfer of the franchise including, without limitation, costs of administrative review, financial, legal and technical evaluation of the proposed transferee, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by such experts), notice and publication costs and document preparation expenses. Any such reimbursement shall not be charged against any franchise fee due to the grantor during the term of the franchise. 
(h)  Geographical coverage. 
(1)  The grantee shall design, construct and maintain the cable system to pass every residential dwelling unit in the service area, subject to any service area line extension requirements of the franchise agreement. 
(2)  After service has been established by activating trunk and/or distribution cables for any service area, grantee shall provide service to any requesting subscriber within that service area within 30 days from the date of request, provided that the grantee is able to secure all rights-of-way, permits and landlord agreements necessary to extend service to such subscriber within such 30-day period on reasonable terms and conditions. 
(i)  Nonexclusive franchise. Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be nonexclusive. The grantor specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a cable system, as it deems appropriate, subject to applicable law. 
(j)  Multiple franchises. 
(1)  The grantor may grant any number of franchises subject to applicable law. The grantor may limit the number of franchises granted, based upon, but not necessarily limited to, the requirements of applicable law and specific local considerations, such as: 
a.  The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate multiple cables in addition to the cables, conduits and pipes of the utility systems, such as electrical power, telephone, gas and sewerage; 
b.  The benefits that may accrue to subscribers as a result of cable system competition, such as lower rates and improved service; 
c.  The disadvantages that may result from cable system competition, such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on residents' property, and the disruption arising from numerous excavations of the public rights-of-way. 
(2)  The grantor may require that any new entrant, nonincumbent grantee be responsible for its own underground trenching and the costs associated therewith, if, in the grantor's opinion, the public rights-of-way in any particular area cannot feasibly accommodate additional cables. 
(k)  Franchise modification. The grantee may be required to pay any costs incurred by the grantor in processing a grantee request for franchise modification. Upon written request from the grantee, the grantor shall provide grantee with an estimate of the total processing costs prior to entering into the review of the request. Such costs shall be paid by the grantee prior to final consideration of the request by the grantor. 
(l)  Contents of franchise agreements. If there is any conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of a franchise agreement authorized by the City Council and provisions of this chapter as of the effective date of the franchise agreement, the provisions of this chapter shall control except where a provision of the franchise agreement expressly states otherwise. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-40; Ord. No. 2006-02)  
Sec. 12-62. - Franchise applications and renewal. 
(a)  Filing of applications. Any person desiring an initial franchise for a cable system shall file an application with the City. A nonrefundable initial application fee established by resolution of the City shall accompany the initial franchise application to cover all validly documented costs associated with processing and reviewing the application, including, without limitation, costs of administrative review, financial, legal and technical evaluation of the applicant, notice and publication requirements with respect to the consideration of the application and document preparation expenses. In the event such validly documented costs exceed the application fee, the selected applicant shall pay the difference to the City within 30 days following receipt of an itemized statement of such costs. 
(b)  Applications; contents. An application for an initial franchise for a cable system shall contain, where applicable: 
(1)  The names and addresses of persons authorized to act on behalf of the applicant with respect to the application; 
(2)  The name and address of the applicant and identification of applicant's ownership and control, including the names and addresses of the ten largest holders of an ownership interest in the applicant and all persons in the applicant's direct ownership chain; the names and addresses of all persons owning ten percent or more in the applicant and in persons in the applicant's direct ownership chain; the persons controlling the applicant and persons in the applicant's direct ownership chain; and all of applicant's officers and directors and persons in the applicant's direct ownership chain; 
(3)  A demonstration of the applicant's technical ability to construct and/or operate the proposed cable system, including identification of key personnel; 
(4)  A demonstration of the applicant's legal qualifications to construct and/or operate the proposed cable system; 
(5)  A statement prepared by an independent certified public accountant regarding the applicant's financial ability to complete the construction and operation of its proposed cable system; 
(6)  A description of the applicant's prior experience in cable system ownership, construction, and operation; 
(7)  Identification of California cities and counties where the applicant or its principals own, or have an interest in, a cable franchise. If an applicant does not have a cable franchise in California, it will provide the information for its operations in other States; 
(8)  Identification of the area of the City to be served by the proposed cable system, including a description of the boundaries of the proposed service area; 
(9)  A detailed description of the physical facilities proposed, including channel capacity, technical design, performance characteristics, headend, and PEG access facilities; 
(10)  A plan for constructing the proposed cable system, including estimated plant mileage and location; proposed construction schedule; a description, where appropriate, of how services will be converted from existing facilities to new facilities; 
(11)  The proposed rate structure, including projected charges for each service tier, installation, converters, and all other proposed equipment or services; 
(12)  A demonstration of how the applicant will meet the community's future cable-related needs and interests, including descriptions of the capacity, facilities, and support for public, educational, and governmental use of the cable system (including institutional networks); 
(13)  Pro forma financial projections for a minimum of five years for the proposed cable franchise term, including a statement of projected income and a schedule of planned capital additions, with all significant assumptions explained in notes or supporting schedules; 
(14)  If the applicant proposes to provide cable service to an area already served by an existing franchisee, the ability of public rights-of-way and other property that would be used by the applicant to accommodate an additional system; 
(15)  Any other information as may be necessary to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of applicable law; and 
(16)  An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or its authorized officer certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the application, acknowledging the enforceability of application commitments, and certifying that the application meets all requirements of applicable law. 
(c)  Consideration of initial applications. 
(1)  Upon receipt of any application for an initial franchise, the City Manager shall prepare a report and make recommendations respecting such application to the Council. 
(2)  A public hearing shall be set prior to any initial franchise grant, at a time and date approved by the Council. Within 60 days after the close of the hearing, the Council shall make a decision based upon the evidence received at the hearing as to whether or not the initial franchise should be granted, and, if granted, subject to what conditions. The Council may grant one or more franchises, or may decline to grant any franchise. 
(d)  Franchise renewal. Franchise renewals shall be in accordance with applicable law. The grantor and the grantee, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal negotiations at any time during the term of the franchise. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-41; Ord. No. 2006-02)  
Sec. 12-63. - Minimum consumer protection and service standards. 
(a)  Operational standards. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in the franchise agreement, grantee shall meet or exceed the following consumer protection and service standards under normal operating conditions, which standards may be modified by action of the City Council from time to time: 
a.  Sufficient toll-free telephone line capacity during normal business hours to ensure that telephone answer time by a customer service representative, including wait time, shall not exceed 30 seconds; and callers needing to be transferred shall not be required to wait more than 30 seconds before being connected to a service representative. Under normal operating conditions, a caller shall receive a busy signal less than three percent of the time. The grantee's customer service telephone numbers shall be listed in the telephone directories of all telephone service providers serving the City of La Palma. 
b.  Emergency toll-free telephone line capacity on a 24-hour basis, including weekends and holidays. After normal business hours, the telephone calls may be answered by a service or an automated response system, including an answering machine and calls received after normal business hours by such service or automated response system must be responded to by a trained company representative by the next business day. During periods when an answering device, including, but not limited to voicemail, is used, grantee shall provide personnel who shall contact the answering device or machine, at a minimum, every four hours to check on requests for service or complaints. 
c.  A business and service and payment office conveniently located to subscribers open during normal business hours where grantee provides adequate staffing to accept subscriber payments and the return or exchange of subscriber equipment. "Conveniently located" shall either be within the City, or at such different location as may be detailed in grantee's franchise agreement. Normal business hours shall include some evening hours, at least one night per week, and/or some weekend hours, but in no case less than 48 hours per week. The grantee may petition the grantor to reduce its business hours if the extended hours are not justified by subscriber demand, and the grantor may not unreasonably deny the petition. 
d.  An emergency system maintenance and repair staff, capable of responding to and repairing major system malfunction on a 24-hour per day basis. 
e.  An installation staff, capable of installing service to any subscriber requiring a standard installation within seven days after receipt of a request, in all areas where trunk and feeder cable have been activated. "Standard installations" shall be those that are located up to 125 feet from the existing distribution system, unless otherwise defined in any franchise agreement. 
f.  The grantee shall schedule, within a specified four-hour time period during normal business hours, all appointments with subscribers for installation of service, service calls and other activities at the subscriber location. The grantee may schedule installation and service calls outside of normal business hours for the express convenience of the customer. The grantee shall not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. If a grantee representative is running late for an appointment with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the customer shall be contacted and the appointment rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is mutually agreeable to the grantee and the customer. 
(2)  Under normal operating conditions, the standards of subsections (a)(1)a to (a)(1)b of this section shall be met not less than 90 percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis. For the purposes of this section, the term "quarterly" shall mean any consecutive three-calendar-month period and is not necessarily coincident with a calendar quarter. The standards of subsections (a)(1)d through (a)(1)f of this section shall be met not less than 95 percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis. 
(3)  The grantee shall not be required to acquire equipment or perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards above unless an historical record of complaints indicates a clear failure to comply. 
(4)  The grantee shall offer and fully describe to those wishing to become a subscriber and existing subscribers who have experienced a missed appointment (where the missed appointment was not the subscriber's fault) that the potential or existing subscriber may choose from at least the following options: 
a.  Installation or service call free of charge, if the appointment was for an installation or service call for which a fee was to be charged; 
b.  An opportunity to elect remedies under California Civil Code § 1722, if applicable. 
(b)  Service standards. 
(1)  The grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Scheduled interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during a period of minimum use of the cable system, preferably between 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. local time. 
(2)  The grantee shall maintain a repair force of technicians normally capable of responding to subscriber requests for service within the following time frames: 
a.  For a system outage: Within two hours, including weekends, of receiving subscriber calls or requests for service which by number identify a system outage of sound or picture of one or more channels, affecting at least ten percent of the subscribers of the system. 
b.  For an isolated outage: Within 24 hours, including weekends, of receiving requests for service identifying an isolated outage of sound or picture for one or more channels that affects five or more subscribers. On weekends, an outage affecting fewer than five subscribers shall result in a service call no later than the next business day. 
c.  For inferior signal quality: Within two business days of receiving a request for service identifying a problem concerning picture or sound quality. 
(3)  The grantee shall be deemed to have responded to a request for service under the provisions of this section when a technician arrives at the service location and begins work on the problem. In the case of a subscriber not being home when the technician arrives, the technician shall leave written notification of arrival. 
(4)  The grantee shall not charge for the repair or replacement of defective or malfunctioning equipment provided by grantee to subscribers, unless the defect was caused by the subscriber, or the equipment owned by the subscriber requires repair or replacement. 
(5)  With regard to subscribers with mobility-limiting disabilities, upon subscriber request, each grantee shall arrange for pickup and/or replacement of converters or other grantee equipment at the subscriber's address or by a satisfactory equivalent (such as providing postage-prepaid mailer). 
(6)  Unless excused, grantee shall determine the nature of the problem resulting in a request for service within two business days of beginning work and resolve all cable system related problems within five business days unless technically infeasible. 
(c)  Billing and information standards. 
(1)  A franchisee's billing statement must be clear, concise, and understandable; must itemize each category of service and equipment provided to the subscriber; and must state clearly the charges therefor. 
(2)  A grantee's billing statement must show a specific payment due date not earlier than the later of: 
a.  Fifteen days after the date the billing statement is mailed; or 
b.  The tenth day of the service period for which the bill is rendered. 
(3)  A late fee or administrative fee (collectively referred to below as a "late fee") may not be imposed for payments earlier than 27 days after the due date specified in the bill. 
a.  A late fee may not be imposed unless the subscriber is provided written notice at least ten days before the date the fee is imposed that a fee will be imposed, the date the fee will be imposed and the amount of the fee that will be imposed if the delinquency is not paid. A late fee may not be imposed unless the outstanding balance exceeds $10.00. 
b.  Subscribers shall not be charged a late fee or otherwise penalized for any failure by a grantee, including failure to timely or correctly bill the subscriber, or failure to properly credit the subscriber for a payment timely made. Payments shall be considered timely if received by the due date. 
c.  A grantee's bill must permit a subscriber to remit payment by mail or in person at the grantee's local office. 
(4)  In case of a billing dispute, the grantee shall respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days. Pending resolution of the billing dispute, grantee shall exercise care to ensure that no termination or late charge notices are issued for the disputed portions of the bill. 
(5)  Credits or refunds shall automatically be provided by grantee on a pro rata basis to any subscribers affected by interruption of service for more than three hours due to actions or outages under the control of the grantee, exclusive of scheduled repairs, maintenance or franchise-required construction that grantee has provided advance written notice of to subscribers. In cases where advance written notice is provided to subscribers, the time period detailed in said notice shall not exceed six hours in any 24-hour period. In cases where said notice has been given to subscribers and the service interruption exceeds the period detailed in said notice, the provisions of this section shall apply. 
(6)  In the event grantee has improperly or inadvertently disconnected cable services to a subscriber, grantee shall provide for restoration without charge to subscriber as soon as possible, but no later than within two days of discovery of disconnection. The grantee shall credit or provide refunds to any subscriber improperly or inadvertently disconnected from receiving cable services for the period of time without cable service. 
(7)  All credits or refunds for service shall be issued no later than the customer's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. For subscribers terminating service, refunds shall be issued promptly, but no later than 30 days after the return of any grantee-supplied equipment. 
(8)  The grantee shall provide written information on each of the following areas: 
a.  At the time of the installation of service; 
b.  At least annually to all subscribers; and 
c.  At any time upon request: 
1.  Products and services offered; 
2.  Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services; 
3.  Installation and service maintenance policies; 
4.  Instructions on how to use the cable service; 
5.  Channel positions of programming carried on the system; and 
6.  Billing and complaint procedures, including the time to pay outstanding bills, the grounds for termination of service, the process for resolving billing disputes, and the address and telephone number of the grantor's office designated for dealing with cable-related issues. 
(9)  Upon the initial provision of cable service to any subscriber, grantee shall prorate the first invoice for cable service to reflect, to the extent appropriate, any partial billing period due to the introduction of service at a time other than the initiation of a billing cycle. 
(10)  Upon the initial provision of cable service to any subscriber, grantee shall provide a written notice to the subscriber containing substantially the following information: 
"Subscriber understands that the Company uses public rights-of-way and other facilities of the City of La Palma in providing service and that this continued use cannot be guaranteed. Subscriber agrees not to make any claims against the City of La Palma or its officers or employees in the event that such use is denied for any reason, and Company is unable, in its discretion, to provide service over alternate routes." 
(11)  Subscribers and the grantor shall be notified of any changes in rates, programming services or channel positions as soon as possible in writing and in accordance with applicable law. Notice must be given to subscribers and the grantor a minimum of 30 days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the grantee. In addition, grantee shall notify subscribers and the grantor 30 days in advance of any significant changes in the information required in subsection (c)(8) of this section. 
(d)  Verification of compliance with standards. 
(1)  Upon ten days' prior written notice, grantee shall respond to a request for information made by the grantor regarding grantee's compliance with any or all of the standards required in subsections (a) through (c) of this section. The grantee shall provide sufficient documentation related solely to the franchise area to permit the grantor to verify grantee's compliance within the franchise area. 
(2)  A repeated and verifiable pattern of noncompliance with the consumer protection standards of subsections (a) through (c) of this section, after grantee's receipt of due notice and not less than a ten-day opportunity to cure, shall be deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement. 
(3)  The grantor, pursuant to subsection (a)(8) of this section, may require grantee to acquire equipment to determine compliance with the telephone answering standards of this section on a franchise-by-franchise basis. Should grantee have its own telephone equipment which can report on telephone line usage, the grantee, upon written request from the grantor, shall submit such report from its own system in order to verify compliance with the telephone answering standards of this section. 
(4)  The grantee shall take necessary steps to ensure that adequate telephone lines and/or staffing are available to permit grantee to satisfy its obligations under this chapter and the franchise. Consideration shall be given for periods of promotional activities or outages. The monthly billing period shall be considered as a normal, daily activity for purposes of determining the availability of adequate telephone lines and/or staffing. 
(e)  Subscriber complaints and disputes. 
(1)  The grantee shall establish written procedures for receiving, acting upon and resolving subscriber complaints without intervention by the grantor. The written procedures shall prescribe the manner in which a subscriber may submit a complaint either orally or in writing, specifying the subscriber's grounds for dissatisfaction. The grantee shall file a copy of these procedures with the grantor. The written procedures shall include a requirement that grantee respond to any written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days of receipt. 
(2)  Upon prior written request, the grantor shall have the right to review grantee's response to any subscriber complaints in order to determine grantee's compliance with the franchise requirements, subject to the subscriber's right to privacy. 
(3)  Subject to applicable law, it shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving cable service insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. In the event that the grantee elects to rebuild, modify, or sell the system, or the grantor gives notice of intent to terminate or not to renew the franchise, the grantee shall act so as to ensure that all subscribers receive cable service so long as the franchise remains in force. 
(4)  In the event of a change of control of grantee, or in the event a new operator acquires the system, the original grantee shall cooperate with the grantor, new grantee or operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During such period, grantee shall be entitled to the revenues for any period during which it operates the system. 
(5)  The grantee response to subscriber complaints, as well as complaints made by subscribers to the grantor and provided by the grantor to grantee, shall be initiated within one business day of receipt by the grantor. The resolution of subscriber complaints shall be effected by grantee not later than three business days after receipt of the complaint, or a longer period if such complaint cannot reasonably be resolved within three business days. Should a grantee supervisor not be available when requested by a subscriber, a supervisor shall respond to the subscriber's complaint at the earliest possible time, and in no event later than the end of the next business day. For complaints received by the grantor and provided by the grantor to grantee, grantee shall notify the grantor of grantee's progress in responding to, and resolving, said complaints. 
(f)  Truth in advertising. 
(1)  Each grantee shall take appropriate steps to ensure that all written promotional materials, announcements, and advertising of cable service to subscribers and the general public, where price information is listed in any manner, clearly and accurately discloses price terms. In the case of telephone orders, a grantee will take appropriate steps to ensure that price terms are clearly and accurately disclosed to potential customers in advance of taking the order. 
(2)  Each grantee will maintain a file available for public inspection containing all notices provided to subscribers under these customer service standards, as well as all promotional offers made to subscribers. The notices and offers will be kept in the file for at least one year from the date of such notice or promotional offer. 
(g)  Other requirements. 
(1)  In the event grantee fails to operate the system for seven consecutive days other than for reasons beyond the control of grantee, without prior approval or subsequent excuse of the grantor, the grantor may, at its sole option, operate the system or designate an operator until such time as grantee restores service under conditions acceptable to the grantor or a permanent operator is selected. If the grantor should fulfill this obligation for the grantee, then during such period as the grantor fulfills such obligation, the grantor shall be entitled to collect all revenues from the system, and the grantee shall reimburse the grantor for all costs or damages in excess of the revenues collected by the grantor that are the result of grantee's failure to perform. 
(2)  All officers, agents or employees of grantee or its contractors or subcontractors who, in the normal course of work come into contact with members of the public or who require entry onto subscribers' premises shall carry a company issued photo-identification card. Every vehicle of the grantee or its major subcontractors shall be clearly identified as working for grantee. 
(3)  Additional service standards and standards governing consumer protection and response by grantee to subscriber complaints not otherwise provided for in this chapter may be established in the franchise agreement or by separate ordinance as permitted by applicable law. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-42; Ord. No. 2006-02)  
Sec. 12-64. - Franchise fee and financial requirements. 
(a)  Franchise fee. 
(1)  Following the issuance and acceptance of the franchise, the grantee shall pay to the grantor a franchise fee on gross annual cable service revenues in the amount and at the times set forth in the franchise agreement. 
(2)  The grantor, on an annual basis, shall be furnished a statement within 120 days of the close of the calendar year, either audited and certified by an independent certified public accountant or certified by an officer or authorized financial representative of the grantee, reflecting the total amounts of gross revenues and all payments, deductions and computations for the period covered by the payment. Upon 30 days' prior written notice, the grantor shall have the right to conduct an independent financial audit of grantee's gross annual cable service revenue and franchise fee records for the preceding four-year-period, and if such audit indicates a franchise fee underpayment of three percent or more, the grantee shall assume all costs of such audit. 
(3)  No acceptance of any payment by the grantor shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the grantor may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this section or for the performance of any other obligation of the grantee. 
(4)  In the event that any franchise fee payment or payment of any adjustment to any franchise fee is not made on or before the dates specified in the franchise agreement, unless otherwise excused, grantee shall pay: 
a.  An interest charge, computed from such due date, at an annual rate equal to the prevailing commercial prime interest rate in effect upon the due date, plus one percentage point; and 
b.  If the payment is late by 30 days or more, a sum of money equal to five percent of the amount due in order to defray those additional expenses and costs incurred by the grantor due to grantee's delinquent payment. 
(5)  Franchise fee payments shall be made in accordance with the schedule indicated in the franchise agreement. 
(b)  Security. 
(1)  The grantor may require grantee to provide security, in an amount and form established in the franchise agreement. The amount of the security shall be established based on the extent of the grantee's obligations under the terms of the franchise or past performance. 
(2)  The security shall be available to the grantor to satisfy all claims, liens and/or taxes due the grantor from grantee which arise by reason of construction, operation, or maintenance of the system, and to satisfy any actual or liquidated damages arising out of a material breach of the franchise agreement, subject to the procedures and amounts designated in the franchise agreement. 
(3)  If the security is drawn upon by the grantor in accordance with the procedures established in this section and the franchise agreement, grantee shall cause the security to be replenished to the original amount no later than 30 days after receiving written confirmation from the issuer where such security is maintained that the grantor has made a draw against the security. Failure to replenish the security shall be deemed a material breach of the franchise. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-43; Ord. No. 2006-02)  
Sec. 12-65. - Construction requirements. 
(a)  System construction. 
(1)  The grantee shall not construct any cable system facilities until grantee has secured the necessary permits from the grantor, or other responsible public agencies. The grantee shall be subject to all permit and bonding requirements applicable to contractors working within the public rights-of-way. No provision of this chapter or the franchise agreement shall be deemed a waiver of the obligation of a grantee to pay the grantor for the issuance of a permit. 
(2)  Prior to performing any work in the public right-of-way, grantee shall give appropriate notice to the "Underground Service Alert" (USA), or any similar type service provider as designated by the grantor. 
(3)  In those areas of the City where transmission lines or distribution facilities of all public utilities providing telephone and electric power service are underground, the grantee likewise shall construct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities underground. 
(4)  In those areas of the City where the grantee's cables are located on the aboveground transmission or distribution facilities of the public and/or municipal utility providing telephone or electric power service, and in the event that the facilities of both the telephone and electric power utilities subsequently are placed underground, then the grantee likewise shall reconstruct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities underground, at grantee's sole cost. Certain of grantee's equipment, such as pedestals, amplifiers and power supplies, which normally are placed above ground, may continue to remain in aboveground enclosures, unless otherwise required by the City. 
(5)  Any changes in or extensions of any poles, anchors, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals or other fixtures and equipment (herein referred to as "structures"), or the construction of any additional structures, in, upon, along, across, under or over the streets, alleys and public ways shall be made under the direction of Public Works Director or a designee, who shall, if the proposed change, extension or construction conforms to the provisions hereof, issue written permits therefor. The height above public thoroughfares of all aerial wires shall conform to the requirements of the California regulatory body having jurisdiction thereof. 
a.  All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by the grantee shall be located so as not to interfere with the proper use of the public rights-of-way, and to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said public rights-of-way, and not to materially interfere with existing public and municipal utility installations. 
b.  In the event that any property or improvement of the grantor in the public rights-of-way is disturbed or damaged by the grantee or any of its contractors, agents or employees in connection with undertaking any and all work pursuant to the rights granted to the grantee pursuant to this chapter and the franchise agreement, the grantee shall promptly, at the grantee's sole cost and expense, restore to the grantor's satisfaction said property or improvement which was so disturbed or damaged. If such property or improvement shall within three years (or in the case of street improvement, until the street is resurfaced if resurfaced prior to the expiration of the three years) of the date the restoration was completed, become uneven, unsettled or otherwise require additional restorative work, repair or replacement because of the initial disturbance or damage to the property by the grantee, then the grantee, as soon as reasonably possible, shall, promptly upon receipt of written notice from the grantor and at the grantee's sole cost and expense, restore to the grantor's satisfaction said property or improvement which was disturbed or damaged. Any such restoration by the grantee shall be made in accordance with such materials and specifications as may, from time to time, be established by the grantor. 
c.  If emergency work on the system in the public right-of-way is required, the grantee shall, with all due diligence, seek to obtain any and all required permits, licenses and authorizations within three working days after commencing such emergency work. 
d.  There shall be no obstruction of the public rights-of-way by the grantee in connection with any of the work provided for herein. The grantee shall maintain any barriers, signs and warning signals during any work performed on or about the public rights-of-way or adjacent thereto as may be necessary to reasonably avoid injury or damage to life and property. 
e.  If the City Manager determines that the grantee has created an unsafe condition in the public right-of-way or adjacent thereto, the City Manager shall have the authority to issue a work stoppage order restricting any work by grantee in the public rights-of-way until the unsafe condition has been corrected to the City's reasonable satisfaction. In cases where unsafe conditions are found by the City Manager, the grantor shall correct the condition as soon as possible unless otherwise permitted by the City. 
f.  If the grantor lawfully elects to alter or change the grade or location of any public right-of-way, the grantee shall, upon reasonable notice by the grantor, and in a timely manner, remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense. 
g.  The grantee shall not place poles, conduits or other fixtures above or below ground where the same will interfere with any gas, electric, telephone fixtures, sewer, water hydrants or other utility, and all such poles, conduits or other fixtures placed in any street shall be so placed as to comply with all ordinances of the grantor. 
h.  In accordance with applicable law, the grantee or any utility user of the public rights-of-way may be required by the grantor to permit joint use of poles located in the public rights-of-way, insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of a reasonable rental fee for such usage. 
i.  The grantee, on request of any person holding a moving permit issued by the grantor, shall temporarily raise or lower its wires or fixtures to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary raising or lowering of wires or fixtures shall be paid by the person, unless such person is the City, requesting the same, and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not less than five business days' prior written notice to arrange for the temporary wire or equipment changes. 
j.  Subject to provisions of this Code, the grantee shall have the authority to trim any trees or other natural growth overhanging the public rights-of-way so as to prevent the branches of such trees or other natural growth from coming in contact with the grantee's wires, cables and other equipment. The grantor may require all trimming of trees and natural growth to be done under its supervision and direction at the expense of the grantee. 
k.  The grantee shall be subject to any and all requirements established by the grantor with regard to the placement and screening of facilities and equipment located in the public rights-of-way. Such requirements may include, but not be limited to, use of landscaping to screen pedestals and cabinets and requiring that construction be flush with the natural grade of the surrounding area. 
l.  The grantee shall use only chalk-based paints to mark the public rights-of-way in connection with the construction or maintenance of the cable system. All paint marks remaining after grantee's clean-up following the completion of the construction or maintenance work must be removed by grantee by means of sandblasting, nontoxic chemicals, water or high-pressure water within 30 days following receipt by grantee of the grantor's written notice requiring such removal. 
(b)  Multiple franchises. If the grantor authorizes or permits another cable system to operate within the municipal limits of the City, grantee shall cooperate with such franchisee to the extent necessary in the event that the installation of such new cable system requires the strengthening of poles, replacing poles, rearranging attachments, placing underground facilities incident to the construction of an additional cable system in the franchise area. The cost of the construction and installation of the new entrant cable system shall, however, be borne by the new cable franchisee. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-44; Ord. No. 2006-02)  
Sec. 12-66. - Standards. 
(a)  Applicable standards. 
(1)  The grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its cable system in a manner consistent with applicable law, and any detailed standards set forth in its franchise agreement. In addition, the grantee shall provide to the grantor, upon written request, a written report of the results of the grantee's periodic proof of performance tests conducted pursuant to Federal Communications Commission standards and guidelines. 
(2)  Should the Federal Communications Commission no longer require proof of performance tests, the grantee shall make and submit such proof of performance tests and reports in response to a written request from the grantor. Such report shall be submitted to the grantor within 30 days of issuance of the grantor's request. 
(b)  Noncompliance with standards. Repeated failure to maintain specified technical standards shall constitute a material breach of the franchise. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-45; Ord. No. 2006-02)  
Sec. 12-67. - Indemnification and insurance requirements. 
(a)  Hold harmless. The grantee shall indemnify, defend and hold the grantor, its officers, agents and employees harmless from any liability, claims, damages, costs or expenses, to the extent provided in the franchise agreement. 
(b)  Insurance. 
(1)  On or before commencement of franchise operations, the grantee shall furnish to the grantor certificates of insurance for liability, workers' compensation and property insurance from appropriately qualified insurance companies, which shall be "admitted" in the State of California. The certificates of insurance shall provide that the insurance is in force and will not be cancelled or modified without 30 days' prior written notice to the grantor. The certificates of insurance shall be in a form satisfactory to the grantor. The grantee shall maintain at its cost throughout the term of the franchise, the insurance required herein and in any franchise agreement. 
(2)  The policy of liability insurance shall: 
a.  Name the grantor, its officers, agents and employees as additional insured; 
b.  Indemnify all liability for personal and bodily injury, death and damage to property arising from activities conducted and premises used pursuant to this chapter by providing coverage therefor, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Negligent acts or omissions of grantee, and its agents, servants and employees, committed in the conduct of franchise operations; and/or 
2.  Use of motor vehicles; 
c.  Provide a combined single limit for comprehensive general liability and comprehensive automobile liability insurance in the amount provided for in the franchise agreement. 
(3)  The policy of workers' compensation insurance shall comply with the laws of the State of California. 
(4)  The policy of property insurance shall provide fire insurance with extended coverage on the franchise property used by grantee in the conduct of franchise operations in an amount adequate to enable grantee to resume franchise operations following the occurrence of any risk covered by this insurance. The certificates of insurance shall indicate the following information: 
a.  The policy number; 
b.  The date upon which the policy will become effective and the date upon which it will expire; 
c.  The names of the primary insureds and any additional insured required by the franchise agreement; 
d.  The subject of the insurance; 
e.  The type of coverage provided by the insurance; 
f.  The amount or limit of coverage provided by the insurance; and 
g.  Any cancellation provisions. 
If the certificates of insurance do not provide all of the above information, the grantor reserves the right to inspect the relevant insurance policies. 
(5)  The commencement of franchise operations shall not begin until grantee has complied with the provisions of this section. 
(6)  In the event grantee fails to maintain any of the policies described in this subsection in full force and effect, the grantor shall, upon 48 hours' notice to grantee, have the right to procure the required insurance and recover the cost thereof from grantee. The grantor shall also have the right to suspend the franchise during any period that grantee fails to maintain said policies in full force and effect. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-46; Ord. No. 2006-02)  
Sec. 12-68. - Records and reports. 
(a)  Records required. 
(1)  The grantee shall at all times maintain: 
a.  A written or computer-stored record of all service calls and interruptions or degradation of service experienced for the preceding two years, provided that such complaints result in or require a service call, subject to the subscriber's right of privacy. 
b.  A full and complete set of "as-built" plans and record drawings showing the locations of the cable system and all aspects thereof, installed or in use in the City, exclusive of subscriber service drops and equipment provided in subscriber's homes. 
c.  If requested by the grantor, a summary of service calls, identifying the number, general nature and disposition of such calls, on a quarterly basis. A summary of such service calls shall be submitted to the grantor within 30 days following any written request by the grantor, in a form acceptable to the grantor. 
d.  If requested by the grantor, a complaint record which shall contain a semi-annual (through June 30 and December 31) breakdown indicating the total number of complaints received for the preceding reporting period, and shall indicate the classifications of complaints as follows: construction, billing, customer relations/service and miscellaneous. 
e.  A full and complete record of rates for programming services, equipment, installations and other subscriber charges. This information shall include, but not be limited to, rates for the basic service tier, tiers of service beyond the basic tier, premium service, pay-per-view services, late fees, additional outlets, converters, remote controls and any charges for installation or service at the subscriber premises. 
(2)  The grantor may impose requests for additional information, records and documents from grantee, provided they relate to the scope of the City's rights under this chapter or the grantee's franchise agreement. 
(3)  Upon reasonable notice, and during normal business hours, grantee shall permit examination, including the provision of copies, by any duly authorized representative of the grantor of all: 
a.  Franchise property and facilities, together with any appurtenant property and facilities of grantee situated within the service area; and 
b.  All records relating to the franchise, provided they are necessary to enable the grantor to determine grantee's compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter or the franchise agreement. 
(b)  Reports. 
(1)  Within 90 days after the end of the calendar year, grantee shall submit a written report to the grantor with respect to the preceding calendar year in a form approved by the grantor, including, but not limited to, the following information: 
a.  A summary of the previous year's (or in the case of the initial reporting year, the initial year's) activities in development of the cable system, including, but not limited to, services begun or discontinued during the reporting year; 
b.  A list of grantee's officers and members of its board of directors; 
c.  A list of stockholders or other equity investors holding ten percent or more of the voting interest in grantee; 
d.  An indication of any residences in grantee's service area where service is not available, and a schedule for providing service; 
e.  Information as to: 
1.  The number of homes passed; 
2.  Total subscribers; and 
3.  The number of basic and pay subscribers; 
f.  A full and complete set of maps showing the locations of the cable system installed or in use in the City, exclusive of subscriber service drops and equipment provided in subscriber's homes. It is the intent of this section that the grantor have a complete set of "as-built" trunk and feeder maps as well as maps showing the location of all aboveground and belowground ancillary equipment. After the initial submission of a complete set of drawings, the grantee may satisfy the provisions of this section by providing updated portions of those sections of the drawings which have changed; 
g.  Any other information relevant to franchise regulation which the grantor shall request, and which is relevant to the grantor's regulatory responsibilities. 
(2)  The grantor may impose requests for additional reports, information, records and documents from grantee, provided they relate to the scope of the City's rights under this chapter or the grantee's franchise agreement. 
(3)  Upon request, grantee shall submit to the grantor copies of all pleadings, applications and reports submitted by grantee to any federal, State or local court, regulatory agency, or other governmental body as well as copies of all decisions issued in response to such pleadings, applications and reports, which are non-routine in nature and which will materially affect its cable system within the franchise area. 
(4)  If grantee is publicly held, a copy of each grantee's annual and other periodic reports and those of its parent, shall be submitted to the grantor upon request. 
(5)  Upon the grantor's request, but no more than annually, grantee shall submit to the grantor a privacy report indicating the degree of compliance with the provisions contained in sections 12-73(c)(3) through (c)(5) and 12-73(c)(8) and all steps taken to ensure that the privacy rights of individuals have been protected. 
(6)  All reports and records required to be delivered to the grantor under this chapter shall be furnished at the sole expense of grantee, except as otherwise provided in the franchise agreement. 
(7)  The willful refusal, failure, or willful negligence of grantee to file any of the reports required as and when due under this chapter, may be deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement if such reports are not provided to the grantor within 30 days after written request therefor, and may subject the grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to the grantor under this chapter or the franchise agreement. 
(8)  Any materially false or misleading statement or representation made knowingly and willfully by the grantee in any report required under this chapter, the franchise agreement or applicable law, shall be deemed a material breach of the franchise and may subject grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to the grantor. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-47; Ord. No. 2006-02)  
Sec. 12-69. - Review of system performance. 
(a)  Throughout the term of the franchise, but not more frequently than once in any five-calendar-year period, if requested by prior written notice from the grantor, the grantor and grantee shall meet to review system performance and quality of service. The various reports required pursuant to this chapter, results of technical performance tests, the record of subscriber complaints and grantee's response to those complaints, and the information acquired in any subscriber surveys, shall be utilized as the basis for review. In addition, any subscriber may submit comments or complaints during the review meetings, either orally or in writing, and these shall be considered. Within 30 days after the conclusion of such a review meeting, the grantor may issue findings with respect to the cable system's franchise compliance. Within 30 days of the issuance of such findings, the grantee shall provide the grantor with grantee's written response to the findings. 
(b)  If the grantor determines that grantee is not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter or the grantee's franchise agreement, the grantor shall provide grantee, in the form of written findings, the specific details of each alleged noncompliance. The grantor may then direct grantee to correct the areas of noncompliance within a reasonable period of time. Failure of the grantee, after due notice, to: 
(1)  Correct the area of noncompliance within the period specified therefor; or 
(2)  Commence compliance within such period and diligently achieve compliance thereafter; or 
(3)  Demonstrate that the allegations of noncompliance are incorrect; 
shall be considered a material breach of the franchise, and the grantor may exercise any remedy within the scope of this chapter and the franchise agreement considered appropriate under the circumstances. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-48; Ord. No. 2006-02)  
Sec. 12-70. - Franchise violations. 
(a)  Remedies for violations. If grantee fails to perform in a timely manner any material obligation required by this chapter or a franchise granted hereunder, following written notice from the grantor and an opportunity to cure such nonperformance in accordance with the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, the grantor may at its option and in its sole discretion: 
(1)  Cure the violation and recover the actual cost thereof from the security fund established in the franchise agreement, unless the grantor, in its sole discretion, has provided grantee with additional time to effectuate a cure; 
(2)  Assess against grantee liquidated damages in an amount set forth in the franchise agreement for any such violations if such violation is not cured, or if grantee has not commenced a cure, on a schedule acceptable to the grantor. Such assessment may be withdrawn from the security fund, and shall not constitute a waiver by the grantor of any other right or remedy it may have under the franchise or applicable law, including without limitation, its right to recover from grantee such additional damages, losses, costs and expenses, including actual attorney's fees, as may have been suffered or incurred by the grantor by reason of or arising out of such material breach of the franchise. 
a.  Within three days of a withdrawal from the security fund, the grantor will mail, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notification of the amount, date and purpose of such withdrawal to grantee. 
b.  If at the time of the grantor's withdrawal, the amounts available are insufficient to provide the total payment toward which the withdrawal is directed, the balance of such payment will continue as grantee's obligation to the grantor until it is paid. 
c.  Not later than 30 days after receipt of notification to grantee by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a withdrawal from the security fund, grantee will deliver to the grantor for deposit in the security fund an amount equal to the amount so withdrawn. 
d.  Failure to make timely delivery of such amount to the grantor or to restore the letter of credit will constitute a material violation of the cable franchise. 
(b)  Procedure for remedying franchise violations. Prior to imposing any remedy or other sanction against grantee specified in this chapter, the grantor shall give grantee notice and opportunity to be heard on the matter, in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The City Manager shall first notify grantee of the alleged violation in writing by personal delivery or registered or certified mail, and demand correction, or evidence of nonviolation, within a reasonable time, which shall not be less than ten calendar days. If grantee fails to: 
a.  Correct the alleged violation within the time prescribed; or 
b.  Commence correction of the alleged violation within the time prescribed and diligently remedy such alleged violation thereafter; or 
c.  Provide evidence that there is no violation; 
the City Manager shall then give, by personal delivery or registered or certified mail, written notice of not less than 15 days of a hearing. Said notice shall set forth in detail each of the violations alleged to have occurred. 
(2)  Subsequent to the hearing, the City Manager shall hear and consider all other relevant evidence, and thereafter render findings and its decision. 
(3)  If the City Manager finds that: 
a.  The grantee has corrected the alleged violation; or 
b.  The grantee has diligently commenced correction of such alleged violation after notice thereof and is diligently proceeding to fully remedy such alleged violation; or 
c.  No material violation has occurred; 
the proceedings shall terminate and no penalty or other sanction shall be imposed. 
(4)  If the City Manager finds that a material violation exists and that grantee: 
a.  Has not corrected the same in a satisfactory manner; or 
b.  Has not diligently commenced correction of such violation after notice thereof and is not diligently proceeding to fully remedy such violation; 
then the City Manager may impose one or more of the remedies provided in this chapter and the franchise agreement as the City Manager, in his or her discretion, deems appropriate under the circumstances. 
(5)  The grantee may appeal any findings of the City Manager to the City Council. The Council shall schedule a hearing on the issue within 30 days of receipt by the City Manager of grantee's appeal. The hearing will provide grantee with the full opportunity to participate and present evidence. The City Council shall decide the matter de novo based upon the evidence presented to the City Council. 
(c)  Grantor's power to revoke. 
(1)  The grantor may revoke any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter and rescind all rights and privileges associated with it in the following circumstances, each of which shall represent a default by grantee and a material breach under the franchise: 
a.  If grantee fails to perform any of its material obligations under this chapter or the franchise agreement and continues such failure to perform after receipt of due notice and a reasonable opportunity to cure; 
b.  If grantee fails to provide or maintain in full force and effect the insurance coverage or security fund as required in the franchise agreement; 
c.  If grantee violates any final order or ruling of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to the grantee's franchise; 
d.  If grantee makes any material false statement to the grantor. 
(2)  After completing the procedures set forth in subsection (b) of this section, the grantor shall cause to be served on grantee written notice of the grantor's intent to revoke grantee's franchise. Such notice shall be served on grantee at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing on the issue. The notice shall contain the time and place of the hearing and shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation within the franchise area ten days prior to the hearing date. 
(3)  The Council shall hear any person interested in the revocation and within 90 days after the date of the hearing shall make its determination whether the grantee has committed a material breach of the franchise. 
(4)  If the grantor determines that the grantee has committed a material breach, then the grantor may, in its discretion: 
a.  Declare the franchise revoked and/or any security fund and bonds forfeited; or 
b.  If the material breach is curable by the grantee, direct the grantee to take appropriate remedial action within the time and manner and under the terms and conditions specified by the grantor. 
The termination and forfeiture of the grantee's franchise shall in no way affect any right of the grantor to pursue any remedy under the franchise or any provision of law. 
(d)  Appeal of Council finding. The grantee may appeal any Council finding made pursuant to subsections (b) and (c) of this section to an appropriate court of jurisdiction. The matter shall be heard pursuant to the substantive and procedural standards set forth in the Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.5. Any such appeal must be taken by the grantee within 60 days of the issuance of the Council's written decision. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-49; Ord. No. 2006-02)  
Sec. 12-71. - Force majeure; grantee's inability to perform. 
In the event grantee's performance of any of the terms, conditions or obligations required by this chapter or a franchise granted hereunder is prevented by a cause or event not within grantee's control, such inability to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof; provided, however, that such inability to perform shall not relieve a grantee from the obligations imposed by section 12-63(c)(5) pertaining to refunds and credits for interruptions in service. For the purpose of this section, causes or events not within the control of grantee shall include, without limitation, acts of God, war, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, labor disputes, restraints imposed by order of a governmental agency or court, explosions, acts of public enemies, and natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes, landslides, and fires, but shall not include financial inability of the grantee to perform or failure of the grantee to obtain any necessary permits or licenses from other governmental agencies or the right to use the facilities of any public utility where such failure is due solely to the acts or omissions of grantee, or the failure of the grantee to secure supplies, services or equipment necessary for the installation, operation, maintenance or repair of the cable system where the grantee has failed to exercise reasonable diligence to secure such supplies, services or equipment. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-50; Ord. No. 2006-02)  
Sec. 12-72. - Abandonment or removal of franchise property. 
(a)  Abandonment or removal. 
(1)  If the grantee discontinues the use of any of its property within the public rights-of-way for a continuous period of six months, such property shall be deemed to have been abandoned by grantee. Any part of the cable system that is parallel or redundant to other parts of the system and is intended for use only when needed as a backup for the system or a part thereof, shall not be deemed to have been abandoned because of its lack of use. 
(2)  The grantor, upon such reasonable terms as the grantor may lawfully impose, may give grantee permission to abandon, without removing, any system facility or equipment laid, directly constructed, operated or maintained under the franchise. Unless such permission is granted or unless otherwise provided in this chapter, the grantee shall remove all abandoned aboveground facilities and equipment upon receipt of written notice from the grantor and shall restore to the grantor's satisfaction any affected public right-of-way. In removing its plant, structures, and equipment, grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it and shall leave all public rights-of-way in as good condition as that prevailing prior to such removal without materially interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires, poles, or attachments. The grantor shall have the right to inspect and approve the condition of the public rights-of-way, cables, wires, attachments and poles prior to and after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this chapter and the security fund as provided herein shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by grantee with the terms and conditions of this subsection. 
(3)  Upon the approved abandonment of any franchise property, the grantee, if required by the grantor, shall submit to the grantor an instrument, satisfactory in form to the grantor, transferring to the grantor the ownership of the abandoned franchise property. 
(4)  At the expiration, without renewal or extension, of the term for which the franchise is granted, or upon its revocation, as provided herein, the grantor shall have the right to require grantee to remove, at its own expense, all aboveground portions of the cable system from all streets and public ways within the service area within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be more than 180 days. 
(5)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this chapter, the grantee may abandon any underground franchise property in place so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the public rights-of-way in which such property is located or with the use thereof by any public utility or other franchise holder. 
(b)  Restoration by the grantor; reimbursement of costs. Upon written notice and upon the failure of the grantee to commence, pursue or complete any work to be done in any public right-of-way required by law or by the provisions of this chapter or the franchise agreement, within the time prescribed and to the satisfaction of the grantor, the grantor may cause the work to be commenced and/or completed. The grantor shall provide to the grantee an itemized work order setting forth in detail the exact nature of the work completed and the supplies used in such work. The grantee shall pay to the grantor the costs for such work no later than 30 days after receipt of the itemized work order. 
(c)  Extended operation and continuity of services. Upon expiration or revocation of the franchise, the grantor shall have the discretion to permit grantee to continue to operate the cable system for an extended period of time. The grantee shall continue to operate the system under the terms and conditions of this chapter as of the effective date of the franchise and the franchise, as existed immediately prior to said expiration or revocation, and to provide the regular subscriber service and any and all of the services that may be provided at that time. It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue to receive all available services provided that financial and other obligations to grantee are honored. The grantee shall use reasonable efforts to provide continuous, uninterrupted service to its subscribers, including operation of the system during transition periods following franchise expiration or termination. 
(d)  Receivership and foreclosure. 
(1)  At the option of the grantor and subject to applicable law, a franchise granted hereunder may be revoked 120 days after appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of grantee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless: 
a.  The receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated within said 120 days; or 
b.  Such receivers or trustees within said 120 days shall have remedied all the defaults under the franchise or provided a plan for the remedy of such defaults which is satisfactory to the grantor; or 
c.  Such receivers or trustees shall, within said 120 days, have executed an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of the franchise. 
(2)  In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the cable system, in whole or in part, the grantor may serve notice of revocation upon grantee and the successful bidder at such sale, and all rights and privileges of the grantee hereunder shall be revoked 30 days after service of such notice, unless: 
a.  The grantor shall have approved the transfer of the franchise, in the manner provided by law; and 
b.  The successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with the grantor to assume and be bound by all terms and conditions of the franchise. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-51; Ord. No. 2006-02)  
Sec. 12-73. - Grantor and subscriber rights. 
(a)  Reservation of grantor rights. 
(1)  In addition to any rights specifically reserved to the grantor by this chapter, the grantor reserves to itself every right and power which is required to be reserved by a provision of applicable law or under the franchise. 
(2)  Any right or power in, or duty retained or imposed upon the grantor, or any commission, officer, employee, department or board of the grantor, may be delegated by the grantor, or to such other person or entity as the grantor may designate to act on its behalf. 
(b)  Waiver. 
(1)  The grantor shall have the right to waive any provision of the franchise imposing an obligation on the grantee, except those required by applicable law, if the grantor determines: 
a.  That it is in the public interest to do so; or 
b.  That the enforcement of such provision will impose an undue hardship on the grantee or on the subscribers. 
To be effective, such waiver shall be evidenced by a statement in writing signed by a duly authorized representative of the grantor. Waiver of any provision in one instance shall not be deemed a waiver of such provision subsequent to such instance nor be deemed a waiver of any other provision of the franchise unless the statement so recites. 
(2)  The grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the requirements of this chapter or the franchise agreement by any failure of the grantor on any one or more occasions to require or seek compliance with any such terms or conditions. 
(c)  Rights of individuals. 
(1)  Grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users, or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age, sex, handicap, marital status, or other protected classes. Grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable law relating to nondiscrimination. However, nothing in this chapter or the franchise shall limit the right of the grantee to deny service to any household or individual who has a negative credit or service history with the grantee, which may include nonpayment of bills or theft or damage to the grantee's equipment, or who has threatened or assaulted employees of the grantee in the course of their employment. In cases of bad or negative credit, the grantee may require the payment of a deposit. 
(2)  Grantee shall adhere to the applicable equal employment opportunity requirements of applicable law, as now written or as amended from time to time. 
(3)  Without a lawful court order or applicable valid legal authority, neither the grantee, nor any person, agency, or entity shall, without the subscriber's advance written consent, tap, or arrange for the tapping, of any cable, line, signal input device, or subscriber outlet or receiver for any purpose except routine maintenance of the system, detection of unauthorized service, polling with audience participation, or audience viewing surveys to support advertising research regarding viewers where individual viewing behavior cannot be identified. 
(4)  In the conduct of providing its cable services or in pursuit of any collateral commercial enterprise resulting therefrom, the grantee shall take steps to prevent the invasion of a subscriber's or general citizen's right of privacy or other personal rights through the use of the system as such rights are delineated or defined by applicable law. The grantee shall not, without lawful court order or other applicable valid legal authority, utilize the system's interactive two-way equipment or capability, if such equipment or capability exists, for unauthorized personal surveillance of any subscriber or general citizen. 
a.  Except for its own use, or in connection with the provision of cable services or for release of data to the grantor, the grantee shall not permit its system to be used for data collection purposes, nor shall it otherwise collect data which would reveal the commercial product or other preferences or opinions of an individual subscriber, members of their families, or their guests, licensees or employees, unless the grantee shall have received the prior written consent of such subscriber which written consent shall be maintained by the grantee in its files for at least three years. 
b.  In any event, the grantee shall not disclose or permit the release or sale of data on individual subscribers or groups thereof, but may disclose or permit the release or sale of aggregate data only. 
(5)  Grantee shall not disclose individual subscriber preferences, viewing habits, beliefs, philosophy, creeds, or religious beliefs to any third person, firm, agency, governmental unit, or investigating agency without court authority or the prior written consent of the subscriber. 
a.  Such written consent, if given, shall be limited to a period of time not to exceed one year, or a term agreed upon by the grantee and the subscriber. 
b.  The grantee shall not condition the delivery or receipt of cable services to any subscriber on any such consent. 
c.  A subscriber may revoke, without penalty or cost, any consent previously given by delivering to the grantee in writing a statement of the subscriber's intent to so revoke. 
(6)  The grantee shall not disclose, or sell, or permit the disclosure or sale of its subscriber list without the prior written consent of each subscriber on such list; provided that grantee may use its subscriber list as necessary for the construction, marketing, and maintenance of the grantee's services and facilities authorized by a franchise, and the billing of subscribers for cable services; and provided further, that consistent with applicable law, the grantor may use the grantee's subscriber list for the purpose of communication with subscribers in connection with matters relating to the operation, management, and maintenance of the cable system. 
(7)  No cable line, wire amplifier, converter, or other piece of equipment owned by the grantee shall be installed by the grantee in the subscriber's premises, other than in appropriate easements, without first securing any required consent. If a subscriber requests service, permission to install upon subscriber's property shall be deemed granted. 
(8)  In addition to the requirements above, the grantee shall comply with applicable law regarding subscriber privacy including, but not limited to, Section 631 of the Cable Act (47 USC 551). 
(Code 1975, § 7A-52; Ord. No. 2006-02)  
Sec. 12-74. - Separability. 
If any provision of this chapter is held by any court or by any federal or State agency of competent jurisdiction, to be invalid as conflicting with any applicable law now or hereafter in effect, or is held by such court or agency to be modified in any way in order to conform to the requirements of applicable law, such provision shall be considered a separate, distinct, and independent part of this chapter, and such holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability of all other provisions hereof. In the event that applicable law is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed, so that the provision thereof which had previously been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with applicable law, said provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect and shall thereafter be binding on the grantor and the grantee, provided that the grantor shall give the grantee 30 days' written notice of such change before requiring compliance with said provision or such longer period of time as may be reasonably required for the grantee to comply with such provision. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-53; Ord. No. 2006-02)  
Secs. 12-75—12-91. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - VIDEO FRANCHISE FEES, CUSTOMER SERVICE AND OTHER VIDEO-RELATED MATTERS 
 
Sec. 12-92. - Regulation of State video franchises and City video franchises. 
Under State law that became effective January 1, 2007, the California Public Utilities Commission (PUC) has the authority to grant State video franchises (State franchises). Under this system, the City acquired certain rights and responsibilities with respect to State video franchise holders. These include the receipt of a franchise fee and a fee for public, educational and government (PEG) purposes, both based on a percentage of the gross revenues of State franchise holders, as well as the establishment and enforcement of penalties for violations of customer service rules. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-54; Ord. No. 2007-04, § 2)  
Sec. 12-93. - State video franchise fees. 
(a)  Any State video franchise holder (State franchisee) operating within the boundaries of the City of La Palma shall pay a franchisee fee to the City equal to five percent of the gross revenue collected by that State franchisee from customers in La Palma. 
(b)  Any State franchisee operating within the boundaries of the City of La Palma shall pay an additional fee to the City equal to one percent of the gross revenue collected by that State franchisee from customers in La Palma, which fee shall be used by the City for PEG purposes consistent with State and federal law. 
(c)  The term "gross revenue," for the purposes of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, shall have the definition set forth in California Public Utilities Code § 5860. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-55; Ord. No. 2007-04, § 2)  
Sec. 12-94. - Audit authority. 
Not more than once annually, the City may examine and perform an audit of the business records of a State franchisee to ensure compliance with this article and the franchisee's State franchise. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-56; Ord. No. 2007-04, § 2)  
Sec. 12-95. - Customer service penalties under State franchises. 
(a)  The holder of a State franchise shall comply with all applicable State and federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service. 
(b)  The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall monitor the compliance of State franchisee(s) with respect to State and federal customer service and protection standards. The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall provide the State franchisee written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer service standards, and shall allow the State franchisee 30 days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within the 30-day time period shall be subject to the following penalties by the City Manager, or his or her designee: 
(1)  For the first occurrence of a violation, a fine of $500.00 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $1,500.00 for each violation. 
(2)  For a second violation of the same nature within 12 months, a fine of $1,000.00 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $3,000.00 for each violation. 
(c)  A State franchisee may appeal a penalty assessed to the City Council within 60 days. After relevant speakers are heard, and any necessary staff reports are submitted, the City Council will vote to either uphold or vacate the penalty. The City Council's decision on the imposition of a penalty shall be final. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-57; Ord. No. 2007-04, § 2)  
Sec. 12-96. - City response to State franchise applications. 
(a)  Applicants for State franchises within the boundaries of the City of La Palma must concurrently provide complete copies to the City of any application or amendments to applications filed with the PUC. One complete copy must be provided to the City Clerk and one complete copy to the City Manager. 
(b)  The City Manager shall provide any appropriate comments to the PUC regarding an application or an amendment to an application for a State franchise. 
(Code 1975, § 7A-58; Ord. No. 2007-04, § 2)  
Chapter 14 - FINANCE AND TAXATION  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Funds established. 
(a)  Special gas tax street improvement fund. There is created in the City treasury a special fund to be known as the "Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund." All moneys received by the City from the State under the provisions of Sections 2106 through 2116 of the Streets and Highways Code (Streets and Highways Code §§ 2106—2116) for the acquisition of real property or interest therein, or the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways other than State highways, shall be paid into such fund. All moneys in such form shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by and subject to all of the provisions of Sections 2106 through 2116 of the Streets and Highways Code (Streets and Highways Code §§ 2106—2116). 
(b)  Services operated as utilities. It is the policy of the City Council that the following services be operated as utilities, and that they shall be operated on a business-like basis without tax subsidy and with adequate reserves to meet emergencies and to replace parts of the system as they wear out or in reasonable anticipation of their failure: 
(1)  Water. 
(2)  Sewer. 
(c)  Utility funds. The following utility funds are hereby created: 
(1)  Water fund. 
(2)  Water capital reserve fund. 
(3)  Sewer fund. 
(4)  Sewer capital reserve fund. 
Moneys in each such funds may be commingled with other moneys and other funds for investment interest-earnings purposes, but each fund shall be credited with its pro rata share of all interest earnings. 
(d)  Moneys credited to water and sewer funds. The water and sewer funds, as enumerated in subsection (c)(1) and (c)(3) shall be credited monthly with the calculated amount of moneys generated from the revenues of the utility which represent a fixed asset charge. Such amounts shall be estimated annually as part of the annual budget process, contained in and enumerated by the budget, and appropriated from such anticipated estimated revenues. Such moneys as are accumulated in each replacement fund shall be expended only under the following circumstances: 
(1)  By appropriation in the annual budget. 
(2)  By vote of four-fifths of the members of the City Council if at a time other than at the time of budget adoption. 
(3)  For specifically enumerated projects only. 
(e)  Reserve for replacement value of utility fixed assets. 
(1)  The combined total of the two water funds as enumerated in subsection (c)(1) and (c)(2) shall retain an amount equal to five percent of the replacement value of the fixed assets of the water utility as a reserve within the funds. 
(2)  The combined total of the two sewer funds as enumerated in subsection (c)(3) and (c)(4) shall retain an amount equal to ten percent of the replacement value of the fixed assets of the sewer utility as a reserve within the funds. 
(3)  The reserve amounts must be fully funded before moneys may be expended for projects, pursuant to subsection (d), except that moneys may be expended from either capital reserve fund account on four-fifths' vote of the City Council. Such appropriation action by the City Council shall enumerate the nature of the emergency, make the emergency appropriation, and appropriate moneys for publicity of said emergency and the situation surrounding such emergency. 
(f)  Annual updating of utility rates. The City Manager shall annually cause an updating of the fixed-asset values for each City utility, calculate the amount necessary to provide adequate cash flow to the funds enumerated in subsection (c) from rates, and make a written report and rate recommendation to the City Council. Said rates shall recover all costs reasonably borne in providing the utility service, including: 
(1)  All operating costs, including maintenance, billing, data processing and bad-debt costs. 
(2)  Departmental overhead. 
(3)  General City overhead. 
(4)  The computed fixed-asset charge. 
(5)  Necessary minor capital outlay for equipment necessary to operate the utility. 
(6)  All indirect costs of the utility, such as building occupancy charges, communications, insurance and the like, on a pro rata basis. 
(Code 1975, § 8-1; Ord. No. 19, § 1; Ord. No. 82-26, § 1; Ord. No. 86-11, § 1; Ord. No. 90-04, § 1; Ord. No. 2014-01, § 1, 6-17-14; Ord. No. 2016-04, § 1, 2-2-2016)  
Sec. 14-2. - Lease-back financing. 
(a)  Whenever the term "lease-back" is used in this section, it shall mean that type of financing commonly involving the use of a nonprofit private corporation with power to issue revenue bonds and supported by a lease or financing agreement with the City. The term shall also include leases giving the City an option or options to purchase or making provision for automatic vesting of title within the City after a certain period of time has elapsed whereby the City is committed to make payments for periods in excess of one year and for total amounts in excess of the income and revenue of the City for the year in which the commitment is made. 
(b)  The City of La Palma hereby adopts as its policy that municipal improvements shall not be acquired through the use of the lease-back device. 
(Code 1975, § 8-2; Ord. No. 172, §§ 1, 2)  
Sec. 14-3. - Tax assessment, collection functions vested in County. 
(a)  All the duties and functions of municipal tax assessment and collection and the treasury functions connected therewith, under Sections 51500 to 51521 of the State Government Code (Government Code §§ 51500—51521), are hereby transferred to the County Treasurer, Tax Collector and Assessor and Auditor. 
(b)  The assessment and collection of taxes for the City shall be done in the manner prescribed by State law and in the same manner and at the same time as are the taxes of the County. Payment of the collected taxes of the City to the City Treasurer shall be made by the County as soon as possible after receipt, or by agreement with the County. 
(c)  Compensation to the County for such services shall be fixed by an agreement between the City and the County and shall be the amount set forth in the State Government Code. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3; Ord. No. 6, §§ 1—3) 
State Law reference— Transfer of City tax functions generally, Government Code § 51500 et seq.  
Sec. 14-4. - Returned checks. 
(a)  There shall be charged and collected a service charge for checks made in payment of all City fees, charges and rates which are returned unpaid to the City by the bank against which the check is written. 
(b)  This charge shall be established by resolution. 
(c)  The charge shall be established in an amount sufficient to recover all actual costs incurred by the City to process and collect on such checks. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3.1; Ord. No. 82-28, § 1) 
State Law reference— Returned check charges generally, Government Code § 6157.  
Sec. 14-5. - Payment of fees and charges for City services. 
(a)  All fees and charges levied for City services shall be due and payable upon presentation or as required by the appropriate section of this Code. 
(b)  All fees and charges for such services shall constitute a valid and subsisting debt in favor of the City and against the person to whom such services are rendered. If an amount remains unpaid after reasonable and practical attempts have been made by the City to obtain payment, a civil action may be filed with the court for the amount due and payable, together with any penalties, any related charges and fees accrued due to nonpayment, and all fees and charges required to file and pursue such civil action. 
(c)  Fees and charges shall be levied for recovering City costs for notification and collection of delinquent accounts and shall be established by resolution of the City Council. Such fees and charges are a part of the fees and charges established for the services rendered and shall be collected as such. 
(d)  No injunction, writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the City or an officer thereof to prevent or enjoin the collection of taxes or business license fee, or any such tax or fee that the City seeks to collect, pursuant to article V or article VIII of this chapter, or article I of chapter 22. Payment of all taxes, interest, and penalties shall be required as a condition precedent to seeking judicial review of any tax or business license fee liability under said articles. 
(Code 1975, § 8-3.2; Ord. No. 83-2, § 1)  
Secs. 14-6—14-28. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CLAIMS, DEMANDS AGAINST CITY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Claims against public entities generally, Government Code § 900 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14-29. - Presentation generally. 
(a)  No City officer shall, except for his or her own service, present any claim, account or demand for allowance against the City or in any way, except in the discharge of his or her official duty, advocate the relief asked in the claim or demand made by any other person. Any person may appear before the City Council and oppose the allowance of any claim or demand made against the City. 
(b)  Claims and demands arising out of tort and all claims and demands not founded upon contract shall set forth the time and place the claim arose, the public property, officers or employees alleged to be at fault, the nature and extent of the injury or damage claimed and full details as to the nature of the claim, shall be signed and verified to be correct by the claimant or someone authorized by him or her and shall be filed with the City Clerk within six months after the accident or event occurred. All other claims and demands shall be presented in writing and filed with the City Clerk within one year after the last item of the account or claim occurred and need not be signed or verified. Unless so presented and filed, no such claim or demand shall be approved, allowed or paid, and the City shall not be liable upon any suit or action based upon any such claim or demand which is not filed in the form and within the time herein provided. 
(c)  The City Council shall not hear or consider or allow or approve any claim, bill or demand against the City, unless such claim, etc., is itemized, giving names, dates and particular services rendered, character of process served and upon whom, distance traveled, character of work done, the number of days engaged, materials and supplies furnished, the price therefor, and other pertinent details as the case may be. Salaries and wages of officers and employees of the City shall not be considered to be claims, accounts, bills or demands against the City. 
(Code 1975, § 8-4; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 14-30. - Register of demands. 
(a)  The City Manager shall present to the City Council for its approval a tabulation of claims and demands in the form of a register of demands. Such register shall be signed by the City Manager and shall consist of the check numbers, the names of the vendors to be paid, the amounts to be paid, and a brief general description of the items for which payment will be made. Approval of the register by the City Council shall be in the form of a duly adopted resolution. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by law, no warrant or register of demands shall be drawn or evidence of indebtedness issued unless there is at the time sufficient money in the treasury legally applicable to the payment of the same. 
(c)  Any claim or demand against the City or against any City officer in his or her official capacity, payable out of any City fund or any fund under control of the City Manager shall be filed and presented to the City Council as herein provided before any suit may be brought thereon. No suit may be brought on any claim until it has been rejected in whole or in part. If the City Council refuses or neglects to allow or reject a claim for 90 days after it is filed with the City Manager, the claimant shall treat such refusal or neglect as final action and rejection on the 90th day. 
(Code 1975, § 8-5; Ord. No. 19, § 1; Ord. No. 79-3, § 6; Ord. No. 2004-07)  
Secs. 14-31—14-48. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SALES AND USE TAXES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 73-12, from which this article was derived, was adopted on October 1, 1973. For purposes of this article, that date is considered the ordinance's operative date. 
State Law reference— Sales and Use Tax Law, Revenue and Taxation Code § 6001 et seq.; Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law, Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14-49. - Adoption of State law. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code (Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq.), all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code (Revenue and Taxation Code § 6001 et seq.) are hereby adopted and made a part of this article as though fully set forth herein. 
(b)  In adopting the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code § 6001 et seq., wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of the City shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "State" is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury or the Constitution of the State of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the City or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this article; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code (Revenue and Taxation Code § 6001 et seq.) or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the State under the provisions of that Code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof) (Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 6701, 6702), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code (Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797, 6828); and the substitution shall not be made for the word "State" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203 (Revenue and Taxation Code § 6203). 
(c)  All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code (Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq.) shall automatically become a part of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 8-6; Ord. No. 73-12, §§ 9, 10, 15)  
Sec. 14-50. - Rate. 
The rate of sales and use tax imposed by this article shall be one percent. 
(Code 1975, § 8-7; Ord. No. 73-12, § 2)  
Sec. 14-51. - Purpose of article. 
The City Council hereby declares that this article is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes and directs that the provisions of this article be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
(1)  To adopt sales and use tax regulations which comply with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code (Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq.); 
(2)  To adopt sales and use tax regulations which incorporate provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code (Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq.); 
(3)  To adopt sales and use tax regulations which impose a tax and provide a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the State sales and use taxes; 
(4)  To adopt sales and use tax regulations which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code (Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq.), minimize the cost of collecting City sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 8-8; Ord. No. 73-12, § 4)  
Sec. 14-52. - Contract of City with State. 
Prior to the operative date of this article, this City shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this article; provided, that if this City shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to such operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 8-9; Ord. No. 73-12, § 5)  
Sec. 14-53. - Sales tax imposed. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the City at the rate stated in section 14-50 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this City on and after the operative date of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 8-10; Ord. No. 73-12, § 6)  
Sec. 14-54. - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this article, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the State sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State board of equalization. 
(Code 1975, § 8-11; Ord. No. 73-12, § 7)  
Sec. 14-55. - Use tax imposed. 
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of this article for storage, use or other consumption in this City at the rate stated in section 14-50 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to State sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Code 1975, § 8-12; Ord. No. 73-12, § 8)  
Sec. 14-56. - When seller's permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code (Revenue and Taxation Code § 6067), an additional seller's permit shall not be required by this article. 
(Code 1975, § 8-13; Ord. No. 73-12, § 11)  
Sec. 14-57. - Exclusions and exemptions. 
(a)  There shall be excluded from the measure of tax: 
(1)  The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State upon a retailer or consumer. 
(2)  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which has been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code (Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq.) by any City and County, County or City in this State. 
(3)  The gross receipts from sales to, and the storage, use or other consumption of property purchased by, operators of common carriers and waterborne vessels to be used or consumed in the operation of such common carriers or waterborne vessels principally outside this City. 
(4)  The storage or use of tangible personal property in the transportation or transmission of persons, property or communications or in the generation, transmission or distribution of electricity or in the manufacture, transmission or distribution of gas in intrastate, interstate or foreign commerce by public utilities which are regulated by the State Public Utilities Commission. 
(b)  The following provisions shall apply to exclusions and exemptions: 
(1)  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the State upon a retailer or consumer. 
(2)  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code (Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq.) by any City and County, County or City in this State shall be exempt from the tax due under this article. 
(3)  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne-vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the City in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes. 
(4)  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax. 
(5)  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the City in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this State, the United States or any foreign government. 
(6)  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code (Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 6366, 6366.1) the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(c)  The following regulations shall apply to the application of the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section: 
(1)  Subsection (b) of this section shall become operative on January 1 of the year following the year in which the State Board of Equalization adopts an assessment ratio for State assessed property which is identical to the ratio which is required for local assessments by Section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code (Revenue and Taxation Code § 401), at which time subsection (a) of this section shall become inoperative. 
(2)  In the event that subsection (b) of this section becomes operative and the State board of equalization subsequently adopts an assessment ratio for the State assessed property which is higher than the ratio which is required for local assessments by Section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code (Revenue and Taxation Code § 401), subsection (a) of this section shall become operative on the first day of the month next following the month in which such higher ratio is adopted, at which time subsection (b) of this section shall be inoperative until the first day of the month following the month in which the board again adopts an assessment ratio for State assessed property which is identical to the ratio required for local assessments by Section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code (Revenue and Taxation Code § 401), at which time subsection (b) of this section shall again become operative and subsection (a) of this section shall become inoperative. 
(d)  This subsection shall be operative on the operative date of any act of the Legislature of the State which amends Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code (Revenue and Taxation Code § 7202) or which repeals and reenacts Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code (Revenue and Taxation Code § 7202) to provide an exemption from City sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in Subdivisions (i)(7) and (i)(8) of Section 7202 as those subdivisions read on October 1, 1983. 
(Code 1975, § 8-14; Ord. No. 73-12, §§ 12—14; Ord. No. 83-12, §§ 1, 2, 4)  
Sec. 14-58. - Enjoining collection. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the State or this City or against any officer of the State or this City to prevent or enjoin the collection under this article, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code (Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq.), of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Code 1975, § 8-15; Ord. No. 73-12, § 16)  
Secs. 14-59—14-89. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DOCUMENTARY REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Documentary Transfer Tax Act, Revenue and Taxation Code § 11901 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14-90. - Imposition. 
(a)  There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements or other realty sold within the City shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers or any other person or persons, by his or her or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed, exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale, exceeds $100.00, a tax at the rate of $0.275 for each $500.00 or fractional part thereof. 
(b)  This article is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7, commencing with Section 11901, of Division 2 of the State Revenue and Taxation Code (Revenue and Taxation Code § 11901 et seq.). 
(Code 1975, § 8-16; Ord. No. 176, §§ 1, 2)  
Sec. 14-91. - By whom paid. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to section 14-90 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. 
(Code 1975, § 8-17; Ord. No. 176, § 3)  
Sec. 14-92. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Any tax imposed pursuant to this article shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. 
(b)  Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any State or territory, or political subdivision thereof, is a party shall be exempt from the tax imposed pursuant to this article when the exempt agency is acquiring title. 
(c)  Any tax imposed pursuant to this article shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan or reorganization or adjustment that is any of the following: 
(1)  Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended; 
(2)  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in Section 101 of Title 11 of the United States Code (11 USCA 101), as amended; 
(3)  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in Section 101 of Title 11 of the United States Code (11 USCA 101), as amended; or 
(4)  Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected. Subsection (c)(1) through (4), inclusive, of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. 
(d)  Any tax imposed pursuant to this article shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in Subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (26 USCA [I.R.C. 1954] 1083).; but only if: 
(1)  The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935 (15 USCA 79k); 
(2)  Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; 
(3)  Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. 
(e)  In the case of any realty held by a partnership or other entity treated as a partnership for federal income tax purposes, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this article by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or other entity or otherwise, if: 
(1)  Such partnership or other entity treated as a partnership is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 USCA 708); and 
(2)  Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned. 
(f)  If there is a termination of any partnership or other entity treated as a partnership for federal income tax purposes, within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, for purposes of this article, such partnership or other entity shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value, exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon, all realty held by such partnership or other entity at the time of such termination. 
(g)  No more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this article by reason of a termination described in subsection (f) of this section, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership or other entity at the time of such termination. 
(h)  No levy shall be imposed pursuant to this article by reason of any transfer between an individual or individuals and a legal entity or between legal entities that results solely in a change in the method of holding title to the realty and in which proportional ownership interests in the realty, whether represented by stock, membership interest, partnership interest, cotenancy interest, or otherwise, directly or indirectly, remain the same immediately after the transfer. 
(Code 1975, § 8-18; Ord. No. 176, §§ 4—8; Ord. No. 220, § 1)  
Sec. 14-93. - Administration. 
The County Recorder shall administer this article in conformity with the provisions of the Revenue and Taxation Code § 11901 et seq. and the provisions of any County ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1975, § 8-19; Ord. No. 176, § 9)  
Sec. 14-94. - Claims. 
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this article shall be governed by the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code § 5096 et seq. 
(Code 1975, § 8-20; Ord. No. 176, § 10)  
Secs. 14-95—14-116. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Hotel occupancy tax, Revenue and Taxation Code § 7280 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14-117. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hotel. 
(1)  The term "hotel" means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes. 
(2)  The term "hotel" includes any hotel, inn, tourist home, or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodginghouse, roominghouse, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof. 
(3)  The term "hotel" does not mean any of the following: 
a.  Any hospital, sanitarium, medical clinic, convalescent home, rest home, home for the aged people, foster home, or other similar facility operated for the care or treatment of human beings; 
b.  Any asylum, jail, prison, orphanage or other facility in which human beings are detained and housed under legal restraint; 
c.  Any housing owned or controlled by an educational institution and used exclusively to house students, faculty or other employees, and any fraternity or sorority house or similar facility occupied exclusively by students and employees of such educational institution, and officially recognized or approved by it; 
d.  Any housing operated or used exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes by any organization having qualifications for exemption from property taxes under the laws of the State; 
e.  Any housing owned by a governmental agency and used to house its employees or for governmental purposes; any camp as defined in the Labor Code, or other housing furnished by an employer exclusively for employees; 
f.  Any private dwelling house or other individually owned single-family dwelling unit rented only occasionally and incidentally to the normal occupancy by the owner or his or her family, provided that the burden of establishing that the housing or facility is not a hotel as defined herein shall be upon the operator thereof, who shall file with the tax collector such information as the tax collector may require to establish and maintain such status. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or rooms, or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes. 
Operator means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agency shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this article and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this article by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
Rent means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel, valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Transient means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of 30 days has expired, unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived may be considered. 
(Code 1975, § 8-21; Ord. No. 85-17, § 1)  
Sec. 14-118. - Tax imposed. 
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of eight percent of the rent charged by the operator. Said tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the City, which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the City. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the Finance Director may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the Finance Director. 
(Code 1975, § 8-22; Ord. No. 85-17, § 1)  
Sec. 14-119. - Exemptions. 
(a)  No tax shall be imposed under the provisions of this article upon: 
(1)  Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the City to impose the tax herein provided; 
(2)  Any federal or State officer or employee when on official business; 
(3)  Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty. 
(b)  No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the Finance Director. 
(Code 1975, § 8-23; Ord. No. 85-17, § 1)  
Sec. 14-120. - Operator's duties. 
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this article to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1975, § 8-24; Ord. No. 85-17, § 1)  
Sec. 14-121. - Registration. 
Within 30 days after commencing business, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register said hotel with the Finance Director and obtain from him or her a "transient occupancy registration certificate" to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Said certificate shall, among other things, state the following: 
(1)  The name of the operator; 
(2)  The address of the hotel; 
(3)  The date upon which the certificate was issued; 
(4)  "This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the Finance Director for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the Finance Director. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this City. This certificate does not constitute a permit." 
(Code 1975, § 8-25; Ord. No. 85-17, § 1)  
Sec. 14-122. - Reporting and remitting. 
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the Finance Director, make a return to the Finance Director on forms provided by him or her, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the Finance Director. The Finance Director may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he or she deems it necessary in order to ensure collection of the tax, and he or she may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this article shall be held in trust for the account of the City until payment thereof is made to the Finance Director. 
(Code 1975, § 8-26; Ord. No. 85-17, § 1)  
Sec. 14-123. - Penalties and interest. 
(a)  Original delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this article within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax. 
(b)  Continued delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed. 
(c)  Fraud. If the Finance Director determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this article is due to fraud, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(d)  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this article shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive or penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
(e)  Penalties merged with tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. 
(Code 1975, § 8-27; Ord. No. 85-17, § 1)  
Sec. 14-124. - Failure to collect, report tax; determination of tax by Finance Director. 
(a)  If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect said tax and to make, within the time provided in this article, any report and remittance of said tax or any portion thereof required by this article, the Finance Director shall proceed in such manner as he or she may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his or her estimate of the tax due. As soon as the Finance Director shall procure such facts and information as he or she is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this article and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he or she shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this article. 
(b)  In case such determination is made, the Finance Director shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his or her last known place of address. 
(c)  Such operator may within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the Finance Director for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the Finance Director shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. 
(d)  If such application is made, the Finance Director shall give not less than five days written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in said notice why said amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. 
(e)  At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. 
(f)  After such hearing the Finance Director shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter given written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after 15 days unless an appeal is taken. 
(Code 1975, § 8-28; Ord. No. 85-17, § 1)  
Sec. 14-125. - Appeal. 
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the Finance Director with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 15 days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The Council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the City Clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his or her last known place of address. The findings of the Council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. 
(Code 1975, § 8-29; Ord. No. 85-17, § 1)  
Sec. 14-126. - Records. 
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment of any tax imposed by this article to the City to keep and preserve, for a period of four years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the City, which records the finance officer shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Code 1975, § 8-30; Ord. No. 85-17, § 1)  
Sec. 14-127. - Refunds. 
(a)  Whenever the amount of any tax, interest, or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City under this article, it may be refunded as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the Finance Director within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the Finance Director. 
(b)  An operator may claim a refund, or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted, the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the Finance Director that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator. 
(c)  A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection (a) of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the Finance Director, or when the transient, having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the Finance Director that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax. 
(d)  No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his or her right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. 
(Code 1975, § 8-31; Ord. No. 85-17, § 1)  
Sec. 14-128. - Actions to collect. 
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this article shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the City. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the City shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the City. Any person owing money to the City under the provisions of this article shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the City for recovery of such amount. 
(Code 1975, § 8-32; Ord. No. 85-17, § 1)  
Sec. 14-129. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in sections 2-350 through 2-352. 
(b)  Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the Finance Director, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is punishable as aforesaid. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade this determination of any amount due required by this article to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as aforesaid. 
(Code 1975, § 8-33; Ord. No. 85-17, § 1)  
Sec. 14-130. - Service charge; waiver of tax. 
The City has the authority to impose, or enter into an agreement to impose, a service charge to reasonably mitigate the financial impact to the City of the operation of a hotel. In the event that the City imposes such a service charge, or enters into an agreement to impose such a service charge, the tax imposed by this article shall be waived. Any service charge required by this section shall constitute a debt owed by the operator to the City. 
(Code 1975, § 8-34; Ord. No. 87-09, § 1)  
Secs. 14-131—14-158. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - MOBILE SOURCE AIR POLLUTION REDUCTION REVENUES 
 
Sec. 14-159. - Expression of support for adoption of motor vehicle registration fees to reduce air pollution. 
The City formally expresses support for the adoption of motor vehicle fees to be used to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles pursuant to the California Clean Air Act of 1988, and/or the plan prepared pursuant to Article V (commencing with Section 40460) of Chapter 5.5 of Part 3 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California (Health and Safety Code § 40460). 
(Code 1975, § 8-41; Ord. No. 91-03, § 1)  
Sec. 14-160. - Establishment of and deposit into air quality improvement trust fund. 
The City shall establish a separate interest-bearing trust fund account in a financial institution authorized to receive deposits of City funds. Upon receipt of vehicle registration fees from SCAQMD pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 44243 (Health and Safety Code § 44243), the City shall deposit such funds into such separate interest-bearing trust fund account. All interest earned by such trust fund account shall be credited only to that account. 
(Code 1975, § 8-42; Ord. No. 91-03, § 1)  
Sec. 14-161. - Expenditure of air quality trust fund revenues. 
All revenues received from the SCAQMD and deposited in the interest-bearing trust fund account established pursuant to Section 8-42 and in accordance with Health and Safety Code § 44243 shall be exclusively expended for the purpose of reducing air pollution from motor vehicles pursuant to the California Clean Air Act of 1988 or the plan prepared pursuant to Article V (commencing with Section 40460) of Chapter 5.5 of Part 3 of the California Health and Safety Code (Health and Safety Code § 40460). 
(Code 1975, § 8-43; Ord. No. 91-03, § 1)  
Secs. 14-162—14-190. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - CRIMINAL JUSTICE FEES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of City to charge a criminal justice administration fee, Government Code § 29550.3. 
 
Sec. 14-191. - Criminal justice fees. 
Any person convicted of any criminal offense related to an arrest by officers of the Police Department shall reimburse the City any criminal justice fee imposed on the City by the County of Orange on account of the incarceration of the arrested person. 
(Code 1975, § 8-44; Ord. No. 92-10, § 1)  
Secs. 14-192—14-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - UTILITY USERS TAX[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Public Utilities Act, Public Utilities Code § 201 et seq.; utility user tax, Revenue and Taxation Code § 7284.2; disclosure of utility user's tax records prohibited, Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 7284.6, 7284.7. 
 
Sec. 14-221. - Description and purpose. 
(a)  This article is enacted solely to raise revenue for the general governmental purposes of the City. The people of La Palma adopt this article in order to maintain the utility users tax that has remained in effect since January 1994. By adopting this article by initiative, the people of La Palma intend to maintain the utility users tax in accordance with Article XIIIC of the California Constitution and Government Code § 53720 et seq. 
(b)  All of the proceeds from the tax imposed by this article shall be placed in the City's General Fund and used for the general governmental purposes and the usual current expenses of the City. The article is urgently required for the preservation of public peace, health and safety for the following reasons: If the City does not continue to collect the utility users tax, revenues to the City will be insufficient to maintain the present level of services to the citizens. The utility users tax is the only tax that is under the City's exclusive control and cannot be reduced or taken away by the County, State, or federal governments. The utility users tax is equitable to all citizens of La Palma since every user of telephone, electricity, gas and cable television utilities and services will share in the utility users tax. 
(Code 1975, § 8-45; Ord. No. 02-01, § 2)  
Sec. 14-222. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charges shall not include taxes, fees or other charges imposed by the County, State, or federal government. 
City means the City of La Palma. 
Cogenerator means any person employing cogeneration technology (as defined in California Public Utilities Code § 218.5) for producing power from other than a conventional power source for the generation of electricity for self use or sale to others. 
Gas means natural or manufactured gas or any alternative hydrocarbon fuel, including methanol, but shall not include diesel, gasoline or methanol fuel used in conventional internal combustion engines for the propulsion of vehicles or vessels as such terms are defined in the California Vehicle Code. 
Month means a calendar month. 
Nonutility supplier means: 
(1)  An electricity supplier, other than an electrical corporation franchised to serve the City, which generates electrical energy in capacities of at least 50 kilowatts for its own use or for sale to others, including those using cogeneration or fuel cell technologies; or 
(2)  A gas supplier, other than a gas corporation franchised to serve the City, that sells or supplies gas to other users within the City. 
Person means any domestic or foreign corporation, firm, association, syndicate, joint stock company, partnership of any kind, joint venture, club, Massachusetts business or common law trust, society, individuals or groups. 
Service means telephone, gas, electric or cable service actually used by the service user. 
Service supplier means any entity required to collect or self-impose and remit a tax as imposed by this article. 
Service user means a person required to pay a tax imposed by this article. 
Tax Administrator means the Finance Director of the City. 
Telephone corporation, electrical corporation, gas corporation and cable television corporation shall have the same meanings as defined in Sections 234, 218, 222, and 215-5, respectively, of the California Public Utilities Code (Public Utilities Code § 216.4, 218, 222, and 234) except, the terms "electrical corporation" and "gas corporation" shall also be construed to include any municipality or public agency engaged in the selling or supplying of electrical power or gas to a service user. 
(Code 1975, § 8-46; Ord. No. 02-01, § 2)  
Sec. 14-223. - General exemptions. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any person when imposition of such tax upon that person would be in violation of applicable federal law or the Constitution of the United States or the State of California. 
(1)  Entities defined under the term "telephone corporation, electrical corporation, gas corporation and cable television corporation" in section 14-222, and other public authorities, as defined by the Tax Administrator, shall be exempt from this tax. 
(2)  The City finds that entities which produce more than $25,000.00 per year in sales tax to the City provide a substantial contribution to the revenues needed to provide basic municipal services and accordingly entities which produce more than $25,000.00 a year in sales tax to the City are exempt from the utility taxes. 
(3)  Entities whose property is exempt from taxation pursuant to California Revenue and Taxation Code § 214. 
(b)  The Tax Administrator shall prepare a list of the persons exempt from the provisions of this article by virtue of this section and furnish a copy thereof to each service supplier. 
(c)  The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to charges related to late payments, returned checks and collection charges. 
(Code 1975, § 8-47; Ord. No. 02-01, § 2)  
Sec. 14-224. - Special exemption; very low income. 
(a)  Households with combined incomes equal to or less than the limits for "very low family income" set by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) shall be exempt from the payment of utility users tax. 
(b)  An application for exemption shall be filed with the Tax Administrator or his or her written designee on such forms as said administrator may provide. 
(c)  An application may be filed at any time. 
(d)  An application shall be verified by declaration under penalty of perjury and shall contain such information as may be required by the Tax Administrator or his or her written designee. 
(e)  The Tax Administrator or his or her written designee shall review each application and shall certify the applicant as exempt from the utility users tax if the eligibility requirements of this section are met, except that no exemption shall be granted to an applicant who is receiving service from a service supplier through a master meter, or who is sharing or prorating service with other service users even though such users qualify under the provisions of this section. No exemption shall be granted with respect to any tax imposed by this article which is or has been paid by a public agency or where the applicant receives funds from a public agency for the payment of such tax. 
(f)  If an applicant is certified as exempt, the Tax Administrator or his or her written designee shall notify applicant's service supplier, stating the name of the applicant, the address to which such service is being supplied, the account number, if any, and such other information as may be necessary for the service supplier to remove the exempt service user from its tax billing procedure. Upon receipt of such notice, the service supplier shall within 60 days discontinue billing applicant for taxes imposed by this article, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(g)  Taxes billed by the service supplier to the service user, prior to removing the service user from its billing procedure, shall be collected from the service user and the service user shall pay such taxes to the service supplier. Taxes billed to and paid by the service user between the time that the application for exemption is filed and the service supplier removes the service user from its taxing procedure will not be refunded to the service user. 
(h)  Exemptions certified by the Tax Administrator or his or her written designee shall continue so long as the facts supporting the qualification for exemption shall exist; provided, however, that the exemption shall automatically terminate with any change in the service address or residence of the exempt individual, or assignment of a different account number by the service supplier because of discontinuance or suspension of service at the request of the service user; and provided further, that such individual may nevertheless apply for a new exemption with each change of address or residence. 
(i)  Any service user who has been exempted under this section shall notify the Tax Administrator or his or her written designee within ten days of any change in fact or circumstance which might disqualify said individual from receiving such exemption. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to knowingly receive the benefits of the exemption provided by this section when the basis for such exemption does not exist or ceases to exist. 
(j)  Any service supplier, who determines by any means that a new or nonexempt service user is receiving service through a meter or connection exempt by virtue of any exemption issued to a previous user or exempt user of the same meter connection shall immediately notify the Tax Administrator or his or her written designee of such fact and the Tax Administrator or his or her written designee shall conduct an investigation to ascertain whether or not the provisions of this section have been complied with and, where appropriate, order the service supplier to commence collecting the tax from the nonexempt service user. 
(k)  The Tax Administrator or his or her designee shall review all exemptions every 12 months to ascertain compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 8-48; Ord. No. 02-01, § 2)  
Sec. 14-225. - Telephone users tax. 
(a)  There is imposed a tax upon the use of telephone services in the City, other than or by a telephone corporation, on the amounts paid for any intrastate, interstate, international and intercontinental communication services in the City (including telecopier, facsimile or modem services) and using any teletypewriter exchange services in the City or mobile or cellular telephone communications when the owner or lessee of the telephone has a billing address in the City. Interstate calls shall be deemed to include calls to the District of Columbia. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent of the total qualified charges made for such services and shall be paid by the person paying for such services. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "charges" shall not include charges for services paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones except that where such coin-operated service is furnished for a guaranteed amount, the amounts paid under such guarantee plus any fixed monthly or other periodic charge shall be included in the base for computing the amount of tax due; nor shall the term "charges" include charges for any type of service or equipment furnished by a service supplied subject to public utility regulations during any period in which the same or similar services or equipment are also available for sale or lease from persons other than a service supplier subject to public utility regulation; nor shall the term "telephone communication services" include land mobile service or maritime mobile services as defined in Section 2.1 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations ( 47 CFR 2.1). The term "telephone communication services" refers to that service which provides access to a telephone system and the privilege of telephone quality communication with substantially all persons having telephone stations which are part of such telephone system. The tax imposed by this section is intended to, and does, apply to charges billed to a telephone account having a situs in the City, irrespective of whether a particular communication service originates and/or terminates within the City. 
(c)  The tax imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the person providing the services, or the person receiving payment for such services. The amount of the tax collected in one month shall be remitted by U.S. Mail to the Tax Administrator on or before the last day of the following month; or at the option of the person required to collect and remit the tax, an estimated amount of tax collected, measured by the tax bill in the previous month, shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the last day of each month. 
(d)  To the extent permitted by law, notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the tax imposed under this section shall not be imposed upon any person for using intrastate telephone communication services to the extent that the amounts paid for such services are exempt from or not subject to the tax imposed under Division 2, Part 20 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code (Revenue and Taxation Code § 41001 et seq.), or the tax imposed under Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code, as interpreted and applied by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States in IRS Revenue Ruling 79-404. 
(Code 1975, § 8-49; Ord. No. 02-01, § 2; Ord. No. 2007-01, § 1) 
State Law reference— Information required from taxing authority when imposing utility user tax on telephone services, Public Utilities Code § 495.6.  
Sec. 14-226. - Electricity users tax. 
(a)  There is imposed a tax upon the use of electrical energy in the City. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent of the total qualified charges made for such energy by an electrical corporation franchised to serve the City and shall be paid by the person using the electricity. The tax applicable to electrical energy provided by a nonutility supplier shall be determined by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges the service user would have incurred if the electricity used had been provided by the electrical corporation franchised by the City. Rate schedules for this purpose shall be available from the City. Nonutility suppliers shall install and maintain an appropriate utility-type metering system which will enable compliance with this section, or may arrange another methodology for applying the tax provided such methodology is acceptable to the Tax Administrator. The term "charges," as used in this section, shall include charges made for: 
(1)  Metered electrical energy; and 
(2)  Minimum charges for service, including customer charges, service charges, demand charges, standby charges and all other annual and monthly charges, fuel or other cost adjustments. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "using electrical energy" shall not mean energy manufactured or generated in or on a boat, automobile, airplane, train or other device used for the purpose of transporting people and goods when used in the boat, automobile, airplane, train or device used for transporting people or goods in which the electricity was manufactured or generated. 
(c)  The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by any electrical energy service supplier. An electrical energy supplier providing wheeling services for delivery of electricity through its distribution system shall collect the tax from the service user based upon the cost of wheeling the electricity. The tax on electricity provided by self-production or by a nonutility supplier shall be collected and remitted in the manner set forth in section 14-229. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted by U.S. Mail, to the Tax Administrator, postmarked on or before the last day of the following month; or, at the option of the person required to collect or remit the tax, an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month or upon the payment pattern of the customers of the service supplier, shall be remitted. 
(Code 1975, § 8-50; Ord. No. 02-01, § 2)  
Sec. 14-227. - Tax on cogenerated electricity. 
(a)  The tax imposed on every person using cogenerated electrical energy in the City shall be at the rate specified in section 14-239. The tax applicable to cogenerated electrical energy used on site shall be determined by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges the cogenerator would have incurred if the energy used had been provided by the electrical corporation franchised by the City. 
(b)  The cogenerator shall install and maintain an appropriate metering system which will enable compliance with this section. 
(c)  The tax shall be collected and paid by the cogenerator under section 14-229 if the cogenerator consumes the energy. If the cogenerator sells the energy for consumption in the City, the tax will be imposed by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges for such service the service user would have incurred if the energy used had been provided by the electrical corporation franchised by the City, and shall be collected from the service user by the electrical energy supplier. 
(d)  The amount of the tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator by U.S. Mail on or before the last day of the following month. 
(Code 1975, § 8-51; Ord. No. 02-01, § 2)  
Sec. 14-228. - Gas users tax. 
(a)  There is imposed a tax upon the use of gas in the City, including gas which is transported through a pipeline distribution system or by mobile transport. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent of the total qualified charges made for such gas and shall be paid by the person using the gas. The tax applicable to gas provided by nonutility suppliers shall be determined by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges the service user would have incurred if the gas or gas transportation had been provided by the gas corporation franchised by the City. The term "charges," as used in this section, shall include: 
(1)  The charge for gas which is delivered through a gas pipeline distribution system or by mobile transport; 
(2)  Gas transportation charges; and 
(3)  Demand charges, service charges, customer charges, minimum charges, annual and monthly charges and any other charges authorized by the California Public Utilities Commission or Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. 
(b)  There shall be excluded from the tax imposed in this section: 
(1)  Charges made for gas which is to be resold and delivered through a gas pipeline distribution system or mobile transport; 
(2)  Charges made for gas used by a cogenerator or as the primary fuel in a fuel cell to generate electricity; and 
(3)  Charges made for natural gas used in the propulsion of a motor vehicle, as that phrase is defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California, utilizing natural gas. 
(c)  Tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the energy service supplier. A gas supplier providing transportation services for delivery of gas through a pipeline distribution system shall collect the tax from the service user based upon the cost of transporting the gas. The tax on gas provided by self-production or by a non-utility supplier shall be collected and remitted in the manner set forth in section 14-229. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted by U.S. Mail, to the Tax Administrator, postmarked on or before the last day of the following month; or, at the option of the person required to collect or remit the tax, an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month or upon the payment pattern of the customers of the service supplier, shall be remitted. 
(Code 1975, § 8-52; Ord. No. 02-01, § 2)  
Sec. 14-229. - Collection of tax from service users receiving direct purchase of gas or electricity. 
(a)  Any service user subject to the tax imposed by sections 14-225, 14-226, 14-227 and 14-228 hereof, who produces electricity or gas for self-use or who receives electricity or gas directly from a nonutility supplier not under the jurisdiction of this article or otherwise not having the full tax due on the use of gas or electricity in the City directly billed and collected by the service supplier, shall report said fact to the Tax Administrator and remit the tax due directly to the City within 30 days of such use. 
(b)  The Tax Administrator may require said service user to identify its nonutility supplier and provide, subject to audit, filed tax returns or other satisfactory evidence documenting the quantity of electricity or gas used and the price thereof. 
(Code 1975, § 8-53; Ord. No. 02-01, § 2)  
Sec. 14-230. - Cable television users tax. 
(a)  There is imposed a tax upon the use of cable television service and all other cable and related services provided by any person furnishing cable television services in the City. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent of the total charges made for such services and shall be paid by the person paying for such service. 
(b)  The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the person furnishing the cable television service. The amount collected shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator by U.S. Mail on a quarterly basis and shall be remitted with the franchise payment. 
(Code 1975, § 8-54; Ord. No. 02-01, § 2)  
Sec. 14-231. - Interest and penalty. 
(a)  Taxes collected from a service user which are not remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the due dates provided in this article are delinquent. Should the due date occur on a Saturday/Sunday or legal holiday, the return may be postmarked on the first regular working day following a Saturday/Sunday, or legal holiday. 
(b)  Penalties and interest on delinquent payments of any tax under this article shall be as set forth in section 14-123. 
(Code 1975, § 8-55; Ord. No. 02-01, § 2)  
Sec. 14-232. - Actions to collect. 
Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this article shall be deemed a personal debt owed by the service user to the City. Any such tax collected from a service user which has willfully been withheld from the Tax Administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the City by the person required to collect and remit. The person required to collect the tax under this article shall be deemed a public official for the purpose of collecting the tax. Any person owing money to the City under the provisions of this article shall be liable in a civil or criminal action brought in the name of the City or the people for the recovery of such amount, or the failure to pay such amount. 
(Code 1975, § 8-56; Ord. No. 02-01, § 2)  
Sec. 14-233. - Duty to collect; procedures. 
The duty to collect and remit the taxes imposed by this article shall be performed as follows: 
(1)  Subject to section 14-229, the tax shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same time as and along with the charges made in accordance with the regular billing practices of the service supplier. Where the amount paid by a service user to a service supplier is less than the full amount of the utility charge and tax which has accrued for the billing period, such amount and any subsequent payments by a service user shall be applied to the utility charge first until such charge has been fully satisfied. Any remaining balance shall be applied to taxes due. In those cases where a service user has notified the service supplier of refusal to pay the tax imposed on said utility charges, section 14-235(c) will apply. 
(2)  The duty to collect the tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first full regular billing period applicable to the service user where all charges normally included in such regular billing are subject to the provisions of this article. Where a person receives more than one billing, one or more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing. 
(Code 1975, § 8-57; Ord. No. 02-01, § 2)  
Sec. 14-234. - Additional power and duties of Tax Administrator. 
(a)  The Tax Administrator shall have the power and duty, and is directed to enforce each and all of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The Tax Administrator shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with provisions of this article for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes herein imposed. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be on file in the Tax Administrator's office. 
(c)  The Tax Administrator may make administrative agreements to vary the strict requirements of this article so that collection of any tax imposed herein may be made in conformance with the billing procedures of a particular service supplier so long as said agreements result in collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this article. A copy of each such agreement shall be on file in the Tax Administrator's office. 
(d)  The Tax Administrator shall determine the eligibility of any person who asserts a right to exemption from the tax imposed by this article. The Tax Administrator shall provide the service supplier with the name of any person who the Tax Administrator determines is exempt from the tax imposed hereby, together with the address to which service is supplied to any such exempt person. The Tax Administrator shall notify the service supplier of termination of any person's right to exemption hereunder, or the change of any address to which service is supplied to any exempt person. 
(e)  The Tax Administrator shall provide written notice to all service suppliers of any change in the City's boundaries at least 90 days prior to any annexation or other change in the City's boundaries. Said notice shall set forth the revised boundaries by street and address along with a copy of the final annexation order from Local Agency Formation Commission. 
(Code 1975, § 8-58; Ord. No. 02-01, § 2)  
Sec. 14-235. - Assessment; administrative remedy. 
(a)  The Tax Administrator may make an assessment for taxes not remitted by a person required to remit. 
(b)  Whenever the Tax Administrator determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by the service user from the amounts remitted to a person required to collect the tax, or that a service user has refused to pay the amount of tax, the Tax Administrator may relieve the person charged with collection of the tax of the obligation to collect taxes due under this article from certain named service users for specified billing periods. 
(c)  The service supplier shall provide the City with amounts refused and/or unpaid and the names and addresses of the service users neglecting to pay the tax imposed under provisions of this article. Whenever the service user has failed to pay the entire amount of the tax for a period of two or more billing periods, the service supplier shall be relieved of the obligation to collect such delinquent taxes due. 
(d)  In the event that the person charged with collection of the tax has been relieved of that duty pursuant to subsections (b) and (c) of this section, the Tax Administrator shall notify the service user that the Tax Administrator has assumed responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes. The notice shall be served on the service user by personal delivery or by deposit of the notice in the U.S. Mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the person required to collect the tax; or, should the service user have changed addresses, to the last known address. If a service user fails to remit the tax to the Tax Administrator within 15 days from the date of the service of the notice, which shall be the date of mailing if service is not accomplished in person, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax set forth in the notice shall be imposed, but not less than $5.00. The penalty shall become part of the tax herein required to be paid. 
(Code 1975, § 8-59; Ord. No. 02-01, § 2)  
Sec. 14-236. - Records. 
(a)  It is the duty of every person required to collect and remit to the City any tax imposed by this article to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine liability for the remittance to the Tax Administrator, which records the Tax Administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(b)  A person providing transportation services of natural gas to a service user for delivery through a gas pipeline distribution system shall make available to the Tax Administrator records of names and addresses of service users for whom only transportation services are provided by such persons. All information provided to the Tax Administrator pursuant to this section shall be used solely for the purposes of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 8-60; Ord. No. 02-01, § 2)  
Sec. 14-237. - Refunds. 
(a)  Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the Tax Administrator under this article, it shall be refunded by the Tax Administrator. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, a service supplier may claim a refund, or take as credit against taxes to be remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established that the service user from whom the tax has been collected did not owe the tax; provided however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax erroneously or illegally collected has either been refunded to the service user or credited to charges subsequently payable by the service user to the person required to collect and remit. A service supplier that has collected any amount of tax in excess of the amount of tax imposed by this article and actually due from a service user, may refund such amount to the service user and claim credit for such overpayment against the amount of tax which is due upon any future monthly returns, provided such credit is claimed in a return properly dated no later than three years from the date of overpayment. 
(c)  No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes the right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. 
(d)  Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, whenever a service supplier, pursuant to an order of the California Public Utilities Commission or a court of competent jurisdiction, makes a refund to service users of charges for past utility services, the taxes paid pursuant to this article on the amount of such refunded charges shall also be refunded to service users, and the service supplier shall be entitled to claim a credit for such refunded taxes against the amount of tax which is due upon the next monthly returns. In the event this article is repealed, the amounts of any refundable taxes will be borne by the City. 
(e)  A service supplier may refund the taxes collected to the service user in accordance with this section or by the service supplier's customary practice. 
(Code 1975, § 8-61; Ord. No. 02-01, § 2)  
Sec. 14-238. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this article or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this article or any part thereof. The people declare that they would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrases be declared unconstitutional. 
(Code 1975, § 8-62; Ord. No. 02-01, § 2)  
Sec. 14-239. - Annual review of utility users tax; temporary reduction of tax. 
(a)  The utility users tax shall be reviewed by the City Council on an annual basis, in conjunction with the City Council's consideration of the City's General Fund budget for the immediately succeeding fiscal year. 
(b)  Upon completion of the annual review required by subsection (a) of this section, and after finding that the projected financial condition of the City during the immediately succeeding fiscal year will not be adversely impacted, the City Council shall have the discretion to reduce the rate of the utility users tax imposed by this article from five percent to a lower rate not lower than one-quarter of one percent for such immediately succeeding fiscal year. 
(c)  In the event that the City Council acts to reduce the rate of the utility users tax in accordance with this subsection (c), then, subject to subsection (d) of this section, such reduction shall only remain in effect for the one fiscal year for which the City Council approves the reduction. Upon the conclusion of such fiscal year, the rate of the utility users tax shall automatically, and without further action of the City Council, revert from the reduced rate to five percent, unless the City Council takes a separate action in accordance with subsection (b) of this section to reduce the rate of the utility users tax to a lower rate not lower than one-quarter of one percent for the next succeeding fiscal year. 
(d)  In the event that the City Council acts to reduce the rate of the utility users tax in accordance with subsection (b) of this section, and the City Council subsequently determines that the tax rate reduction adversely impacts the City's financial condition, the City Council shall have the discretion to increase the utility users tax for the remainder of the fiscal year to a rate not to exceed five percent. 
(e)  The service supplier shall, upon notification, modify any utility users tax commencing with the first full billing period which occurs after the effective date of such action by the City Council. 
(Code 1975, § 8-63; Ord. No. 02-01, § 2; Init. Ord. No. 10-01, § 1, 3-2-2002; Res. No. 2010-62, 12-7-2010)  
Sec. 14-240. - CAP/Maximum tax payable. 
The following CAP or maximum amount shall be payable under the provisions of this article: 
(1)  The combined total maximum of electricity, cogenerated electricity, gas, telephone, water and cable user taxes paid by any single service user for one location under this article shall not exceed the sum of $10,000.00 during any 12-month period between January 1 and December 31. 
(2)  A service user may deposit the maximum tax specified in subsection (a) of this section with the Tax Administrator during the month of January each year as payment in advance of taxes due under this article for the 12-month period commencing on the first day of said month and ending on December 31 thereafter. Any service user making a deposit of maximum tax shall not thereafter be billed for any tax under this article for said 12-month period. The Tax Administrator shall notify each service supplier when to cease and when to resume billing the tax to such service users. 
(3)  The penalty assessment provided in section 14-231 shall not be counted in computing the maximum tax as provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(4)  Any service user paying more than a maximum tax provided for in subsection (a) of this section during any 12-month period commencing January 1 and ending December 31, may claim a refund or credit for such overpayment from the Tax Administrator in the manner provided in section 14-237. 
(5)  The phrase "one location" as used in subsection (a) of this section means one or more contiguous sites for which the service user receives one or more utility billings. 
(Code 1975, § 8-64; Ord. No. 02-01, § 2)  
Chapter 16 - FIRE PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Fire protection generally, Government Code § 38600 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Fire protection services. 
Fire protection services for the City shall be provided by the Orange County Fire Authority, which shall be operated under the Fire Chief of the Orange County Fire Authority. Unless otherwise stated in this chapter or this Code, the Fire Chief or designee is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter.  
Secs. 16-2—16-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-09, § 1, adopted October 18, 2016, repealed art. II, §§ 16-21—16-24, in its entirety; and § 3 enacted a new art. II, to read as set out herein. Former art. II, pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Ord. No. 2010-04, §§ 2(9-1), (9-2), adopted December 7, 2010 and Ord. No. 2013-05, § 3, adopted November 19, 2013. 
 
Sec. 16-21. - References to officials in adopted technical codes. 
Unless otherwise stated in this chapter, where reference is made to the duties of certain officials named within the technical codes which are adopted by reference in this chapter, then that designated official of the City or of Orange County, California, who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said technical code shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of that technical code are concerned. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § 3, 10-18-2016)  
Sec. 16-22. - Codes adopted. 
For the purpose of prescribing regulations and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided, the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, based on the 2015 International Fire Code as published by the International Code Council, as amended by this article shall constitute the Fire Code of the City. Where the California Code of Regulations and State Building Standards Code of Regulations differ from any sections of the Fire Code, State regulations shall prevail over the Fire Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § 3, 10-18-2016)  
Sec. 16-23. - Enforcement and inspections. 
The California Fire Code and the International Fire Code with amendments shall be enforced by the Orange County Fire Authority, which shall be operated under the Fire Chief of the Orange County Fire Authority. The Fire Chief of the Orange County Fire Authority may designate such members of the fire authority as inspectors as shall be necessary from time to time. All fees for services provided for in the Fire Code shall not take effect until a resolution for such fees is adopted by the Orange County Fire Authority Board of Directors pursuant to California Government Code Sections 66016 and 66020. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § 3, 10-18-2016)  
Sec. 16-24. - Amendments, additions, and deletions to the 2016 California Fire Code. 
Chapter 1 Scope and Administration is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments: 
Section 109.4 Violation penalties is hereby revised to read as follows: 
109.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or shall fail to comply with any issued orders or notices or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall result in penalties assessed as prescribed in the OCFA Prevention Field Services adopted fee schedule. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
Section 109.4.2 Infraction and misdemeanor is hereby added as follows: 
109.4.2 Infraction and misdemeanor. Persons operating or maintaining any occupancy, premises or vehicle subject to this code that shall permit any fire or life safety hazard to exist on premises under their control shall be guilty of an infraction. Persons who fail to take immediate action to abate a fire or life safety hazard when ordered or notified to do so by the chief or a duly authorized representative are guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Chapter 2 Definitions is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments: 
Sections 202 General Definitions is hereby revised by adding "OCFA," "Sky Lantern," and "Spark Arrester" as follows: 
202 General Definitions 
OCFA: Orange County Fire Authority, fire authority having jurisdiction. 
SKY LANTERN. An airborne lantern typically made of paper, Mylar, or other lightweight material with a wood, plastic, or metal frame containing a candle, fuel cell, or other heat source that provides buoyancy. 
SPARK ARRESTER. A listed device constructed of noncombustible material specifically for the purpose of meeting one of the following conditions: 
1.  Removing and retaining carbon and other flammable particles/debris from the exhaust flow of an internal combustion engine in accordance with California Vehicle Code Section 38366. 
2.  Fireplaces that burn solid fuel in accordance with California Building Code Chapter 28. 
Chapter 3 General Requirements is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments: 
Section 304.1.2 Vegetation is hereby revised to read as follows: 
304.1.2 Vegetation. Type, amount, or arrangement of weeds, grass, vines or other growth that is capable of being ignited and endangering property needing to comply with OCFA Guidelines, shall be cut, thinned, and removed by the owner or occupant of the premises in accordance with OCFA Guideline C-05 "Vegetation Management Guideline—Technical Design for New Construction, Fuel Modification Plans, and Maintenance Program. Vegetation clearance requirement in urban-wildland interface areas shall be in accordance with Chapter 49. 
Section 305.6 Hazardous Conditions is hereby added as follows: 
305.6 Hazardous conditions. Outdoor fires are not allowed when predicted sustained winds exceed 8 MPH during periods when relative humidity is less than 25%, or a red flag condition has been declared or public announcement is made, when an official sign was caused to be posted by the fire code official, or when such fires present a hazard as determined by the fire code official. 
Section 305.7 Disposal of rubbish is hereby added as follows: 
305.7 Disposal of rubbish. Rubbish, trash or combustible waste material shall be burned only within an approved incinerator and in accordance with Section 307.2.1. 
Section 307 OPEN BURNING, RECREATIONAL FIRES AND PORTABLE OUTDOOR FIREPLACES is hereby revised to read as follows: 
SECTION 307 OPEN BURNING, RECREATIONAL FIRES, FIRE PITS, FIRE RINGS, AND PORTABLE OUTDOOR FIREPLACES 
Sections 307.6 Outdoor Fireplaces, Fire Pits, Fire Rings, or similar devices used at Group R Occupancies is hereby added as follows: 
307.6 Outdoor Fireplaces, Fire Pits, Fire Rings, or similar devices used at Group R Occupancies. Outdoor fireplaces, fire pits, fire rings, or similar exterior devices used at Group R shall comply with this section. 
Exception: Barbeques, grills, and other portable devices intended solely for cooking. 
Section 307.6.1 Gas-fueled devices is hereby added as follows: 
307.6.1 Gas-fueled devices. Outdoor fireplaces, fire pits and similar devices fueled by natural gas or liquefied-petroleum gas are allowed when approved by the Building Department and the device is designed to only burn a gas flame and not wood or other solid fuel. At R-3 occupancies, combustible construction shall not be located within three feet of an atmospheric column that extends vertically from the perimeter of the device. At other R occupancies, the minimum distance shall be ten feet. Where a permanent Building Department approved hood and vent is installed, combustible construction may encroach upon this column between the bottom of the hood and the vent opening. Where chimneys or vents are installed, they shall have a spark arrester as defined in Section 202. 
Section 307.6.2 Devices using wood or fuels other than natural gas or liquefied-petroleum gas is hereby added as follows: 
307.6.2 Devices using wood or fuels other than natural gas or liquefied-petroleum gas. Fireplaces burning wood or other solid fuel shall be constructed in accordance with the California Building Code. Fires in a fireplace shall be contained within a firebox with an attached chimney. The opening in the face of the firebox shall have an installed and maintained method of arresting sparks. The burning of wood or other solid fuel in a device is not allowed within 15 feet of combustible structures, unless within a permanent or portable fireplace. Conditions which could cause a fire to spread within 25 feet of a structure or to vegetation shall be eliminated prior to ignition. Fires in devices burning wood or solid fuel shall be in accordance with Sections 305, 307, and 308. 
Section 307.6.2.1 Where prohibited is hereby added as follows: 
307.6.2.1 Where prohibited. The burning of wood and other solid fuels shall not be conducted within a fuel modification zone. Wood and other solid fuel burning fires in devices other than permanent fireplaces are not allowed within Wildfire Risk Areas (WRA) and Wildland-Urban Interface Areas (WUI) or in locations where conditions could cause the spread of fire to the WRA or WUI unless determined by the Fire Code Official that the location or design of the device should reasonably prevent the start of a wildfire. 
Section 309.2.1 Indoor charging of electric carts/cars is hereby added as follows: 
309.2.1 Indoor charging of electric carts/cars. Indoor charging of electric carts/cars where the combined volume of all battery electrolyte exceeds 50 gallons shall comply with following: 
1.  Spill control and neutralization shall be provided and comply with Section 608.5. 
2.  Room ventilation shall be provided and comply with Section 608.6.1 
3.  Signage shall be provided and comply with Section 608.7.1 
4.  Smoke detection shall be provided and comply with Section 608.9. 
Section 320 Fuel Modification Requirements for New Construction is hereby added as follows: 
320 Fuel Modification Requirements for New Construction. All new structures and facilities adjoining land containing hazardous combustible vegetation shall be approved and in accordance with the requirements of OCFA Guideline C-05 "Vegetation Management Guideline — Technical Design for New Construction Fuel Modification Plans and Maintenance Program." 
Section 321 Clearance of brush or vegetation growth from roadways is hereby added as follows: 
321 Clearance of brush or vegetation growth from roadways. The fire code official is authorized to cause areas within 10 feet (3048 mm) on each side of portions of highways and private streets which are improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic, to be cleared of flammable vegetation and other combustible growth. Measurement shall be from the flow-line or the end of the improved edge of the roadway surfaces. 
Exception: Single specimens of trees, ornamental shrubbery or cultivated ground cover such as green grass, ivy, succulents or similar plants used as ground covers, provided that they do not form a means of readily transmitting fire. 
Section 322 Unusual Circumstances is hereby added as follows: 
322 Unusual circumstances. The fire code official may suspend enforcement of the vegetation management requirements and require reasonable alternative measures designed to advance the purpose of this code if determined that in any specific case that any of the following conditions exist: 
1.  Difficult terrain. 
2.  Danger of erosion. 
3.  Presence of plants included in any state and federal resources agencies, California Native Plant Society and county-approved list of wildlife, plants, rare, endangered and/or threatened species. 
4.  Stands or groves of trees or heritage trees. 
5.  Other unusual circumstances that make strict compliance with the clearance of vegetation provisions undesirable or impractical. 
Section 323 Use of Equipment is hereby added as follows: 
323 Use of equipment. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall use, operate, or cause to be operated in, upon or adjoining any hazardous fire area any internal combustion engine which uses hydrocarbon fuels, unless the engine is equipped with a spark arrester as defined in Section 202 maintained in effective working order, or the engine is constructed, equipped and maintained for the prevention of fire. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Engines used to provide motor power for trucks, truck tractors, buses, and passenger vehicles, except motorcycles, are not subject to this section if the exhaust system is equipped with a muffler as defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California. 
2.  Turbocharged engines are not subject to this section if all exhausted gases pass through the rotating turbine wheel, there is no exhaust bypass to the atmosphere, and the turbocharger is in good mechanical condition 
Section 323.1 Spark Arresters is hereby added as follows: 
323.1 Spark arresters. Spark arresters shall comply with Section 202, and when affixed to the exhaust system of engines or vehicles subject to Section 323 shall not be placed or mounted in such a manner as to allow flames or heat from the exhaust system to ignite any flammable material. 
Section 324 Sky Lanterns or similar devices is hereby added as follows: 
324 Sky Lanterns or similar devices. The ignition and/or launching of a Sky Lantern or similar device is prohibited. 
Chapter 4: Emergency Planning and Preparedness. Adopt only the sections, subsections, and amendment listed below: 
401 
401.3.4 
401.9 
402 
403.2 
404.5 — 404.6.6 
407 
Section 407.5 is revised to read as follows: 
407.5 Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement. Where required by the fire code official, each application for a permit shall include OCFA's Chemical Classification Packet in accordance with Section 5001.5.2. 
Chapter 5 Fire Service Features is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments: 
SECTION 501.1 Scope is revised to read as follows: 
501.1 Scope. Fire service features for buildings, structures and premises shall comply with this chapter and, where required by the fire code official, with OCFA Guideline B-09, "Fire Master Plan for Commercial & Residential Development." Fire service features for buildings, structures and premises located in State Responsibility Areas shall also comply with OCFA Guideline B-09a, "Fire Safe Development in State Responsibility Areas." 
Section 510.1 Emergency responder radio coverage is revised to read as follows: 
510.1 Emergency responder radio coverage in new buildings. All new buildings shall have approved radio coverage for emergency responders within the building based upon the existing coverage levels of the public safety communication systems of the jurisdiction at the exterior of the building. This section shall not require improvement of the existing public safety communication systems. The Emergency Responder Radio Coverage System shall comply with the local authority having jurisdiction's ordinance and this code. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Where it is determined by the fire code official that the radio coverage system is not needed. 
2.  In facilities where emergency responder radio coverage is required and such systems, components or equipment required could have a negative impact on the normal operations of that facility, the fire code official shall have the authority to accept an automatically activated emergency radio coverage system. 
This section shall not apply to the following: 
1.  Existing buildings or structures, unless required by the Building Official and OCFA for buildings and structures undergoing extensive remodel and/or expansion. 
2.  Elevators. 
3.  Structures that are three stories or less without subterranean storage or parking and that do not exceed 50,000 square feet on any single story. 
4.  Wood-constructed residential structures four stories or less without subterranean storage or parking that are not built integral to an above ground multi-story parking structure. 
5.  Should construction that is three stories or less that does not exceed 50,000 square feet on any single story include subterranean storage or parking, then this ordinance shall apply only to the subterranean areas. 
Section 510.2 Emergency responder radio coverage in existing buildings is deleted without replacement. 
Section 510.4.2.2 Technical Criteria is revised to read as follows: 
510.4.2.2 Technical criteria. The fire code official shall maintain a document providing the specific technical information and requirements for the emergency responder radio coverage system. This document shall contain, but not be limited to, the various frequencies required, the location of radio sites, effective radiated power of radio sites, and other supporting technical information. 
1.  The frequency range supported from the 800 MHz Countywide Communications System shall be 851-869 MHz (base transmitter frequencies). 
2.  The frequency range supported to the 800 MHz Countywide Communications System shall be 806-824 MHz (radio field transmit frequencies). 
3.  A public safety radio amplification system shall include filters to reject frequencies below 851 MHz and frequencies above 869 MHz by a minimum of 35dB. 
4.  All system components must be 100 percent compatible with analog and digital modulations after installation without adjustments or modifications. The systems must be capable of encompassing the frequencies stated herein and capable of future modifications to a frequency range subsequently established by the jurisdiction. 
5.  Active devices shall have a minimum of -50 dB 3 rd order intermodulation protection. 
6.  All active in-building coverage devices shall be FCC Part 90 Type Certified 
Section 510.5.1 Approval prior to installation is revised to read as follows: 
510.5.1 Approval prior to installation. Amplification systems capable of operating on frequencies licensed to any public safety agency by the FCC shall not be installed without prior plan submittal, coordination and approval from Orange County Communications and a copy of the approved plan provided to the fire and building code officials. 
Section 510.5.2 Minimum qualification of personnel is revised to read as follows: 
510.5.2 Minimum qualifications of personnel. The minimum qualifications of the system designer and lead installation personnel shall include both of the following: 
1.  A valid FCC-issued general radio operator's license. 
2.  Certification of in-building system training issued by a nationally recognized organization, school or a certificate issued by the manufacturer of the equipment being installed. 
Section 510.5.3 Acceptance test procedure item 7 is revised to read as follows: 
510.5.3 Acceptance test procedure. When an emergency responder radio coverage system is required, and upon completion of installation, the building owner shall have the radio system tested to ensure that two-way coverage on each floor of the building is not less than 90 percent. The test procedure shall be conducted as follows: 
7.  As part of the installation a spectrum analyzer or other suitable test equipment shall be utilized to ensure spurious oscillations are not being generated by the subject signal booster. This test shall be conducted at the time of installation and subsequent annual inspections by the FCC licensed technician hired by the property owner and an OCSD/Communications Division FCC-certified technician. 
Section 510.6.1 Testing and proof of compliance is revised to read as follows: 
510.6.1 Testing and proof of compliance. The owner of the building or their representative shall have the emergency responder radio coverage system inspected and tested annually or where structural changes occur including additions or remodels that could materially change the original field performance tests. Testing shall consist of the following: 
1.  In-building system components shall be tested to determine general functional operability. 
2.  Signal boosters shall be tested to ensure that the gain is the same as it was upon initial installation and acceptance. 
3.  Backup batteries and power supplies shall be tested under load of a period of one hour to verify that they will properly operate during an actual power outage. If within the 1-hour test period the battery exhibits symptoms of failure, the test shall be extended for additional 1-hour periods until the integrity of the battery can be determined. 
4.  Other active components shall be checked to verify operation within the manufacturer's specifications. 
5.  If noncompliance is found, the FCC licensed technician will assess improvements necessary and provide such information to OCSD Communications and the fire and building code officials. 
6.  At the conclusion of the testing, a certification report, which shall verify compliance with Section 510.5.3, shall be submitted to OCSD Communications and the fire and building code officials. 
Chapter 6 Building Services and Systems is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Chapter 7 Fire-Resistance-Rated Construction is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Chapter 8 Interior Finish, Decorative Materials and Furnishings is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Adopt Chapter 9 Fire Protection Systems is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments: 
Section 903.2 Where required is hereby revised to read as follows: 
903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in buildings and structures shall be provided when one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  New buildings: Notwithstanding any applicable provisions of Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.19, an automatic fire-extinguishing system shall also be installed in all occupancies when the total building area exceeds 5,000 square feet as defined in Section 202, regardless of fire areas or allowable area, or is more than two stories in height. 
Exception: Subject to approval by the Fire Code Official, open parking garages in accordance with Section 406.5 of the California Building Code. 
2.  Existing R-3 Buildings: An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout when an addition is 51% or more of the existing building area as defined in Section 202, and/or greater than 1,000 square feet within a two year period. 
Exception: Additions to Group R-3 occupancies shall comply with Section 903.2.8 (2). 
Section 903.2.8 Group R is hereby revised to read as follows: 
903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a Group R fire area as follows: 
3.  New Buildings: An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all new buildings. 
4.  Existing R-3 Buildings: An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout when an addition is 51% or more of the existing building area as defined in Section 202, and/or greater than 1,000 square feet within a two year period. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Existing Group R-3 occupancies converted to Group R-3.1 occupancies and not housing bedridden clients, not housing nonambulatory clients above the first floor, and not housing clients above the second floor. 
2.  Existing Group R-3 occupancies converted to Group R-3.1 occupancies housing only one bedridden client and complying with Section 435.8.3.3 of the California Building Code. 
3.  Pursuant to Health and Safety Code, Section 13113, occupancies housing ambulatory children only, none of whom are mentally ill children or children with intellectual disabilities, and the buildings or portions thereof in which such children are housed are not more than two stories in height, and building or portions thereof housing such children have an automatic fire alarm system activated by approved smoke detectors. 
4.  Pursuant to Health and Safety Code, Section 13143.6, occupancies licensed for protective social care which house ambulatory clients only, none of whom is a child (under the age of 18 years), or who is elderly (65 years of age or over). 
When not used in accordance with Section 504.2 or 506.3 of the California Building Code, an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2 shall be allowed in Group R-2.1 occupancies. 
An automatic sprinkler system designed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.3 shall not be utilized in Group R-2.1 or R-4 occupancies. 
Section 903.3.5.3 Hydraulically calculated systems is hereby added as follows: 
903.3.5.3 Hydraulically calculated systems. The design of hydraulically calculated fire sprinkler systems shall not exceed 90% of the water supply capacity. 
Exception: 
When static pressure exceeds 100 psi, and when required by the fire code official, the fire sprinkler system shall not exceed the water supply capacity specified by Table 903.3.5.3. 
  
Chapter 10 Means of Egress is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Chapter 11 Construction Requirements for Existing Buildings. Adopt only those sections and subsections listed below: 
1103.7 
1103.7.3 
1103.7.3.1 
1103.7.8 — 1103.7.8.2 
1103.7.9 — 1103.7.9.10 
1103.8 — 1103.8.5.3 
1107 
1113 
1114 
1115 
1116 
Chapter 20 Aviation Facilities is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Chapter 21 Dry Cleaning is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Chapter 22 Combustible Dust-Producing Operations is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Chapter 23 Motor Fuel-Dispensing Facilities and Repair Garages is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Chapter 24 Flammable Finishes is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Chapter 25 Fruit and Crop Ripening is deleted in its entirety. 
Chapter 26 Fumigation and Insecticidal Fogging is deleted in its entirety. 
Chapter 27 Semiconductor Fabrication Facilities is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Chapter 28 Lumber Yards and Agro-Industrial, Solid Biomass and Woodworking Facilities is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments: 
Section 2801.2 Permit is hereby revised to read as follows: 
2801.2 Permit. Permits shall be required as set forth in Section 105.6 and 105.6.29. 
Section 2808.2 Storage site is hereby revised to read as follows: 
2808.2 Storage site. Storage sites shall be level and on solid ground, elevated soil lifts or other all-weather surface. Sites shall be thoroughly cleaned and approval obtained from the fire code official before transferring products to the site . 
Section 2808.3 Size of piles is hereby revised to read as follows: 
2808.3 Size of piles. Piles shall not exceed 15 feet in height, 50 feet in width and 100 feet in length. 
Exception: 
The fire code official is authorized to allow the pile size to be increased where a fire protection plan is provided for approval that includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
1.  Storage yard areas and materials-handling equipment selection, design and arrangement shall be based upon sound fire prevention and protection principles. 
2.  Factors that lead to spontaneous heating shall be identified in the plan, and control of the various factors shall be identified and implemented, including provisions for monitoring the internal condition of the pile. 
3.  The plan shall include means for early fire detection and reporting to the public fire department; and facilities needed by the fire department for fire extinguishment including a water supply and fire hydrants. 
4.  Fire apparatus access roads around the piles and access roads to the top of the piles shall be established, identified and maintained. 
5.  Regular yard inspections by trained personnel shall be included as part of an effective fire prevention maintenance program. 
Additional fire protection called for in the plan shall be provided and shall be installed in accordance with this code. The increase of the pile size shall be based upon the capabilities of the installed fire protection system and features. 
Section 2808.4 Pile Separation is hereby revised to read as follows: 
2808.4. Pile separation. Piles shall be separated from adjacent piles by a minimum distance of 20 feet. Additionally, piles shall have a minimum separation of 100 feet from combustible vegetation. 
Section 2808.7 Pile fire protection is hereby revised to read as follows: 
2808.7 Pile fire protection. Automatic sprinkler protection shall be provided in conveyor tunnels and combustible enclosures that pass under a pile. Combustible conveyor systems and enclosed conveyor systems shall be equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system. Oscillating sprinklers with a sufficient projectile reach are required to maintain a 40% to 60% moisture content and wet down burning/smoldering areas. 
Section 2808.9 Material-handling equipment is hereby revised to read as follows: 
2808.9 Material-handling equipment. All material-handling equipment operated by an internal combustion engine shall be provided and maintained with an approved spark arrester. Approved material-handling equipment shall be available for moving wood chips, hogged material, wood fines and raw product during fire-fighting operations. 
Section 2808.11 Temperature control is hereby added as follows: 
2808.11 Temperature control. The temperature shall be monitored and maintained as specified in Sections 2808.11.1 and 2808.11.2. 
Section 2808.11.1 Pile temperature control is hereby added as follows: 
2808.11.1 Pile temperature control. Piles shall be rotated when internal temperature readings are in excess of 165 degrees Fahrenheit. 
Section 2808.11.2 New material temperature control is hereby added as follows: 
2808.11.2 New material temperature control. New loads delivered to the facility shall be inspected and tested at the facility entry prior to taking delivery. Material with temperature exceeding 165 degrees Fahrenheit shall not be accepted on the site. New loads shall comply with the requirements of this chapter and be monitored to verify that the temperature remains stable. 
Section 2808.12 Water availability is hereby added as follows: 
2808.12 Water Availability. Facilities with over 2500 cubic feet shall provide a water supply. The minimum fire flow shall be no less than 500 GPM @ 20 psi for a minimum of 1 hour duration for pile heights up to 6 feet and 2 hour duration for pile heights over 6 feet. If there is no water purveyor, an alternate water supply with storage tank(s) shall be provided for fire suppression. The water supply tank(s) shall provide a minimum capacity of 2500 gallons per pile (maximum 30,000 gallons) for piles not exceeding 6 feet in height and 5000 gallons per pile (maximum 60,000) for piles exceeding 6 feet in height. Water tank(s) shall not be used for any other purpose unless the required fire flow is left in reserve within the tank at all times. An approved method shall be provided to maintain the required amount of water within the tank(s). 
Section 2808.13 Tipping area is hereby added as follows: 
2808.13 Tipping areas shall comply with the following: 
1.  Tipping areas shall not exceed a maximum area of 50 feet by 50 feet. 
2.  Material within a tipping area shall not exceed 5 feet in height at any time. 
3.  Tipping areas shall be separated from all piles by a 20 foot wide fire access lane. 
4.  A fire hydrant or approved fire water supply outlet shall be located within 150 feet of all points along the perimeter of the tipping area. 
5.  All material within a tipping area shall be processed within 5 days of receipt. 
Section 2808.14 Emergency Contact is hereby added as follows: 
2808.14 Emergency Contact. The contact information of a responsible person or persons shall be provided to the Fire Department and shall be posted at the entrance to the facility for responding units. The responsible party should be available to respond to the business in emergency situation. 
Chapter 29 Manufacture of Organic Coatings is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Chapter 30 Industrial Ovens is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Chapter 31 Tents and Other Membrane Structures is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Chapter 32 High-Piled Combustible Storage is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Chapter 33 Fire Safety During Construction and Demolition is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Chapter 34 Tire Rebuilding and Tire Storage is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Chapter 35 Welding and Other Hot Work is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Chapter 36 Marinas is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Chapter 37 Combustible Fibers is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Chapter 48 Motion Picture and Television Production Studio Sound Stages, Approved Production Facilities and Production Locations is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Chapter 49 Requirements for Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Areas is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments: 
Section 4906.3 Requirements is hereby revised to read as follows: 
4906.3 Requirements. Hazardous vegetation and fuels around all applicable buildings and structure shall be maintained in accordance with the following laws and regulations: 
1.  Public Resources Code, Section 4291. 
2.  California Code of Regulations, Title 14, Division 1.5, Chapter 7, Subchapter 3, Section 1299 (see guidance for implementation "General Guideline to Create Defensible Space"). 
3.  California Government Code, Section 51182. 
4.  California Code of Regulations, Title 19, Division 1, Chapter 7, Subchapter 1, Section 3.07. 
5.  OCFA Guideline C-05 "Vegetation Management Guideline — Technical Design for New Construction Fuel Modification Plans and Maintenance Program." 
Section 4908 Fuel Modification Requirements for New Construction is hereby added as follows: 
4908 Fuel Modification Requirements for New Construction. All new buildings to be built or installed in a Wildfire Risk Area shall comply with the following: 
1.  Preliminary fuel modification plans shall be submitted to and approved by the fire code official prior to or concurrently with the approval of any tentative map. 
2.  Final fuel modification plans shall be submitted to and approved by the fire code official prior to the issuance of a grading permit. 
3.  The fuel modification plans shall meet the criteria set forth in the Fuel Modification Section of OCFA Guideline C-05 "Vegetation Management Guideline — Technical Design for New Construction Fuel Modification Plans and Maintenance Program." 
3.1  The fuel modification plan shall include provisions for the maintenance of the fuel modification in perpetuity. 
4.  The fuel modification plan may be altered if conditions change. Any alterations to the fuel modification areas shall have prior approval from the fire code official. 
5.  All elements of the fuel modification plan shall be maintained in accordance with the approved plan and are subject to the enforcement process outlined in the Fire Code. 
Chapter 50 Hazardous Materials — General Provisions is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments. 
Section 5001.5.2 Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement (HMIS) is hereby revised to read as follows: 
5001.5.2 Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement (HMIS). Where required by the fire code official, an application for a permit shall include Orange County Fire Authority's Chemical Classification Packet, which shall be completed and approved prior to approval of plans, and/or the storage, use or handling of chemicals on the premises. The Chemical Classification Packet shall include the following information: 
1.  Product Name. 
2.  Component. 
3.  Chemical Abstract Service (CAS) number. 
4.  Location where stored or used. 
5.  Container size. 
6.  Hazard classification. 
7.  Amount in storage. 
8.  Amount in use-closed systems 
9.  Amount in use-open systems. 
Section 5003.1.1.1 Extremely Hazardous Substances is hereby added as follows: 
5003.1.1.1 Extremely Hazardous Substances. No person shall use or store any amount of extremely hazardous substances (EHS) in excess of the disclosable amounts (see Health and Safety Code Section 25500 et al) in a residential zoned or any residentially developed property. 
Chapter 51 Aerosols is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Chapter 53 Compressed Gases is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Chapter 54 Corrosive materials is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Chapter 55 Cryogenic Fluids is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Chapter 56 Explosives and Fireworks is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments: 
Section 5608.2 Firing is hereby added as follows: 
5608.2 Firing. All fireworks displays, regardless of mortar, device, or shell size, shall be electrically fired. 
Section 5608.3 Application for Permit is hereby added as follows: 
Section 5608.3 Application for Permit. A diagram of the grounds on which the display is to be held showing the point at which the fireworks are to be discharged, the fallout area based on 100 feet per inch of shell size, the location of all buildings, roads, and other means of transportation, the lines behind which the audience will be restrained, the location of all nearby trees, telegraph or telephone line, or other overhead obstructions shall be provided to OCFA. 
Chapter 57 Flammable and Combustible Liquids is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Chapter 58 Flammable Gases and Flammable Cryogenic Fluids is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Chapter 59 Flammable Solids is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Chapter 60 Highly Toxic and Toxic Materials is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Chapter 61 Liquefied Petroleum Gases is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Chapter 62 Organic Peroxides is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Chapter 63 Oxidizers, Oxidizing Gases, and Oxidizing Cryogenic Fluids is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Chapter 64 Pyrophoric Materials is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Chapter 65 Pyroxylin (Cellulose Nitrate) Plastics is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Chapter 66 Unstable (Reactive) Materials is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Chapter 67 Water-Reactive Solids and Liquids is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Chapter 80 Referenced Standards is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments: 
NFPA 13, 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems is hereby amended as follows: 
Section 6.7.3 is hereby revised to read as follows: 
6.7.3 Fire department connections (FDC) shall be of an approved type. The location shall be approved and be no more than 150 feet from a public hydrant. The FDC may be located within 150 feet of a private fire hydrant when approved by the fire code official. The size of piping and the number of 2½" inlets shall be approved by the fire code official. If acceptable to the water authority, it may be installed on the backflow assembly. Fire department inlet connections shall be painted OSHA safety red or as approved. When the fire sprinkler density design requires more than 500 gpm (including inside hose stream demand), or a standpipe system is included, four 2½" inlets shall be provided. 
Section 8.3.3.1 is hereby revised to read as follows: 
8.3.3.1 When fire sprinkler systems are installed in shell buildings of undetermined use (Spec Buildings) other than warehouses (S occupancies), fire sprinklers of the quick-response type shall be used. Use is considered undetermined if a specific tenant/occupant is not identified at the time the fire sprinkler plan is submitted. Sprinklers in light hazard occupancies shall be one of the following: 
(1)  Quick-response type as defined in 3.6.4.8 
(2)  Residential sprinklers in accordance with the requirements of 8.4.5 
(3)  Quick response CMSA sprinklers 
(4)  ESFR sprinklers 
(5)  Standard-response sprinklers used for modifications or additions to existing light hazard systems equipped with standard-response sprinklers 
(6)  Standard-response sprinklers used where individual standard-response sprinklers are replaced in existing light hazard systems 
Section 11.1.1.1 is hereby added as follows: 
11.1.1.1 When fire sprinkler systems are required in buildings of undetermined use other than warehouses, they shall be designed and installed to have a fire sprinkler density of not less than that required for an Ordinary Hazard Group 2 use, with no reduction(s) in density or design area. Warehouse fire sprinkler systems shall be designed to Figure 16.2.1.3.2(d) curve "G". Use is considered undetermined if a specific tenant/occupant is not identified at the time the sprinkler plan is submitted. Where a subsequent use or occupancy requires a system with greater capability, it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to upgrade the system to the required density for the new use or occupancy. 
Section 11.2.3.1.1.1 is hereby added as follows: 
11.2.3.1.1.1 The available water supply for fire sprinkler system design shall be determined by one of the following methods, as approved by the fire code official: 
1.  Subtract the project site elevation from the low water level for the appropriate pressure zone and multiply the result by 0.433; 
2.  Use a maximum of 40 psi, if available; 
3.  Utilize the OCFA water-flow test form/directions to document a flow test conducted by the local water agency or an approved third party licensed in the State of California. 
NFPA 13D 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes is hereby amended as follows: 
Section 7.1.2 is hereby revised to read as follows: 
7.1.2 The sprinkler system piping shall not have separate control valves installed unless supervised by a central station, proprietary or remote station alarm service 
NFPA 14, 2013 Edition, Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems is hereby amended as follows: 
Section 7.3.1.1 is hereby revised to read as follows: 
7.3.1.1 Class I and III Standpipe hose connections shall be unobstructed and shall be located not less than 18 inches or more than 24 inches above the finished floor. Class II Standpipe hose connections shall be unobstructed and shall be located not less than 3 feet or more than 5 feet above the finished floor. 
NFPA 24, 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Private Fire Service Mains and Their Appurtenances is hereby amended as follows: 
Section 6.2.8.1 is hereby added as follows: 
6.2.8.1 All indicating valves controlling fire suppression water supplies shall be painted OSHA red. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Brass or bronze valves on sprinkler risers mounted to the exterior of the building may be left unpainted. 
2.  Where OS&Y valves on the detector check assembly are the only control valves, at least one OS&Y valve shall be painted red. 
Section 6.2.9 is hereby revised to read as follows: 
All connections to private fire service mains for fire protection systems shall be arranged in accordance with one of the following so that they can be isolated: 
1.  A post indicator valve installed not less than 40 ft (12 m) from the building 
(a)  For buildings less than 40 ft (12 m) in height, a post indicator valve shall be permitted to be installed closer than 40 ft (12 m) but at least as far from the building as the height of the wall facing the post indicator valve. 
2.  A wall post indicator valve 
3.  An indicating valve in a pit, installed in accordance with Section 6.4 
4.  A backflow preventer with at least one indicating valve not less than 40 ft (12 m) from the building 
(a)  For buildings less than 40 ft (12 m) in height, a backflow preventer with at least one indicating valve shall be permitted to be installed closer than 40 ft (12 m) but at least as far from the building as the height of the wall facing the backflow preventer. 
5.  Control valves installed in a fire-rated room accessible from the exterior 
6.  Control valves in a fire-rated stair enclosure accessible from the exterior 
Section 10.1.5 is hereby added as follows: 
10.1.5 All ferrous pipe and joints shall be polyethylene encased per AWWA C150, Method A, B, or C. All fittings shall be protected with a loose 8-mil polyethylene tube or sheet. The ends of the tube or sheet shall extend past the joint by a minimum of 12 inches and be sealed with 2 inch wide tape approved for underground use. Galvanizing does not meet the requirements of this section. 
Exception: 304 or 316 Stainless Steel pipe and fittings 
Section 10.4.1.1 is hereby revised to read as follows: 
10.4.1.1 All bolted joint accessories shall be cleaned and thoroughly coated with asphalt or other corrosion-retarding material after installation. 
Exception: Bolted joint accessories made from 304 or 316 stainless steel. 
Section 10.4.1.1.1 is hereby added as follows: 
10.4.1.1.1 All bolts used in pipe-joint assembly shall be 316 stainless steel. 
Section 10.4.3.2 is hereby revised to read as follows: 
10.4.3.2 Where fire service mains enter the building adjacent to the foundation, the pipe may run under a building to a maximum of 24 inches, as measured from the interior face of the exterior wall to the center of the vertical pipe. The pipe under the building or building foundation shall be 304 or 316 stainless steel and shall not contain mechanical joints or it shall comply with 10.4.3.2.1 through 10.4.3.2.4. 
Appendix A is deleted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix B is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix BB is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix C is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix CC is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix D is deleted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix E is deleted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix F is deleted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix G is deleted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix H is adopted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix I is deleted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix J is deleted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix K is deleted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix L is deleted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix M is deleted in its entirety without amendments. 
Appendix N is deleted in its entirety without amendments. 
(Ord. No. 2016-09, § 3, 10-18-2016)  
Secs. 16-25—16-51. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIREWORKS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— State Fireworks Law, Health and Safety Code § 12500 et seq. 
 
Sec. 16-52. - Regulations as to sales. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to sell, give away, purchase, possess, or discharge any fireworks within the City, except as set forth in section 16-53. 
(b)  The Fire Department or the Police Department shall seize, take, remove or cause to be removed, at the expense of the owner, all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for sale, stored or held in violation of this Code. 
(Code 1975, § 9-4; Ord. No. 93-03, § 1; Ord. No. 86-10, § 1; Ord. No. 88-04, § 1)  
Sec. 16-53. - Display permit. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the City Council, in its discretion, may grant permits for public displays of fireworks under the supervision of the County Fire Chief. Applications for such permits shall be filed with the City Manager not less than 15 days before the public display, and shall be accompanied by a detailed statement of the items in the proposed public display. If the permit is granted, no items shall be displayed except as are contained in the statement and the Council may, in granting the permit, eliminate from the statement such items as it deems hazardous, and it shall be unlawful for the grantee of the permit to exhibit or display the eliminated items. The display shall be under the supervision of the County Fire Chief and such persons as he or she shall designate and authorize. The fee to the City for the permit for each display shall be in an amount established by resolution of the City Council. 
(Code 1975, § 9-5; Ord. No. 86-10, § 1; Ord. 88-04, § 1)  
Sec. 16-54. - Prerequisite State license. 
The applicant for any public display shall obtain, before filing with the City, a license from the State Fire Marshal, as required in Division 11 of the State Health and Safety Code. The surety requirements therein provided are considered to be the minimum, and may be increased by the State Fire Marshal, County Fire Chief or City Council. 
(Code 1975, § 9-6; Ord. No. 86-10, § 1; Ord. No. 88-04, § 1)  
Secs. 16-55—16-81. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS DISCLOSURE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Hazardous waste control regulations, Health and Safety Code § 25100 et seq. 
 
Sec. 16-82. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Carcinogen means a substance which causes cancer. For purposes of this article, "carcinogens" are those substances specified on the list developed by the United States Department of Health and Human Services on its Second Annual Report on Carcinogens. 
CAS number means the unique identification name as assigned by the Chemical Abstracts Services to specific chemical substances. 
Chemical name means the scientific designation of a substance in accordance with the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry, or the system developed by the Chemical Abstracts Services. 
Common name means a designation of identification such as code name, code number, trade name or brand name used to identify a substance other than by its chemical name. 
Disclosure form means the written request for information prepared pursuant to section 16-84. 
Fire Chief or Chief means the Orange County Fire Authority Fire Chief or designee. 
Fire department or department means the Orange County Fire Authority. 
Handle means to generate, treat, store or dispose of hazardous material in any fashion. 
Hazardous material. 
(1)  The term "hazardous material " means any substance or hazardous waste as defined in subsection (2) in this definition and the definition for hazardous waste as defined in this section, or any material designated pursuant to section 16-83. 
(2)  The term "hazardous material " means any substance or product: 
a.  For which the manufacturer or producer is required to prepare a MSDS for the substance or product pursuant to the Hazardous Substances Information and Training Act (commencing with Labor Code § 6360 et seq.) or pursuant to any applicable federal law or regulation; or 
b.  Listed in Health and Safety Code § 25316; or 
c.  Which is listed as a radioactive material set forth in Chapter I, Title 10, Appendix B, maintained and updated by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission; or 
d.  Which is listed as a legal carcinogen from the California Administration Code, Title 8, Subchapter 7, Group 16 and those substances specified in subsection (a) of this section; or 
e.  Which the Director of the Department of Food and Agriculture classifies as pesticides; or 
f.  Which the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) classifies as priority organic pollutants. 
Hazardous waste or extremely hazardous waste means any material that is identified in: 
(1)  The California Health and Safety Code §§ 25115 and 25117 and set forth in Section 66680 and 66684 of Title 22 of the California Administrative Code (22 CCR §§ 66680—66684); or 
(2)  The 40 CFR 261.31 through 261.33. 
Health official means the Health Officer of the County of Orange or his designated representative. 
MSDS means a Material Safety Data Sheet prepared pursuant to the California Labor Code § 6390 or pursuant to the regulations of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration of the United States Department of Labor. 
Person means an individual, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation, partnership, association, City, County, district and the State, or any department or agency thereof. 
Physician means any person who holds a valid certificate from the State of California to practice the healing arts. 
SIC Code means the identification number assigned by the Standard Industrial Classification Code to specific types of businesses. 
Storage or storing means the containment of substances or materials in such a manner as not to constitute disposal of such substances or materials. 
Use means the handling, processing or storage of a hazardous substance. 
User means any person who uses a hazardous substance or handles a hazardous waste. 
(Code 1975, § 12-21; Ord. No. 85-21, § 1)  
Sec. 16-83. - Designation of a hazardous material. 
A material may be added to the list of hazardous materials as defined in section 16-82 upon a finding by the Fire Chief that the material, because of its quantity, concentration or physical or chemical characteristics, poses significant present or potential hazard to human health and safety or to the environment if released into the community. A material added to the list of hazardous materials pursuant to this section shall be designated as either a hazardous material or hazardous waste. The Fire Chief may use the Uniform Fire Code published by the Western Fire Chiefs to assist him or her in requiring types and amounts of hazardous materials to be disclosed. 
(Code 1975, § 12-22; Ord. No. 85-21, § 1)  
Sec. 16-84. - Filing of hazardous material disclosure form. 
(a)  Any person who uses or handles a hazardous material must semiannually, during the months of January and July, submit a completed hazardous material disclosure form to the Orange County Fire Department. 
(b)  Any person who, during the calendar year, for the first time becomes a user or handler of any hazardous material, must submit a completed disclosure form to the fire department within 30 days of becoming a user or handler. Thereafter, said person shall comply with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The fire department may specify in writing such other times that the submittal of the disclosure form may be necessary. 
(d)  Any person who fails to file a disclosure form within the time limits set forth pursuant to subsections (a) through (c), or upon notice of the Fire Chief, or his or her authorized representative, shall pay such penalty for said late filing as established pursuant to section 16-90. Said penalty shall be submitted with the disclosure form and shall be in addition to regularly assessed fees, if any. 
(e)  Within 15 days of any: 
(1)  Significant change in the use or handling of hazardous material; 
(2)  New use or handling of a previously undisclosed hazardous material; 
(3)  Change of business address; 
(4)  Change of business ownership; 
(5)  Change of business name; or 
(6)  Closure of business; 
any person who has filed a disclosure form pursuant to subsections (a) through (d) of this section shall submit to the fire department a new completed disclosure form detailing the new use, handling or other appropriate information required. 
(Code 1975, § 12-23; Ord. No. 85-21, § 1)  
Sec. 16-85. - Disclosure of information. 
Upon receipt of a disclosure form, the fire department shall maintain files of all disclosure forms received. Subject to the provisions of section 16-92 relating to trade secrets, these files shall be open to the public during normal business hours. 
(Code 1975, § 12-24; Ord. No. 85-21, § 1; Ord. No. 86-09, § 1)  
Sec. 16-86. - Content of the disclosure form. 
(a)  The disclosure form showing information required of businesses shall be developed by the fire department. The disclosure form shall include, but not be limited to, requests for the following: 
(1)  A copy of the material safety data sheets for every hazardous material used by the person completing the disclosure form as required by the fire department; 
(2)  CAS number as may be required by the fire department; 
(3)  SIC code as may be required by the fire department; 
(4)  U.N. identification number as may be required by the fire department; 
(5)  A listing of the chemical name and any common names of every hazardous material used by the person completing the disclosure form; 
(6)  The maximum amount of each hazardous material, disclosed in subsection (a)(2) of this section, which is handled or used at any one time by the user over the course of the year; 
(7)  Specific information on how and where the hazardous materials disclosed in subsection (2) of this section is handled or used by the user to allow fire and safety personnel to prepare adequate emergency response plans to potential releases of the hazardous materials; 
(8)  The names and phone numbers of at least two persons representing the business and who may be able to assist emergency personnel in the event of an emergency involving the business during business and nonbusiness hours; 
(9)  The hazard characteristics of every hazardous material disclosed, including, but not limited to, toxicity, flammability, reactivity, and corrosivity as may be required by the fire department. 
(b)  Upon request all users must provide information in addition to that required in the disclosure form, as follows: 
(1)  To the fire department, any information determined by the fire department to be necessary to protect the public health, safety or the environment; and 
(2)  To any physician where the physician determines that such information is necessary to the medical treatment of his or her patient. 
(Code 1975, § 12-25; Ord. No. 85-21, § 1)  
Sec. 16-87. - Exemptions from disclosure. 
The following materials, persons or entities shall be exempt, as specified, from the disclosure requirements under this article: 
(1)  A material designated as a hazardous material by this article solely by its presence on the Nuclear Regulatory Commission list of radioactive materials shall be exempt from the requirement that a MSDS be submitted with the disclosure form. 
(2)  Hazardous materials or substances contained in food, drug, cosmetic, or tobacco products. 
(3)  Any person using or handling less than 500 pounds or 55 gallons per year, whichever is the lesser, of a hazardous material shall be exempted from the requirement of disclosure of that use or handling unless the Fire Chief has provided notice that the weight or volume limits of this exemption for a specific hazardous material have been lowered in response to public health concerns or to meet the intent and requirements of the Uniform Fire Code (UFC). 
The exemption of this subsection shall not apply to the using or handling of carcinogens, except to the extent that such carcinogens are handled or used solely for personal purposes. 
(4)  Hazardous materials contained solely in consumer products packaged for use by and distributed to the general public, unless the product is repackaged or altered in any way; provided, however, the manufacture and distribution of these products are not exempt or required to be permitted or reported by the Uniform Fire Code. 
(5)  Any person, while engaged in the transportation of hazardous materials, including storage directly incident thereto, provided that such materials are accompanied by shipping papers prepared in according with the provisions of 49 Code of Federal Regulations, Subtitle B. 
(6)  No MSDS shall be required for any hazardous material for which an MSDS is not available at the time disclosure is required, provided, however, that such MSDS shall be submitted to the fire department within 15 days after receipt by the user of the MSDS. 
(7)  Infectious waste generated by hospitals, medical centers, clinics, and other health care facilities that are regulated under Title 22 of the California Administrative Code. 
(Code 1975, § 12-26; Ord. No. 85-21, § 1)  
Sec. 16-88. - Information regarding hazardous waste. 
The Health Official will make information available to fire departments and emergency response personnel, upon request, of hazardous wastes, extremely hazardous wastes, or underground tanks, when the information is currently collected and processed by the Health Official. 
(Code 1975, § 12-27; Ord. No. 85-21, § 1)  
Sec. 16-89. - Identification. 
When required by the Fire Chief, areas containing hazardous materials shall be identified. Such identification may include signs, color coding, posting lists of materials and MSDS, or other notice as may be deemed necessary. 
(Code 1975, § 12-28; Ord. No. 85-21, § 1)  
Sec. 16-90. - Fees and penalties. 
The Orange County Board of Supervisors may establish by resolution a schedule of fees to be paid by persons subject to this article which is sufficient to cover the costs of administration resulting from this article. 
(Code 1975, § 12-29; Ord. No. 85-21, § 1; Ord. No. 86-09, § 2)  
Sec. 16-91. - On-site utilization of MSDS and occupancy floor plans. 
When required by the Fire Chief, any person submitting a disclosure form may be required to install an approved key box for emergency utilization of MSDS, floor plans, site plans and access keys. The location of the required key box shall be approved by the Fire Chief. 
(Code 1975, § 12-30; Ord. No. 85-21, § 1)  
Sec. 16-92. - Trade secrets. 
(a)  If a user believes that a request from the public for information on the disclosure form or otherwise pursuant to this article involves the release of a trade secret, the user shall so notify the fire department, in writing. As used herein, the term "trade secret" shall have the meaning given to it by Government Code § 6254.7 and Evidence Code § 1060. 
(b)  Subject to the provisions of this section, the fire department shall protect from disclosure any trade secret coming into its possession when requested to do so in writing by the user. 
(c)  Any trade secret information reported to or otherwise obtained by the fire department, or any of its representatives or employees, whose user has complied with subsections (a) and (b) of this section, shall not be disclosed to anyone except: 
(1)  To an officer or employees of the City, the County, the State of California, or the United States of America, in connection with the official duties of such officer or employee under any law for the protection of health, or to contractors with the City and their employees if, in the opinion of the Fire Chief, such disclosure is necessary and required for the satisfactory performance of a contract for performance of work; or 
(2)  To any physician where the physician determines that such information is necessary to the medical treatment of his or her patient; or 
(3)  As otherwise required by law or court order. 
(d)  For the purpose of this section, fire and emergency response personnel and County health personnel operating within the jurisdiction of the City shall be considered employees of the City. 
(e)  Any officer or employee of the City, or former officer or employee, who by virtue of such employment or official position, has obtained possession of or has access to information, the disclosure of which is prohibited by this section, and who, knowing that disclosure of the information is prohibited, knowingly and willfully discloses the information in any manner to any person not entitled to receive it, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any contractor with the City and any employee of such contractor, who has been furnished information as authorized by this section, shall be considered to be an employee of the City for purposes of this section. Any physician who has been furnished information or who has obtained information pursuant to subsection (c)(2) of this section and who, knowing that the disclosure of the information is prohibited, knowingly and willfully discloses the information shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(f)  Information certified by appropriate officials of the United States, as necessarily kept secret for national defense purposes, shall be accorded the full protections against disclosure as specified by such officials in accordance with the laws of the United States. 
(g)  Upon receipt of a request for the release of information to the public which includes information which the user has notified the fire department is a trade secret pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the fire department shall notify the user in writing of said request by certified mail. The fire department shall release the information 30 days after the day of mailing said notice, unless, prior to the expiration of said 30 days, the user institutes an action in an appropriate court for a declaratory judgment that said information is subject to protection under subsection (b) of this section and/or an injunction prohibiting disclosure of said information to the general public. 
(h)  The provisions of this section shall not permit a user to refuse to disclose information required to be disclosed pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1975, § 12-31; Ord. No. 85-21, § 1)  
Chapter 18 - GARBAGE AND REFUSE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of City to acquire garbage disposal sites, Government Code § 38790; City collecting garbage fees may also collect delinquent fees or charges, Government Code § 38790.1; garbage and refuse generally, Public Resources Code § 49000 et seq.; power of City to contract for collection and disposal of garbage and refuse, Public Resources Code § 49300. 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Contractor means and includes any person with whom the City has entered or may hereafter enter into a contract for the collection and removal of garbage and refuse from establishments, and any employee of any such person while acting within the scope of his or her employment during the time any such contract is in force. 
Establishment means and includes every premises, lot, building, property, residence, and/or portion thereof, located in the City upon which a residential structure or commercial structure exists, and/or upon which solid waste, garbage or refuse is generated. 
Garbage means and includes all putrescible waste, including kitchen and table refuse, offal, swill and other accumulations of animal, fruit or vegetable matter that attend or result from the dealing in, preparation, use, consumption, decay, growing, handling, or storage of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables. 
Refuse means all solid waste, as that term is defined by the California Public Resources Code and/or California Code of Regulations, as they may be amended from time to time, not otherwise defined herein as garbage. The term "refuse" shall also include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Animal or human offal, asphalt, inoperative bicycles and parts, boards, inoperative boats and parts, bottles, boxes, bricks, cans, cartons, cement, cinder blocks, concrete, containers, crates, dirt, doors, equipment, glass, gravel, hoses, lumber, machinery, metal, paint, pallets, paper, pipe, plaster, rebar, rocks, rubber, sand, siding boards, stucco, tile, windows, wire, wood, and other similar material. 
(2)  Trimmings, clippings and cuttings from lawns, shrubs and trees, and all dead or uprooted grass, sod, shrubs, trees, vegetables and dirt, and firewood piles. 
(3)  Rugs, bedding, furniture, utensils, clothing, toys, appliances, household supplies, and equipment. 
(4)  Vehicle bodies, motors, tires, parts, and accessories. 
(5)  Any other similar item and material of residential, commercial, or industrial nature existing in an unusable, inoperative, discarded, or abandoned condition. 
Temporary solid waste container. 
(1)  The term "temporary solid waste container" means any bin, dumpster, drop-off box, or waste receptacle placed on public or private property for the temporary collection and eventual removal of excise garbage, refuse, or solid waste. 
(2)  The term "temporary solid waste container" does not include small barrels, cans, bags, or other waste containers, which do not exceed 32 gallons in capacity, used by residents for the weekly disposal of household garbage, refuse, or solid waste, pursuant to section 18-13. 
(Code 1975, § 11-1; Ord. No. 82-13, § 1; Ord. No. 2000-02, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 2000-03, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 2004-03, § 3; Ord. No. 2007-06, § 1)  
Sec. 18-2. - Proper containers. 
(a)  Containers provided by the contractor. The contractor shall provide garbage and refuse containers for multifamily dwellings of more than five units, and for industrial and commercial establishments. These containers shall have the name and phone number of the owner clearly visible on two sides in letters not less than three inches in height. Containers shall be of a design and size to contain all the contents therein such manner as to promote good housekeeping conditions. The owner of such containers shall maintain them in a well-painted, safe and sanitary condition. 
(b)  Other containers. Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, all other establishments must provide their own containers. All garbage and refuse shall be wrapped securely or placed in a secure container to prevent garbage or refuse from leaking or spilling from the wrapping or container during storage or collection. Containers may not exceed 32 gallons in capacity. Containers may not weigh more than 75 pounds when full. A container with a capacity of more than 32 gallons will be collected with the garbage or refuse therein. A container with a capacity of 32 gallons or less shall be collected with the garbage or refuse therein, unless the container is made of metal or durable plastic. 
(c)  Tree and shrubbery trimmings. Nothing in subsection (b) of this section shall be construed to prohibit the placement of securely tied bundles of tree and shrubbery trimmings, not to exceed four feet in length and two feet in diameter without further containment, in the parkway for collection along with garbage and refuse in containers. 
(Code 1975, § 11-2; Ord. No. 80-3, § 1; Ord. No. 82-13, § 1)  
Sec. 18-3. - Proper location of stored garbage. 
(a)  No person shall store for any period of time any garbage, refuse, boxes, barrels or containers of any type at any location within view from any adjacent street. Specifically, such material may not be stored within any street, parkway or sidewalk, or within any front yard setback required by law, or between any front lot line and the main building on such lot, or within that portion of the street side of a corner lot equal to the depth of the street-side side yard required by law. 
(b)  Nothing in subsection (a) of this section shall be construed to preclude the storage of garbage or refuse in a covered metal bin or container with a capacity of not less than one cubic yard and not more than three cubic yards at any other than the required street-side side yard of a corner lot, so long as such bin or container is within a solid-wall enclosure lawfully erected and maintained in such manner that such bin or container is not within view from any adjacent street. 
(c)  Nothing in subsection (a) of this section shall be construed to prohibit the temporary accumulation of refuse while an owner or occupant of property is actually engaged in lawn cutting, tree or shrubbery trimming, or clearing the property of refuse. 
(d)  Nothing in subsection (a) of this section shall be construed to prohibit the temporary placement of garbage and refuse on the parkway or along the curb at the street in front of the residential dwelling from which such garbage or refuse emanates; provided, however, that no such garbage or refuse shall be so placed earlier than 3:00 p.m. on the day before collection from that location is scheduled to occur. No garbage, refuse or container shall be allowed to remain within the parkway or along the curb later than midnight of the day specified for the collection of garbage and refuse, whether or not garbage and refuse is actually collected on that day. 
(Code 1975, § 11-3; Ord. No. 82-13, § 1; Ord. No. 88-16, § 1)  
Sec. 18-4. - Persons authorized to collect. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, no person shall gather or collect, or cause or permit to be gathered or collected, any garbage or refuse from any establishment in the City. 
(b)  The following persons may gather or collect garbage and refuse: 
(1)  Any person in the employ of the City who shall be assigned by the City to the work of collecting or removing garbage or refuse, while such person is acting within the scope of his or her employment. 
(2)  Any contractor, as defined in section 18-1. 
(3)  Any person personally removing garbage or refuse from premises owned or occupied by himself or herself. 
(Code 1975, § 11-4; Ord. No. 82-13, § 1; Ord. No. 97-05, § 1; Ord. No. 2000-02, § 3; Ord. No. 2000-03, § 3)  
Sec. 18-5. - Tampering with. 
No person, other than the owner thereof, his or her agents or employees, an officer or employee of the City or of a contractor shall tamper or meddle with any garbage or refuse container or the contents thereof, or remove the contents of any such container, or remove any such container from the location where the same shall have been placed by the owner thereof or his or her agent, regardless of whether or not such container conforms to the requirements set forth in this Code. 
(Code 1975, § 11-5; Ord. No. 82-13, § 1)  
Sec. 18-6. - Time for collection. 
(a)  Garbage or refuse shall be collected from any parkway, public sidewalks, or along the curb at street, according to the schedule adopted by resolution of the City Council. 
(b)  No garbage or refuse shall be collected on any Sunday, or any day celebrated as one of the following holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas. When a holiday falls on a collection day, garbage and refuse collections scheduled for that day and for any day during the balance of the same week shall be postponed one day. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the City Manager may authorize the collection of garbage or refuse at times or from places otherwise prohibited by the provisions of this chapter, if the City Manager finds that such collection is necessary for the protection of the property or health of the citizens and residents of La Palma. 
(d)  No garbage or refuse shall be collected from establishments by contract on or before the hours of 7:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. on any day except within those areas within the City which are zoned for industrial or commercial uses and which are not adjacent to residentially zoned properties. Those areas of the City where garbage or refuse may be collected other than the hours set forth above shall be designated on an official map to be approved by resolution of the City Council and may be amended from time to time. 
(Code 1975, § 11-6; Ord. No. 82-13, § 1; Ord. No. 82-22, § 1)  
Sec. 18-7. - Exceptional amounts. 
(a)  No person or establishment shall place in the parkway or along the curb at street containers or tied bundles weighing a total of 200 pounds or more. 
(b)  Any person wishing the City or contractor to remove household furniture, equipment or furnishing shall make prior special arrangements with contractor or the City for such removal. 
(Code 1975, § 11-7; Ord. No. 82-13, § 1)  
Sec. 18-8. - Setting of rates and billing. 
A contractor may, in its discretion, set rates and charges for services provided to residential and commercial customers within the City, and may bill to and collect from residential and commercial customers any such rates and charges it sets, all subject to the provisions of its contract with the City. 
(Code 1975, § 11-9; Ord. No. 82-27, § 1; Ord. No. 84-5, § 1; Ord. No. 97-05, § 2)  
Sec. 18-9. - Mandatory use of City contractor; exceptions. 
(a)  Mandatory collection. Except as otherwise provided herein, it is unlawful for any owner, occupant or person in possession, charge or control of any residential or commercial establishment within the City to fail to subscribe to collection services provided by a contractor for the collection and disposal of solid waste, garbage or refuse generated or accumulated at the establishment. 
(b)  Exception: vacant establishments. The owner or person in possession, charge or control of any residential or commercial establishment shall not be required to subscribe to services provided by a contractor during such periods as the establishment is vacant and not generating or accumulating solid waste, garbage or refuse. 
(c)  Exception: self haulers. The owner, occupant or person in possession, charge or control of any residential or commercial establishment shall not be required to subscribe to the services provided by a contractor if said owner, occupant or person in possession, charge or control of the establishment registers with the City as a "self hauler" and complies with all such administrative regulations as the City Manager, or his or her designee, may impose to ensure self haulers lawfully dispose of solid waste, garbage and refuse. The City Manager, or his or her designee, is authorized to enact all such administrative regulations as he or she deems necessary or appropriate to ensure self haulers lawfully dispose of solid waste, garbage and refuse, including, without limitation, administrative regulations for the periodic monitoring of self-haulers activities. 
(d)  Public nuisances. Nothing contained herein exempting any establishment from subscribing to the services provided by a City contractor shall be construed as authorizing the accumulation of solid waste, garbage or refuse on any premises in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance. 
(Code 1975, § 11-10; Ord. No. 82-27, § 2; Ord. No. 83-6, § 1; Ord. No. 84-22, § 1; Ord. No. 97-05, § 3)  
Sec. 18-10. - Unlawful deposit. 
It shall be unlawful to deposit solid waste in a container owned or legally possessed by another person without the written permission of the owner or legal possessor of the container, except that the tenants of multiple dwellings or multi-tenant businesses, where authorized, may deposit such solid waste in containers which the owner or manager of the multiple dwelling or multi-tenant business building has authorized for the use of the tenants thereof. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the public from depositing solid waste in containers placed in public areas intended for use by the public. 
(Code 1975, § 11-13)  
Sec. 18-11. - Unauthorized temporary solid waste containers. 
(a)  No person other than the City or any contractor, as defined in section 18-1, shall deposit, place, or leave standing any temporary solid waste container on any public or private property within the City for the purpose of providing garbage, rubbish, or solid waste removal. 
(b)  The depositing, leaving, or placing of a temporary solid waste container anywhere in the City by any person other than the City or its contractor is hereby declared a public nuisance and may be abated by removal, in accordance with the procedures described in this chapter, or in accordance with the procedures prescribed in chapter 26. 
(c)  Additionally, all temporary solid waste containers placed on public property shall have an approved encroachment permit, pursuant to chapter 36 of this Code. 
(Code 1975, § 11-14; Ord. No. 2007-06, § 2)  
Sec. 18-12. - Removal of temporary solid waste containers. 
(a)  The City or its contractor, acting as the agent of the City, may cause the posting of a written notice of violation in a conspicuous place on any temporary solid waste container deposited, placed, or left on any public or private property within the City in violation of this chapter. Such notice shall specify the nature of the violation and shall state that the temporary solid waste container must be removed within 24 hours or it may be impounded and stored by the City or its contractor, and the contents disposed of, at the expense of the owner. The posting of a written notice of violation shall constitute constructive notice to the owner and the user of the requirement to remove the container and the owner and/or user shall immediately cease placing garbage, rubbish, or solid waste therein. 
(b)  If the container is not removed within 24 hours after the notice of violation is posted, the City may remove or direct its contractor to impound and store the temporary solid waste container and dispose of its contents. The owner of the temporary solid waste container shall be responsible to reimburse the City or its contractor, as applicable, for the actual cost of the removal, storage, and disposal, and all amounts due shall be paid before the temporary solid waste container may be returned to the owner. Such amounts shall constitute a debt owed by the owner to the City or its contractor, as applicable, and the owner shall be liable to the City or its contractor in an action brought by the City and/or contractor for the recovery of such amounts. 
(c)  The owner of a temporary solid waste container that has been removed pursuant to this section shall be promptly noticed by the City or its contractor with a notice to be mailed to the owner to claim the stored property. If the temporary solid waste container is not claimed within 45 days after removal and notice to the owner, or 30 days after removal if the identity of the owner is unknown to the City or its contractor, the temporary solid waste container shall be deemed abandoned property and may be disposed of accordingly. 
(d)  After a temporary solid waste container has once been removed by the City or its contractor pursuant to a notice of violation posted in accordance with this section, the owner thereof shall be deemed to have actual notice of the provisions of this chapter, including the prohibition against the placement, or leaving of unauthorized temporary solid waste containers on property in the City. In the event of a subsequent placement or leaving of a temporary solid waste containers owned by the same owners, or an affiliate of the owner, on public property within the City, the City may immediately, without posting of a notice of violation, remove or direct its contractor to impound and store the unlawfully placed temporary solid waste container without the requirement that a notice be posted on the temporary solid waste container. All other portions of this section shall continue to apply. 
(Code 1975, § 11-15; Ord. No. 2007-06, § 2)  
Sec. 18-13. - Removal of unidentifiable temporary solid waste containers from public property. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, the City Manager is authorized to direct the immediate removal by the City or any contractor defined in section 18-1, without notice, of any temporary solid waste container placed on public property within the City in violation of this chapter where the owner of the temporary solid waste container is unidentified and cannot be ascertained by an inspection of the temporary solid waste container. 
(Code 1975, § 11-16; Ord. No. 2007-06, § 2)  
Sec. 18-14. - Enforcement. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this chapter or to fail to comply with its requirements. Notwithstanding, and not as a means of limiting any other remedies available to the City and/or its contractor pursuant to this chapter, any violation of this chapter may be prosecuted in the name of the people of the State, redressed by civil action, resolved by imposition of an administrative fine, or adjudicated by any other legal method, pursuant to chapter 2, article XI of this Code. 
(Code 1975, § 11-17; Ord. No. 2007-06, § 2)  
Sec. 18-15. - State agency exception. 
Pursuant to State law, the provisions of this chapter are not applicable to State agencies, including school districts. 
(Code 1975, § 11-18; Ord. No. 2007-06, § 2)  
Chapter 20 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of City Council to adopt ordinances and rules to protect and regulate health and sanitary matters in the City, Health and Safety Code § 101450; duties and functions of health officers in preventing the spread of contagious, infectious or communicable disease or the occurrence of additional cases, Health and Safety Code § 120175 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 20-1. - Health Officer—Designated. 
The Chief Health Officer of the County is hereby declared to be the Health Officer of the City. Unless otherwise stated in this chapter or this Code, the Health Officer or his or her designee is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 12-1; Ord. No. 19, § 1) 
State Law reference— City Council may contract with County for the performance by County health officers of any or all inspection and enforcement functions within the City related to ordinances of public health and sanitation, Health and Safety Code § 101400.  
Sec. 20-2. - Same—Interference with. 
No person shall refuse, resist, or attempt to resist the entrance of the Health Officer into any railway car, stage, vehicle, building, room, lot or other place or portion or room thereof, in the City in the performance of his or her duty, or shall refuse to obey any lawful order of the Health Officer made in the performance of his or her duties within the power conferred upon him or her by law or by this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 12-2; Ord. No. 19, § 1) 
State Law reference— Any person who violates rule, order, regulation or demand of health officer is guilty of misdemeanor, Health and Safety Code § 120275.  
Sec. 20-3. - Public washrooms. 
Every person maintaining any toilet, washroom, bath, or shower room for the use of employees or the public shall at all times keep the floors, walls, ceilings, lavatory, urinal, and toilet bowl free from any accumulation of dirt, filth, or corrosion. All lavatories shall be supplied with soap and individual towels with a receptacle for their disposal. All toilet rooms shall be provided with toilet paper and shall be well lighted and ventilated. 
(Code 1975, § 12-5; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Secs. 20-4—20-24. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - HEALTH SERVICES FEE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of City Council to adopt an ordinance or resolution prescribing fees to pay the expenses of the health officer or other officers or employees incurred in the enforcement of health and sanitation regulations, Health and Safety Code § 101325. 
 
Sec. 20-25. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Health department or department means the Orange County Health Care Agency. 
Health Officer means the County Health Officer or his or her designee. 
Receipt means a County public health services fee receipt. 
(Code 1975, § 12A-1; Ord. No. 96-7, § 1)  
Sec. 20-26. - Purpose and authority. 
The purpose of this article is to establish fees sufficient to meet the reasonable expenses of the Health Officer in enforcing State statutes, orders, quarantines and rules and regulations of State offices and departments relating to public health, which expenses are hereby found not to be met by the fees prescribed by the State. The authority for this article is contained in the Health and Safety Code § 101325, as amended. 
(Code 1975, § 12A-2; Ord. No. 96-7, § 1)  
Sec. 20-27. - Area of application. 
This article shall be enforceable within the territory in which the Health Officer enforces any State statute, order, quarantine or rule or regulation of State offices and departments relating to public health, which expenses are hereby found not to be met by the fees prescribed by the State. 
(Code 1975, § 12A-3; Ord. No. 96-7, § 1)  
Sec. 20-28. - Violation. 
Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, it shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any activity enumerated in section 20-32 without obtaining a valid receipt. 
(Code 1975, § 12A-4; Ord. No. 96-7, § 1)  
Sec. 20-29. - Separate activities. 
If a person shall conduct more than one of the activities for which a receipt is required, he or she must obtain a separate receipt for each activity, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(Code 1975, § 12A-5; Ord. No. 96-7, § 1)  
Sec. 20-30. - Applications. 
Applications for a receipt shall be filed with the health department on a form to be provided by that department. The applications shall be accompanied by payment of the required fee. An applicant for or a recipient of a receipt shall provide the Health Officer with any information requested by him or her. 
(Code 1975, § 12A-6; Ord. No. 96-7, § 1)  
Sec. 20-31. - Rules and regulations. 
The Health Officer shall administer this article and may issue regulations and prepare application and identification forms pertaining thereto. 
(Code 1975, § 12A-7; Ord. No. 96-7, § 1)  
Sec. 20-32. - Fees. 
The County shall, by annual resolution of the Board of Supervisors, adopt health service fees to be paid by the proprietor or operator of the applicable business. Such fees are to be paid directly to the health department and retained by the department as reimbursement for said services related to this article. 
(Code 1975, § 12A-8; Ord. No. 96-7, § 1)  
Secs. 20-33—20-52. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— California Retail Food Code, Health and Safety Code § 113700 et seq.; authority of City Council to regulate food facilities, Health and Safety Code § 113709. 
 
Sec. 20-53. - Definitions. 
The following terms used in this article shall have the meanings indicated below; provided, however, said definitions shall also include any amendments or changes made to referenced sections of the California Health and Safety Code: 
Certified farmers' market means as defined in Health and Safety Code § 113742. 
Commissary means as defined in Health and Safety Code § 113751. 
Food facility means as defined in Health and Safety Code § 113789. 
Food processing establishment means as defined in Health and Safety Code § 111955. 
Health department or department means the Orange County Health Care Agency. 
Health Officer means the County Health Officer or his or her designee. 
Inspector means an environmental health specialist, as defined in Health and Safety Code § 106615, employed by the health department, or the Health Officer or any deputy health officer authorized to inspect premises or equipment for the enforcement of this chapter. 
Mobile food facility means as defined in Health and Safety Code § 113831. 
Person means as defined in Health and Safety Code § 113855. 
Premises means and includes land, buildings, vehicles and ships and other vessels wherein food is handled, stored, distributed, prepared, processed, served or sold, and also equipment installed or used in food establishments or food facilities or on such premises. 
Produce stand means as defined in Health and Safety Code § 113879. 
Restricted food service facility means as defined in Health and Safety Code § 113893. 
Satellite food service means as defined in Health and Safety Code § 113899. 
Temporary food facility means as defined in Health and Safety Code § 113930. 
Vending machine means as defined in Health and Safety Code § 113938. 
Vending machine business means the business of selling food or beverages by means of vending machines, regardless of the number of locations at which the vending machines are located. 
(Code 1975, § 10-1; Ord. No. 92-04)  
Sec. 20-54. - Permit required; conditions and terms. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any food facility, vending machine business, food processing establishment, or any other food handling business governed by this article, without first applying for and receiving a food vending permit issued by the health department under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Every applicant for a food vending permit shall file with the health department a written application which shall state the name and address of the applicant, the character and location of the activity for which a permit is required under this article and such other information as the health department may require. Applicants for a permit to operate a mobile food preparation unit shall, in addition, provide a list of three service stops which shall include the address of exact location and time of each stop. 
(c)  A permit may be issued when investigation has determined that the proposed facility and its method of operation will conform to all applicable laws and regulations. A permit, once issued, is nontransferable. A permit shall be valid only for the person, location, type of food sales, or distribution activity approved and, unless suspended or revoked, for the time period indicated. 
(d)  Any permit may be suspended or revoked for a violation of any applicable provisions of law or regulation. Any food facility, vending machine business, food processing establishment, or any other food handling business governed by this article, for which the permit has been suspended or revoked shall close and remain closed until the permit has been reinstated or until a new permit has been issued. 
(e)  Permits may be granted at any time during the year. A permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises or vehicle for which it is issued. 
(Code 1975, § 10-2; Ord. No. 92-04)  
Sec. 20-55. - Construction, conversion and alteration. 
A person proposing to build or remodel a food facility, vending machine business, food processing establishment, or any other food handling business governed by this article, shall submit three copies of the complete plans and specifications to the department for review and approval pursuant to the applicable requirements of the California Health and Safety Code. The Health Officer may thereafter issue a certificate stating what modifications, if any, are required for compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
(Code 1975, § 10-3; Ord. No. 92-04)  
Sec. 20-56. - Suspension of permits. 
A permit issued under this article or its predecessor may be suspended or revoked under the procedure set forth in this article for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Violation of State law; 
(2)  Violation of this article; 
(3)  Violation of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this article; or 
(4)  Upon recommendation by the Health Officer. 
(Code 1975, § 10-4; Ord. No. 92-04)  
Sec. 20-57. - Notice of violation. 
When any laws, this article, or rules and regulations have been violated, an inspector may serve written notice thereof entitled "Notice of Violation," specifying: 
(1)  The acts or omissions with which the permittee is charged; 
(2)  The provision or provisions violated thereby; 
(3)  The corrective steps required; 
(4)  The date by which all such corrections must be completed, allowing a reasonable period therefor; 
(5)  That the permittee has a right to a hearing upon written request or that a mandatory hearing has been scheduled; 
(6)  That if no hearing is requested or the permittee fails to appear at the scheduled hearing and if the health department does not receive notice that all such corrections have been made before 9:00 a.m. of the date specified under subsection (4) of this section, the permit will be subject to suspension or revocation from that time until all violations have been corrected. 
(Code 1975, § 10-5; Ord. No. 92-04)  
Sec. 20-58. - Mobile food preparation units generally. 
In addition to all other applicable provisions of the Health and Safety Code and of this article, mobile food preparation units shall comply with the following safety requirements: 
(1)  Compressors, auxiliary engines, generators, batteries, battery chargers, gas-fueled water heaters, and similar equipment shall be installed so as to be accessible only from the outside of the unit. 
(2)  All equipment installed in any part of the unit shall be secured so as to prevent movement during transit and to prevent detachment in the event of a collision or overturn. 
(3)  All equipment installed within the interior of the unit, including the interiors of cabinets or compartments, shall be constructed so as to be free of sharp or jagged edges. 
(4)  All utensils shall be stored so as to prevent their being hurled about in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn. A safety knife holder shall be provided to avoid loose storage of knives in cabinets, boxes or slots along counter aisles. Knife holders shall be designed to be easily cleaned and be manufactured of materials approved by the Health Officer. 
(5)  Ceiling light fixtures shall be recessed or flush-mounted and sealed and shall be equipped with safety covers approved by the Health Officer. The minimum clearance from the floor to the light fixture shall be at least 188 centimeters (76 inches) or the fixture shall be installed out of the traffic aisle or work area. 
(6)  High voltage (110-120v) electrical wiring shall be properly installed in electrical conduit with all splices or connections being made within junction, outlet or switch as to prevent the use of extension cords exceeding 183 centimeters (six feet). Outside electrical connection receptacles shall be of weatherproof design with cover. 
(7)  Attached, firmly anchored seats with backrests, equipped with seat belts, shall be provided for all occupants. If a jump seat in the aisleway is utilized, it shall fold in a manner that will clear the aisleway when not in use and be held with a self-latching mechanism. Seats and backrests shall be at least 35 and five-tenths centimeters by 35 and five-tenths centimeters (14 inches by 14 inches) in size. All occupants shall be seated, shall wear seat belts and shall not cook or prepare food while the unit is in motion. Signs setting forth the latter three requirements shall be posted in both English and Spanish. 
(8)  A first-aid kit approved by the Health Officer shall be provided and located in a convenient area in an enclosed case. 
(9)  All pressure cylinders shall be securely fastened to a rigid structure of the unit. All liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) equipment shall be installed as follows: 
a.  The LPG tanks and relief valves shall be ASME-approved for intended use. 
b.  Tanks shall be securely fastened and located where they will normally not be subject to damage. They may be in a body compartment or underneath the body. The tank or fittings must not protrude beyond the body. 
c.  Tanks and regulators shall be separated from any open flame by a vapor-tight partition. 
d.  When tanks are installed in a body compartment, the partitions shall be sealed off from the rest of the body with no openings to the interior except for the tubing. The following additional requirements shall be met: 
1.  All tank valves and fittings shall be readily accessible from outside the unit. 
2.  The tank safety relief valve shall be vented to the outside and directed downward. 
3.  The filling shall be done through an outside door to the compartment. 
4.  The compartment shall be vented to the exterior of the unit so as to prevent accumulation of gas. 
e.  Tubing that passes through partitions shall be protected by grommets made of rubber or other approved materials. 
f.  Tubing exposed to friction shall be protected against chafing. 
g.  Expansion and contraction bends shall be made in the tubing between the tank and the appliance. 
h.  ASME-approved LPG tubing or standard weight pipe shall be used throughout. 
i.  Protective "thread" caps shall be installed on fill-line check valves. 
j.  Every appliance fueled by LPG shall be equipped with a pilot light attachment and provided with an ASME-approved device which will automatically shut off all gas to the appliance if the pilot light should be extinguished. 
(10)  A minimum 5 B.C.-rated portable fire extinguisher (UL or State Fire Marshal approved design) shall be installed in plain sight and within easy reach, immediately inside the front driver's door. The extinguisher shall be replaced or recharged after each use. 
(Code 1975, § 10-6; Ord. No. 92-04) 
State Law reference— Mobile food facilities generally, Health and Safety Code § 114294 et seq.  
Sec. 20-59. - Additional requirements for mobile food preparation units operating in multi-locations in any day. 
In addition to the requirements specified in section 20-58, mobile food preparation units which operate at more than one location in any calendar day, shall comply with the following additional requirements: 
(1)  Coffee urns. Coffee urns shall be installed in a compartment that will prevent excessive spillage of coffee in the interior of the unit in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn, or, as an alternative to this requirement, coffee urns shall be equipped with positive closing lids as well as perforated metal protective sleeves on the glass liquid level sight gauges. 
(2)  Deep fat fryers. Deep fat fryers are prohibited, unless equipped with positive closing lids to contain the fat and to prevent splashing or excessive spillage in transit or in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn of the unit. Such lids shall be designed and constructed so as to prevent pressure buildup which could result in an explosion. All lids shall be kept positively closed while the unit is in motion. Signs setting forth the latter requirements shall be posted in both English and Spanish. 
(3)  Steam tables, etc. Water bath or steam food insert tables shall be provided with baffles to prevent surging in transit. All such tables, as well as dry heat units, their insert food containers and similar equipment that contains hot liquids or hot foods shall have positive closing lids to contain all such liquids or foods and to prevent splashing or spillage in transit or in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn of the unit. Such lids shall be designed and constructed so as to prevent pressure buildup which could result in an explosion. All lids shall be positively closed while the unit is in motion. Signs setting forth the latter requirement shall be posted in both English and Spanish. 
(4)  Safety exit facilities. An alternate means of exit in the side opposite the main exit door, or the roof, or the rear of the unit, with unobstructed passage of 61 centimeters by 92 centimeters (24 inches by 36 inches) minimum to the outside, shall be provided. The interior latching mechanism shall be operable by hand without special tools or key. The exit shall be labeled "Safety Exit" in contrasting colors with at least 2 54/100 centimeters (one inch) high letters. 
(Code 1975, § 10-7; Ord. No. 92-04)  
Sec. 20-60. - Building permits. 
The building department of the City shall notify the health department when plans are received to build or remodel a food establishment. The City shall not issue a building permit if the health department provides written notice that the plans do not conform to department standards. 
(Code 1975, § 10-8; Ord. No. 92-04)  
Sec. 20-61. - Sanitation requirements. 
(a)  All food handling establishments for which a permit is required by this article shall be constructed, equipped, operated, and maintained so as to comply with the pertinent sections of the Health and Safety Code. In addition, at least a single-compartment janitorial sink with hot and cold running water, or other approved facilities shall be provided for general cleanup purposes. 
(b)  A hand lavatory shall be provided in each food preparation and packaging area for employees. 
(Code 1975, § 10-9; Ord. No. 92-04)  
Sec. 20-62. - Hearing. 
(a)  The permit holder shall have the right to a hearing, if requested, on all violations listed in the notice. A written request for a hearing shall be made by the permittee within 15 calendar days after receipt of the notice. A failure to request a hearing within 15 calendar days after receipt of the notice shall be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing. When circumstances warrant, the hearing officer may order a hearing at any reasonable time within this 15-day period to expedite the permit suspension or revocation process. The hearing shall be held within 15 calendar days of the receipt of a request for a hearing. Upon written request of the permittee, the hearing officer may postpone any hearing date, if circumstances warrant such action. 
(b)  The hearing shall be presided over by the Health Officer or his or her duly authorized representative who is a qualified environmental health specialist as defined in Health and Safety Code § 106615 and registered as provided in Health and Safety Code § 106710 thereof, but shall not be the inspector who reported the violations or who inspected any corrective measure taken. 
(c)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written notice of decision to the permittee within five working days following the hearing. In the event of a suspension or revocation, the notice shall specify the acts or omissions with which the permittee is charged, and shall state the terms of the suspension, or that the permit has been revoked. 
(d)  The Health Officer may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, modify, suspend, or revoke a permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of the applicable laws, rules and regulations. 
(Code 1975, § 10-10; Ord. No. 92-04)  
Sec. 20-63. - Suspension for refusal of entry. 
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to deny or hinder entry by an inspector for the purpose of inspection of any of the premises described in section 20-54, or any portion thereof; and in such event the inspector may forthwith suspend the food vending permit issued for the premises. 
(Code 1975, § 10-11; Ord. No. 92-04) 
State Law reference— Enforcement officer's inspection authority, Health and Safety Code § 114390.  
Sec. 20-64. - Summary suspension. 
(a)  If any immediate danger to the public health or safety is found, unless the danger is immediately corrected, an inspector may temporarily suspend the permit and order the premises immediately closed. The term "immediate danger to the public health and safety" means any condition, based upon inspection findings or other evidence, that can cause food infection, food intoxication, disease transmission, or hazardous condition, including but not limited to unsafe food temperature, sewage contamination, nonpotable water supply, or an employee who is a carrier of a communicable disease. 
(b)  Whenever a permit is suspended as the result of an immediate danger to the public health or safety, the inspector shall issue to the permittee a notice setting forth the acts or omissions with which the permittee is charged, specifying the pertinent Code section, and informing the permittee of the right to a hearing. 
(c)  At any time within 15 calendar days after service of a notice pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, the permittee may request in writing a hearing before a hearing officer to show cause why the permit suspension is not warranted. The hearing shall be held within 15 calendar days of the receipt of a request for a hearing. A failure to request a hearing within 15 calendar days shall be deemed a waiver of the right to such hearing. 
(Code 1975, § 10-12; Ord. No. 92-04)  
Sec. 20-65. - Supervision of closing down premises. 
When any permit is first suspended hereunder, or when any premises governed hereby shall have been closed for business and left in an unsanitary condition, the health department shall have the power to enter to ensure that the premises are closed down in a manner which will not endanger the public health. If the permittee or his or her employee in charge cannot be found, or is unwilling or unable to remedy the condition of the premises, the owner of the premises shall be notified of the unsanitary conditions and shall be required to take such remedial action as may be necessary to obviate such condition. 
(Code 1975, § 10-13; Ord. No. 92-04)  
Sec. 20-66. - Rules and regulations. 
The Health Officer may adopt and enforce rules and regulations necessary to administer this article including, but not limited to, regulations pertaining to: 
(1)  Forms for applications, permits and notices; 
(2)  Forms and procedures for hearings upon the granting, denying, suspending, revoking or reinstating of permits; 
(3)  Inspection of premises and reporting thereon. 
(Code 1975, § 10-14; Ord. No. 92-04)  
Sec. 20-67. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1975, § 10-15; Ord. No. 92-04)  
Sec. 20-68. - Preemption. 
This article shall not apply to any matter to which it concerns to the extent that the regulation of such matter is preempted by State law. 
(Code 1975, § 10-16; Ord. No. 92-04)  
Secs. 20-69—20-94. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS HEALTH SERVICES FEE 
 
Sec. 20-95. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Health department or department means the Orange County Health Care Agency. 
Health Officer means the County Health Officer or his or her designee. 
Person means an individual, partnership, corporation or other legal entity. 
Receipt means a County public health services fee receipt. 
(Code 1975, § 10a-1; Ord. No. 92-04)  
Sec. 20-96. - Purpose and authority. 
The purpose of this article is to establish fees sufficient to meet the reasonable expenses of the Health Officer in enforcing State statutes, orders, quarantines and rules and regulations of State offices and departments relating to public health, which expenses are hereby found not to be met by the fees prescribed by the State. The authority for this article is contained in Health and Safety Code § 101325. 
(Code 1975, § 10a-2; Ord. No. 92-04)  
Sec. 20-97. - Area of application. 
This article shall be enforceable within the territory in which the Health Officer enforces any State statute, order, quarantine or rule or regulation of any State office or department relating to public health, including incorporated as well as unincorporated territory. 
(Code 1975, § 10a-3; Ord. No. 92-04)  
Sec. 20-98. - Violation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any activity enumerated in this article without a valid receipt. 
(Code 1975, § 10a-4; Ord. No. 92-04)  
Sec. 20-99. - Separate activities. 
If a person shall conduct more than one of the activities for which a receipt is required, he or she must obtain a separate receipt for each activity, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(Code 1975, § 10a-5; Ord. No. 92-04)  
Sec. 20-100. - Applications. 
Applications for a receipt shall be filed with the health department on a form to be provided by that department. The applications shall be accompanied by payment of the required fee. An applicant for or recipient of a receipt shall provide the Health Officer with any information requested by him or her. 
(Code 1975, § 10a-6; Ord. No. 92-04)  
Sec. 20-101. - Rules and regulations. 
The Health Officer shall administer this article and may issue regulations and prepare application and identification forms pertaining thereto. 
(Code 1975, § 10a-7; Ord. No. 92-04)  
Sec. 20-102. - Fees. 
The County shall, by annual board resolution, adopt health service fees to be paid by the proprietor or operator of the food facility. Such fees are to be paid directly to the County Health Officer and retained by the County as reimbursement for said services related to this article. 
(Code 1975, § 10a-8; Ord. No. 92-04)  
Chapter 22 - LICENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of City to license, for revenue and regulation, and fix the license tax upon, every lawful business transacted in the City, Government Code § 37101; authority of City to license in the exercise of police power and for purpose of regulation, Business and Professions Code § 16000 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Daily means commences at the hour of 8:00 a.m. of any day and ends at 8:00 a.m. of the next day. 
Gross payroll means the gross payroll of the preceding fiscal year, before deductions of any kind are made. 
Gross receipts. 
(1)  The term "gross receipts" means, except as otherwise specifically provided, the gross receipts of the preceding fiscal year and includes the total of amounts actually received or receivable from sales and the total amounts actually received or receivable for the performance of any act or service, of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such act or service is done as a part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares or merchandise. Included in the term "gross receipts" shall be all receipts, cash, credits, redemption stamps, and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever. 
(2)  Excluded from the term "gross receipts" shall be the following: 
a.  Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales; 
b.  Any tax which is measured by the sales price or the gross receipts from the sale or which is a stated sum per unit of such property sold, included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser; 
c.  Such part of the sale price of property returned by purchasers upon rescission of the contract of sale as is refunded either in cash or by credit; 
d.  Amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an agent or trustee to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom collected; 
e.  Receipts of refundable deposits, except that refundable deposits forfeited and taken into income of the business shall not be excluded; 
f.  As to a real estate agency or broker, the sales price of real estate sold for the account of others except that portion which represents a commission or other income to the agency or broker including any portion thereof to be remitted to any salesperson or salespersons. As to a real estate agency or broker, the place of business of which or of whom is located outside the City, the commissions or other income included as gross receipts shall include only commissions or other income derived from the sale of real estate located within the City; 
g.  Credit allowed on property accepted as part of the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser; 
h.  The difference between the balance owed and paid on a defaulted purchase or finance contract upon repossession by seller and the amount received from resale of the repossessed article by the repossessing seller; 
i.  Cash value of sales, trades or transactions between departments or units of the same business. 
Pawnbroker means every person conducting, managing, or carrying on the business of loaning money, either for himself/ herself or for any other person, upon any personal property, personal security, or purchasing personal property and reselling or agreeing to resell such property to the vendor or other assignee at prices previously agreed upon. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to apply to the loaning of money on personal property or personal security by any bank authorized to do so under the laws of this State or of the United States. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Financial Code § 21000. 
Person means all domestic and foreign corporations, firms, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, businesses, or common law trusts, societies, and individuals engaged in any business in the City. 
Quarter annual means commences on any day of issuance of such license and ends three months after such day. 
Sound vehicle means any motor vehicle having mounted thereon, or attached thereto, any sound amplifying equipment, including any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, of music or of any other sound. 
Special permit committee means the City Manager, Community Development Director and a representative of the Police Department comprise a committee to investigate, conduct hearings and issue special permits and consider the revocation or extension of special permits in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
Unpaid license fee means not only all license fees owing for licenses therefrom issued, but also any sums or amount which the City would have received had a license been issued as required by this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 13-1; Ord. No. 99, § 1; Ord. No. 103, § 1; Ord. No. 79-3, § 8; Ord. No. 84-3, § 1; Ord. No. 84-10, § 1; Ord. No. 84-11, § 1; Ord. No. 2004-04)  
Sec. 22-2. - Purpose. 
License provisions of this chapter are enacted solely to raise money for municipal purposes and are not intended for regulation. 
(Code 1975, § 13-2; Ord. No. 99, § 2)  
Sec. 22-3. - Effect on unlawful business. 
No license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be construed as authorizing the conduct of or continuance of any illegal or unlawful business. 
(Code 1975, § 13-3; Ord. No. 99, § 3)  
Sec. 22-4. - Fee as debt. 
The amount of any license imposed by this chapter together with any penalties accruing thereon shall be deemed a debt due to the City from the person required to pay the same and an immediate cause of action shall accrue to the City for the collection thereof in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1975, § 13-4; Ord. No. 99, § 4)  
Sec. 22-5. - Effect on other ordinances. 
Persons required to pay a license tax for transacting or carrying on any business under the provisions of this chapter shall not be relieved from the payment of any other applicable fee required under any other ordinances of the City and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of other ordinances of the City. 
(Code 1975, § 13-5; Ord. No. 99, § 5; Ord. No. 84-10, § 2; Ord. No. 84-11, § 2)  
Sec. 22-6. - License required. 
(a)  Except as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, no person shall, as principal, agent, clerk, employee, corporate officer, or otherwise, for himself/herself or for any other person, commence or carry on any business specified in this article in the City, without having first: 
(1)  Applied for and received a license certificate specifying such business; 
(2)  Paid for the required license tax; 
(3)  Obtained any permit required by this chapter or any other ordinance of the City; 
(4)  Paid any permit fee required; and 
(5)  Paid any investigation, processing, or inspection fee required. 
(b)  A license shall not be required of a separate business conducting live entertainment incidental to the operation of a separate food-serving establishment if all of the following conditions are satisfied: 
(1)  The location, occupancy, and use of the food-serving establishment is in compliance with a valid conditional use permit for which revocation proceedings have not been commenced, and the conditional use permit authorizes the live entertainment as an incidental use to the operation of the food-serving establishment; 
(2)  The food-serving establishment shall have a current, valid business license; and 
(3)  At least five business days prior to the performance of the live entertainment by the business, the food-serving establishment shall have furnished to the Business License Division the name, mailing address, telephone number, emergency contact telephone number and current driver's license number with regard to each person affiliated with the business scheduled to perform the live entertainment. 
(c)  A license shall not be required of a separate business whose business activity in the City is limited to providing entertainment or food concessionaire services for community events under contract with the City. 
(Code 1975, § 13-6; Ord. No. 99, § 7; Ord. No. 84-10, § 3; Ord. No. 84-11, § 3; Ord. No. 2008-03, § 1)  
Sec. 22-7. - Branch establishments. 
(a)  A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business engaged in and each license shall authorize the licensee to engage only in the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such license; provided that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments. 
(b)  Every person who operates any business, whether upon a cost rental or commission basis as a concession or upon rented floor space in or upon the premises of any person licensed under any provision of this chapter, shall be required to obtain a separate and independent license pursuant to the appropriate provisions of this chapter and shall be subject to all of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 13-7; Ord. No. 99, § 8)  
Sec. 22-8. - Partnerships. 
In the event that any business conducted, managed or carried on in the City is organized as a partnership or joint venture, the scheduled license fee need be paid only by such partnership or joint venture and not by each individual partner or joint venture. 
(Code 1975, § 13-8; Ord. No. 99, § 9)  
Sec. 22-9. - Two or more businesses at same location. 
Except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, any person conducting, managing or carrying on two or more businesses licensed by this chapter at the same location shall be required to apply for and obtain a license for only one of such businesses; provided, however, that if the amount of such license differs for such businesses, such person shall obtain a license for that business for which the largest fee or amount is provided by this chapter; provided, further, that in cases where the license tax upon two or more businesses is based upon the gross annual receipts of such businesses, then one license shall be issued on the basis of the combined total gross receipts of the several businesses. 
(Code 1975, § 13-9; Ord. No. 99, § 10)  
Sec. 22-10. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person transacting and carrying on any business exempt by virtue of the Constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or of the State from the payment to municipal corporations of such taxes as are herein prescribed. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to require the payment of a license fee to conduct, manage or carry on any business, occupation or activity, from any institution or organization which is conducted, managed, or carried on wholly for the benefit of charitable purposes or from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any individual, firm, or corporation; nor shall any license fee be required for the conducting of any entertainment, concert, exhibition, or lecture on scientific, historical, literary, religious, or moral subjects within the City whenever the receipts of any such entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture on scientific, historical, literary, religious or moral subjects within the City are to be appropriated to any church or school or to any religious or benevolent purpose; nor shall any license fee be required for the conducting of any entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition, or lecture by any religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, military, State, County, or municipal organization or association, whenever the receipts of any such entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture are to be appropriated for the purpose and objects for which such organization or association was formed and from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly by any individual, firm, or corporation; provided, that nothing in this section shall be deemed to exempt any such organization or association from complying with the provisions of any ordinance of the City requiring a permit from the City Council or any commission or officer to conduct, manage or carry on any profession, trade, calling or occupation. 
(c)  Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this chapter shall file a verified statement with the Business License Division stating the facts upon which exemption is claimed. 
(d)  The Business License Division shall, upon a proper showing contained in the verified statement, issue a license to such person claiming exemption under this section without payment to the City of the license tax required by this chapter. 
(e)  The Business License Division may revoke any license granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter upon information that the licensee is not entitled to the exemption as provided in this section. 
(Code 1975, § 13-10; Ord. No. 99, § 11)  
Sec. 22-11. - Application; contents. 
Every person required to have a license under the provisions of this chapter shall make application for the same to the Business License Division of the City upon forms prescribed by the City. The Business License Division shall issue to such person a license which shall contain: 
(1)  The name of the person to whom the license is issued. 
(2)  The business licensed. 
(3)  The place where such business is to be transacted and carried on. 
(4)  The date of the expiration of such license. 
(5)  Such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 13-11; Ord. No. 99, § 12)  
Sec. 22-12. - Payment of fees. 
(a)  All annual license fees under the provisions of this chapter shall be due and payable in lawful money of the United States, in advance, of the business license anniversary date. All business licenses shall pay the full license fee in advance. 
(b)  At the time of renewal of any business license based on gross receipts, verification of the business' total gross receipt shall be presented to the City in the following manner: 
(1)  Those businesses that have business income totally comprised of retail sales shall present a copy of Board of Equalization Department of Business Taxes, State, Local And District Sales And Use Return for the previous year. 
(2)  Those businesses that have business income of other than retail sales shall present a copy of the business income tax return filed with the State Franchise Tax Board for the previous year. 
(c)  At the time of renewal of any business license based on gross payroll, each business shall present a copy of the federal withholding tax for the previous year. 
(Code 1975, § 13-12; Ord. No. 99, § 13; Ord. No. 114; Ord. No. 84-10, § 4; Ord. No. 84-11, § 4; Ord. No. 85-01, § 1; Ord. No. 85-10; Ord. No. 2004-04 )  
Sec. 22-13. - Renewal of business license. 
(a)  At the time of renewal of any business license based on gross receipts, verification of the business's total gross receipts shall be presented to the City in the following manner: 
(1)  Those businesses that have business income totally comprised of retail sales shall present a copy of Board of Equalization Department of Business Taxes, State, Local and District Sales and Use Return for the previous year. 
(2)  Those businesses that have business income of other than retail sales shall present a copy of the business income tax return filed with the State Franchise Tax Board for the previous year. 
(b)  At the time of renewal of any business license based on gross payroll, each business shall present a copy of the federal withholding tax for the previous year. 
(c)  Such documents shall be subject to verification by the Business License Division, his or her deputies or authorized employees of the City who are hereby authorized to examine records of any licensee or applicant for license as may be necessary in their judgment to verify or ascertain the amount of license fee due. 
(d)  The information furnished or secured pursuant to this section shall be confidential to the extent permitted by law. Any unlawful and unauthorized disclosure or use of such information by any officer or employee of the City shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(e)  If any person fails to file such required documents at the time of renewal, the Director of Finance may determine the amount of license tax due from such person by means of an assessment as set forth in section 22-16. 
(f)  No license for any succeeding current or unexpired license term shall knowingly be issued to any person who, at the time of making application for any license, is indebted to the City for any unpaid license fee. 
(Code 1975, § 13-13; Ord. No. 99, §§ 14—16; Ord. No. 84-10, § 5; Ord. No. 84-11, § 5; Ord. No. 85-01, § 2)  
Sec. 22-14. - Duplicates. 
A duplicate license may be issued to replace any license previously issued hereunder which has been lost or destroyed, upon the licensee filing an affidavit attesting to such fact, and at the time of filing such affidavit, paying a duplicate license fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council. 
(Code 1975, § 13-14; Ord. No. 99, § 19; Ord. No. 84-10, § 6; Ord. No. 84-11, § 6)  
Sec. 22-15. - Enforcement of chapter. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the Finance Director to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter, and the Police Chief shall render assistance in the enforcement of this chapter as may from time to time be required by the Finance Director or the City Council. 
(b)  The Finance Director, in the exercise of the duties imposed upon him or her under this chapter and acting through his or her deputies or duly authorized assistants, may examine or cause to be examined all places of business in the City to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  The Finance Director and each and all of his or her assistants and any police officer shall have the power and authority to enter, free of charge and at any reasonable time, any place of business required to be licensed herein and demand an exhibition of its license certificate. Any person possessing such a license certificate, who willfully fails to exhibit the same on demand, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties provided for by the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Each department of the City which issues permits for work to be done shall require the production of a valid unexpired business tax certificate prior to the issuance of such a permit. 
(e)  Final building inspection approvals shall be issued only when it is ascertained by the building division that all business license liability of the prime contractor and all subcontractors employed by the prime contractor has been fully satisfied. 
(Code 1975, § 13-15; Ord. No. 99, § 18; Ord. No. 84-10, § 7; Ord. No. 84-11, § 7)  
Sec. 22-16. - Assessment as administrative remedy. 
(a)  Assessment. 
(1)  Whenever the Finance Director determines that any tax is due or may be due to the City under the provisions of this chapter, the Finance Director may make and give notice of an assessment of such tax. 
(2)  The notice of assessment shall separately set forth the amount of any tax known by the Finance Director to be due or estimated by the Finance Director, after full consideration of all information within his or her or her knowledge concerning the business and activities of the person assessed, to be due under each applicable section of this chapter and shall include the amount of any penalties or interest accrued on each amount to the date of the notice of assessment. 
(b)  Service of assessment; right to hearing. The notice of assessment shall be served upon the person either by delivering it to him or her personally, or by a deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the person at the address of the location of the business appearing on the face of the business license certificate issued to the business or to such other address as he or she shall register with the Finance Director for the purpose of receiving notices provided under this chapter; should the person have no such certificate issued to him or her and should he or she have no address registered with the Finance Director for such purpose, then to such person's last known address. For the purpose of this section, a service by mail is complete at the time of deposit in the United States mail. Within 15 days after the date of service, the person addressed may either apply in writing to the Finance Director for a hearing on the assessment or may file a written request that such hearing be waived. If the person neither requests a hearing upon the assessment nor requests a waiver of hearing within the prescribed time, the amount of the assessment shall be final, and the amount thereof shall immediately be due and owing to the City, but penalties and interest as provided by this chapter shall continue to accrue until paid. 
(c)  Waiver of hearing. If the person requests that the hearing be waived, the Finance Director may either grant such request and notify the person thereof in writing or may, at the discretion of the Finance Director, deny the request and set the assessment for hearing at the time and in the manner prescribed by subsection (b) of this section. If the Finance Director grants the request for waiver of hearing, the administrative proceedings prescribed by this section shall be deemed exhausted and the City shall have the right to bring an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to collect the amount of the assessment, plus such penalties and interest as may have accrued thereon as provided by this chapter. 
(d)  Time of hearing; notice. If the person requests a hearing upon the assessment or if the Finance Director denies the request for waiver of hearing, the Finance Director shall cause the matter to be set for hearing before a board of review, as specified in subsection (e) of this section, not later than 90 days after the date of the application, or as the case may be, the date of the Finance Director's denial of the request for waiver of hearing. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be mailed to the person addressed not later than 15 days before the date set for hearing and, if the Finance Director desires said person to produce specific records at such hearing, such notice may designate the records required to be produced. 
(e)  Administrative hearing. The hearing prescribed by this section shall be before a board of review. The board of review shall be composed of the City Manager, Police Chief, and the Community Services Director, or the duly appointed representative of each. At the hearing the person assessed and the appropriate City representative may submit such evidence relevant to their respective positions. The board of review may require the presentation of additional evidence and may continue the hearing from time to time for the purpose of allowing the presentation of additional evidence. 
(f)  Decision of the board of review. Upon completion of the hearing, the board of review may: 
(1)  Affirm the assessment; 
(2)  Increase the assessment; or 
(3)  Decrease the assessment as the evidence may require; 
but the amount of the assessment shall not be increased unless the claim for the increase is asserted on behalf of the City either before or during the hearing. Written notice of the decision of the board of review shall be given to the person assessed in the same form and in the same manner as the notice of assessment. 
(g)  Exception. Within 15 days from the date of service of the notice of decision of the board of review, the person assessed may file written exceptions to the decision of the board of review, but shall not be required to do so. If the person does not do so, the person shall nevertheless be deemed to have exhausted the administrative proceedings provided by this section. Upon filing of written exceptions, the board of review may either deny the exceptions or modify its decision, as it deems appropriate. If the board of review modifies its decision, it shall cause a written notice of decision as required by subsection (f) of this section, to be given to the person assessed at the time, and in the manner provided therein. If the board of review does not modify its decision within 30 days from the service of said exceptions, the exceptions shall be deemed denied. 
(h)  Effect of delay in administrative proceedings. Failure of the Finance Director to set any hearing within the time prescribed in this section and failure of the board of review to complete any procedure prescribed in this section within the period stated shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken hereunder. 
(i)  Effect of payment of an assessment. Acceptance of any payment upon an assessment, the validity of which has not previously been passed upon by the board of review, shall not preclude the Finance Director from subsequently levying another assessment in any case where the original assessment does not truly reflect the correct tax liability. 
(Code 1975, § 13-15.1; Ord. No. 84-10, § 8; Ord. No. 84-11, § 8)  
Sec. 22-17. - Method and time of payment. 
(a)  All licenses shall be paid for in lawful money of the United States of America. 
(b)  All daily license fees shall be paid in advance of each day. 
(c)  All annual licenses on a flat rate basis become due and payable on the anniversary date of the license. 
(d)  All annual licenses on a gross receipts basis become due on the anniversary date of the license. 
(Code 1975, § 13-16; Ord. No. 2004-04)  
Sec. 22-18. - Refunds. 
Any license fee or portion thereof, or any penalty hereafter paid more than once or erroneously paid, may be refunded, provided that a claim therefor, duly verified by the person paying such fee or penalty, or his or her authorized representative, agent or attorney, shall have been filed with the Finance Director within 100 days after the date that the fee was erroneously paid. Such claims shall be processed in the same manner as other claims and demands. 
(Code 1975, § 13-16.1; Ord. No. 84-10, § 9; Ord. No. 84-11, § 9)  
Sec. 22-19. - Compliance with additional regulations prerequisite. 
(a)  No license shall be issued to any person failing to present any land use permit required by chapter 44 of this Code or who has failed to comply with the provisions of any other regulation having to do with trade, business or occupation or for a use that is not in compliance with all City, State, and federal laws and regulations. 
(b)  A business license shall only be issued after approval of all departments possessing any regulatory powers over the business of the applicant, and after compliance with all applicable requirements of this Code. 
(Code 1975, § 13-17; Ord. No. 99, § 20; Ord. No. 84-10, § 10; Ord. No. 84-11, § 10; Ord. No. 2008-05, § 1(13-17), 12-2-2008)  
Sec. 22-20. - Transferability; loaning. 
(a)  No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable; provided, that where a license is issued authorizing a person to transact and carry on a business at a particular place, such licensee may, upon application therefor and paying a fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council, have the license amended to authorize the transacting and carrying on of such business under such license at some other location to which the business is or is to be moved. 
(b)  No person shall loan his or her license to another. 
(Code 1975, § 13-18; Ord. No. 99, §§ 21, 22; Ord. No. 84-10, § 11; Ord. No. 84-11, § 11)  
Sec. 22-21. - Powers of Finance Director as to extension of deadlines and settlement of tax claim. 
In addition to all other power conferred upon him or her, the Finance Director shall have the power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing any required sworn statement for a period not exceeding 30 days and in such case to waive any penalty that would otherwise have accrued and shall have the further power, with the consent of the Council, to compromise any claim as to amount of license tax due. 
(Code 1975, § 13-19; Ord. No. 99, § 23)  
Sec. 22-22. - Appeal from decision to deny. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Finance Director with respect to the issuance or refusal to issue a license pursuant to this chapter may appeal to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk accompanied by an appeal processing fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council. The City Council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing such appeal. The City Clerk shall give notice to such person of the time and place of hearing by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail at La Palma, California, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at his or her last known address. 
(b)  If the decision of the City Council at such hearing is made in favor of the person initiating the appeal, such person, or his or her authorized representative, may file a duly verified claim for refund of the appeal processing fee with the Finance Director within 100 days of the council action. Such claims shall be processed in the same manner as other claims and demands. 
(Code 1975, § 13-20; Ord. No. 99, § 24; Ord. No. 84-10, § 12; Ord. No. 84-11, § 12)  
Sec. 22-23. - Display. 
(a)  Any licensee engaged in a business at a fixed place of business shall keep the license issued to him or her posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is conducted. Any licensee not operating from a fixed place of business shall keep the license issued to him or her upon his or her person at all times while engaged in the business within the City. 
(b)  No person shall exhibit a delinquent or revoked business license. 
(Code 1975, § 13-21; Ord. No. 99, § 25; Ord. No. 84-10, § 13; Ord. No. 84-11, § 13)  
Sec. 22-24. - Failure to pay tax. 
(a)  The licenses in this chapter shall be due and payable to the Business License Division and a penalty of ten percent shall be added to each license remaining unpaid 30 days after it becomes due. On the first day of each month thereafter that such fee remains unpaid, an additional penalty of ten percent of such unpaid fee shall be added; provided, that the maximum amount shall not exceed an amount equal to the amount of such fee and provided, that a penalty of ten percent will be added on the 16th day a fee is due for those unpaid license fees based on a gross receipts basis and an additional ten percent every 30 day thereafter. 
(b)  The conviction and imprisonment of any person for engaging in any business without first obtaining a license to conduct such business shall not relieve such person from paying the license tax to conduct such business, nor shall the payment of any license tax prevent a criminal prosecution for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. All remedies prescribed hereunder shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the City shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 13-22; Ord. No. 99, §§ 26, 27)  
Sec. 22-25. - Interest. 
In addition to the penalties imposed, any business that fails to remit the tax due shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per month, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
(Code 1975, § 13-22.1; Ord. No. 84-10, § 14; Ord. No. 84-11, § 14)  
Sec. 22-26. - Effect of chapter on past actions and obligations. 
Neither this chapter nor its superseding of any portion of any other ordinance of the City shall in any manner be construed to affect prosecution for violation of any other ordinance committed prior to the effective date of this chapter, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or any penal provision applicable to any such violation, nor be construed to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit required by any ordinance to be posted, filed or deposited and all rights and obligations thereunto appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Code 1975, § 13-23; Ord. No. 99, § 6)  
Secs. 22-27—22-57. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TYPES AND FEES 
 
Sec. 22-58. - License fees. 
The fee for any license required by any section of this chapter shall be that established for the particular business involved. The fee and the duration of the license shall be annual, quarterly, monthly, weekly or daily as established from time to time by the City Council. 
(Code 1975, § 13-24; Ord. No. 99, § 28)  
Sec. 22-59. - Omnibus provisions. 
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to license all businesses, occupations, trades, callings, or professions carried on within the City, other than those herein specifically excepted, and if the application for license is made for any business for which an appropriate category of license is not included herein, the Business License Division shall cause the application to be referred to the special permit committee, as defined herein, for its consideration, and if the license is granted, then the committee shall fix the license fee to be paid by such applicant. 
(Code 1975, § 13-25.1; Ord. No. 84-10, § 15; Ord. No. 84-11, § 15)  
Secs. 22-60—22-79. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - HOME BUSINESS LICENSES 
 
Sec. 22-80. - License required for home occupation. 
No individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, association, corporation, estate, trust, or any other entity shall operate, conduct, or manage any business in a residential dwelling except upon the issuance of a home business license in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 13-40; Ord. No. 82-6, § 1; Ord. No. 2004-03, § 4)  
Sec. 22-81. - Application. 
Application shall be made in writing on a form approved by the City Manager. 
(Code 1975, § 13-41; Ord. No. 82-6, § 1; Ord. No. 2004-03, § 4)  
Sec. 22-82. - Investigation of applicant. 
Upon receipt of the application, the City Manager shall refer the matter to the appropriate members of the City staff, who shall investigate and report to the City Manager all facts or evidence bearing upon the nature of the home occupation. 
(Code 1975, § 13-43; Ord. No. 82-6, § 1; Ord. No. 2004-03, § 4)  
Sec. 22-83. - Issuance of license. 
Within 30 days after the filing of the application with the City Manager, and after having received the investigation report, the City Manager shall either: 
(1)  Issue a home business license if the City Manager finds that the home occupation will conform to the requirements of this chapter and will comport with the peace, health, safety, convenience, good morals, and general welfare of the public. To ensure that such home occupation will comport therewith, the City Manager may impose such terms, conditions, and restrictions upon the operation and conduct of such home occupation in addition to the requirements of this chapter as the City Manager may deem necessary. 
(2)  Deny the home business license if the City Manager determines that the operation of the home occupation will not comport with the provisions of this chapter or with the peace, health, safety, convenience, good morals, and general welfare of the public. 
(Code 1975, § 13-44; Ord. No. 82-6, § 1; Ord. No. 2004-03, § 4)  
Sec. 22-84. - Fee. 
The home business license fee shall be in accordance with the gross receipts schedule of section 22-59. Proration of fees shall be in accordance with the provisions of section 22-12. 
(Code 1975, § 13-45; Ord. No. 82-6, § 1; Ord. No. 2004-03, § 4)  
Sec. 22-85. - Appeal. 
The applicant may appeal the decision of the City Manager to either issue or deny the home business license to the City Council by filing a written appeal with the City Clerk within ten days following the determination. The City Council shall conduct a public hearing within 30 days following the filing of the appeal. At the conclusion of the public hearing, which shall be noticed in accordance with the provisions of division 2 of article IV of chapter 44 (Hearings), the City Council shall either direct the issuance of the home business license, direct the issuance of home business license with conditions, or deny the home business license. 
(Code 1975, § 13-46; Ord. No. 82-6, § 1; Ord. No. 2004-03, § 4)  
Sec. 22-86. - Processing charge. 
An appeal processing charge in an amount to be determined by the City Council is required for and shall accompany all appeals to the decision of the City Manager. 
(Code 1975, § 13-47; Ord. No. 82-6, § 1; Ord. No. 2004-03, § 4)  
Sec. 22-87. - Period of validity. 
A home business license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall, unless otherwise provided by the City Manager or City Council at the time of issuance of the permit, be valid for a period of one year. 
(Code 1975, § 13-48; Ord. No. 2004-04)  
Sec. 22-88. - Transferability. 
No home business license issued under the provisions of this article shall be transferable except with the written consent of the City Manager, which may require the transferee to file on original application in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 13-49; Ord. No. 82-6, § 1; Ord. No. 2004-03, § 4)  
Sec. 22-89. - Renewal. 
Any home business license issued under this article may be renewed by filing a request for renewal upon an application form to be approved by the City Manager at least 15 days prior to the date of expiration. The City Manager may authorize the renewal of the permit based upon the same standards as are set forth herein for the original issuance thereof. The decision of the City Manager on renewal may be appealed to the City Council in the same manner as set forth above for the appeal of the original determination of the City Manager. 
(Code 1975, § 13-50; Ord. No. 82-6, § 1; Ord. No. 2004-03, § 4)  
Sec. 22-90. - Standards applicable to issuance of home business licenses. 
The establishment and conduct of home occupations authorized by this article shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  There shall be no exterior evidence of the conduct of a home occupation. 
(2)  A home occupation shall be conducted only within the enclosed living area of the dwelling unit or within the enclosed garage. 
(3)  Electrical or mechanical equipment which create visible or audible interference in radio or television receivers or cause fluctuations in line voltage outside the dwelling unit shall be prohibited. 
(4)  Only the residents of the dwelling unit may be engaged in the home occupation. 
(5)  There shall be no physical delivery of goods directly to customers at the premises. 
(6)  The establishment and conduct of a home occupation shall not change the character of the use of the dwelling unit involved. 
(7)  There shall be no signs related to the home occupation. 
(8)  The required residential off-street parking shall be maintained. 
(9)  A home occupation shall not create greater vehicular or pedestrian traffic than normal for the neighborhood in which it is located. 
(10)  No vehicles advertising the business may be parked on the street or driveway of the residence. 
(11)  Separate and prior approval of any flammable materials by the Fire Marshal is required. 
(12)  The home business will not create any noise or odors beyond the property which could be construed as a nuisance. 
(Code 1975, § 13-52; Ord. No. 82-6, § 1; Ord. No. 2004-03, § 4)  
Secs. 22-91—22-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SOLICITATION 
 
Sec. 22-111. - Purpose. 
The policies governing solicitation provided herein are intended to protect the health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of the public.  
Sec. 22-112. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Charitable means and includes the words patriotic, philanthropic, social services, welfare, benevolent, educational, religious, civic or fraternal, either actual or purported. 
Solicit and solicitation includes the act of going from place-to-place on or along City streets or sidewalks, in any public park, in any place of public accommodation, in any place of business generally open to the public, or in any other public place for any of the following purposes: 
(1)  Displaying, offering for sale, selling or taking orders for the future delivery of goods, or offering for sale, selling or taking orders for the future rendering of services, whether such activities are oral or written; 
(2)  Directly or indirectly, whether in writing or orally, requesting money, credit, property, financial assistance, patronage or any other thing of value, for charitable or non-charitable purposes; 
(3)  Distributing, circulating, posting or publishing any handbill, written advertisement or other written publication; 
(4)  Offering or announcing the availability of employment; or 
(5)  Proselytizing, evangelizing or otherwise attempting to spread a message, religious or otherwise. 
A solicitation, as defined in this subsection, shall be deemed completed when made, whether or not an actual employment relationship is created, a transaction is completed or any exchange of money or other item of value takes place.  
Sec. 22-113. - Hours of operation.  
Sec. 22-114. - Manner of solicitation. 
(a)  No person shall, without prior appointment or express permission from the owner or occupant, solicit at any residential dwelling, including but not limited to a house, apartment, or condominium, where there is a sign indicating "No Solicitations," "Do Not Disturb," or any other indication, including but not limited to a verbal statement by the occupant, that the occupant does not wish to be solicited or in any other way have his or her privacy disturbed. 
(b)  No person shall, in connection with any solicitation, touch, come into physical contact with, or affix any object to another person, without first receiving express permission therefor from such other person. 
(c)  No person shall solicit in a manner that obstructs the free movement of any person on any street, sidewalk or other public place open to the public generally. 
(d)  No person shall threaten any injury or damage to any person who declines to be solicited. 
(e)  No person shall misrepresent his or her physical or mental health while soliciting. 
(f)  The regulations contained in this section shall not apply to any solicitation that occurs pursuant to the voluntary prior consent of the person to whom or location at which the solicitation is directed.  
Sec. 22-115. - Fraudulent misrepresentation. 
(a)  No person shall directly or indirectly solicit from any person by misrepresentation of his or her name, occupation, financial condition, social condition, residence or principal place of business, and no person shall make or cause to be made any misstatement of fact, deception, or fraudulent misrepresentation in connection with any solicitation in the City. 
(b)  No person soliciting within the City shall use a name, symbol, or statement so closely related or similar to that used by another business, organization or governmental agency, in such a manner that the use thereof would tend to confuse or mislead the public.  
Sec. 22-116. - Solicitation in public streets. 
No person shall solicit from or direct solicitation to any person in a motor vehicle traveling along any City street. This section shall not apply to freeway oriented solicitation regulated by Vehicle Code § 22520.5.  
Sec. 22-117. - Commercial fundraisers for charitable purposes. 
All commercial fundraisers for charitable purposes, as that term is defined by State law, shall comply with all State registration, reporting and other related requirements prior to and while soliciting within the City.  
Secs. 22-118—22-153. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - TOWING SERVICE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of City to establish procedures for removal from private or public property of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof, Vehicle Code § 22660. 
 
Sec. 22-154. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Illegally parked vehicle means any vehicle parked in violation of the laws of the City of La Palma, the County of Orange and/or the State of California. 
Public automobile storage facility means any vehicle storage facility which provides to the public the service of storing or holding vehicles. 
Tow car means any vehicle or device used to tow or otherwise remove vehicles from one place to another. 
Tow service means any service whereby vehicles are towed or otherwise removed from one place to another. 
(Code 1975, § 13-92; Ord. No. 86-05, § 1)  
Sec. 22-155. - Permit required; exemptions. 
No person, association, firm or corporation shall engage in, conduct, or carry on, the business of towing or impounding illegally parked vehicles from a private property location within the City of La Palma without first having obtained a permit pursuant to this article. La Palma Emergency Tow and Storage List contractors may tow from private property under conditions established by this Code and are exempt from the private property permit fee. 
(Code 1975, § 13-93; Ord. No. 86-05, § 1)  
Sec. 22-156. - Application; fee. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain or renew a permit to tow or impound illegally parked vehicles from private property locations within the City of La Palma shall make application pursuant to section 22-164. 
(b)  Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee as established by resolution of the City Council. 
(Code 1975, § 13-94; Ord. No. 86-05, § 1)  
Sec. 22-157. - Application contents. 
An applicant for a permit shall submit the following information: 
(1)  The full name and business and residence address of the applicant; 
(2)  The location, description and hourly availability of the tow cars owned or operated by the applicant; 
(3)  The addresses of the available public automobile storage facilities that the applicant will use for housing all vehicles towed from private property; 
(4)  Written proof that the applicant is over 18 years of age; 
(5)  The names, addresses and driver's license numbers of all tow car operators employed by the applicant. Applicant will provide this information for any employees hired after issuance of the permit; 
(6)  The business, occupation, or employment history of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application; 
(7)  The business license and permit history of the applicant, owner, or profit interest holder in the tow service; 
(8)  All criminal convictions of applicant, including Vehicle Code violations; 
(9)  Such other identification and information as reasonably necessary. 
(Code 1975, § 13-95; Ord. No. 86-05, § 1)  
Sec. 22-158. - Display of permit. 
Every tow car operator and driver performing towing services of illegally parked vehicles from private property in the City shall have on file with the La Palma Police Department a valid permit or copy thereof. 
(Code 1975, § 13-96; Ord. No. 86-05, § 1)  
Sec. 22-159. - Sale or transfer. 
Upon the sale or transfer of any ownership or profit interest whether present or prospective in a tow service, the permit issued under this article shall be null and void. A new application and payment of fees shall be made, deleting the person who no longer holds any ownership or profit interest and naming the person who has been sold or transferred ownership or profit interest in the tow service. 
(Code 1975, § 13-97; Ord. No. 86-05, § 1)  
Sec. 22-160. - Notification. 
(a)  Twenty-four hours before authorizing a tow service to remove any illegally parked vehicle from private property, the owner or person in lawful possession of the private property must notify the La Palma Police Department of the following in accordance with Vehicle Code § 22658(a): 
(1)  The name, address and phone number of the person authorizing removal of the illegally parked vehicle from private property; 
(2)  The location of the private property from which the vehicle is to be removed; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the location where the vehicle is to be stored; 
(4)  The license number, model and color of the vehicle to be removed; 
(5)  The name and address of the person reporting the private property impounded. 
(b)  It is the responsibility of the tow service operation to ensure that the La Palma Police Department is notified by the owner or person in lawful possession of the private property prior to the tow service operator removing any illegally parked vehicle. 
(c)  The owner or person in lawful possession of such property shall give or cause to be given notice in writing to the registered and legal owner of the vehicle of the fact of such removal, and the reason for the removal, if such person knows or is able to ascertain such information from the records of the Department of Motor Vehicles. The mileage of the vehicle at the time of removal must also be reported to the registered owner of the vehicle, (in accordance with Vehicle Code § 22658(b)). If the owner or person in lawful possession of the property is unable to comply with Vehicle Code § 22658(b), said owner or person shall comply with Vehicle Code § 22853(c). 
(Code 1975, § 13-98; Ord. No. 86-05, § 1)  
Sec. 22-161. - Storage facility. 
The illegally parked vehicle removed from private property shall be towed or otherwise transported to the nearest available public automobile storage facility. The nearest available public automobile storage facility is defined as that facility which is closest to the private property from which the illegally parked vehicle was towed or otherwise removed, or the storage lot of the permittee if approved by the Police Chief. 
(Code 1975, § 13-99; Ord. No. 86-05, § 1)  
Sec. 22-162. - Warning signs. 
The permittee shall not tow from private property unless the private property has displayed signs containing the following message: 
NO PARKING—UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLES SUBJECT TO TOW-AWAY AT OWNER'S EXPENSE CVC 22658 LA PALMA POLICE TELEPHONE (714) 690-3370. 
(Code 1975, § 13-100; Ord. No. 86-05, § 1)  
Sec. 22-163. - Rates. 
The permittee shall maintain on file with the La Palma Police Department a current rate schedule indicating all charges for towing and storage services. The charges for towing and storage services of illegally parked vehicles removed from private property shall be assessed according to the prevailing rates charged for similar services in Orange County and on file at the La Palma Police Department. 
(Code 1975, § 13-101; Ord. No. 86-05, § 1)  
Sec. 22-164. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  An applicant for a permit under the provisions of this article shall obtain and complete the necessary applicant's form and return it to the Police Department. The Police Department will thereafter notify the permit applicant of a date and time in which to personally appear at the Police Department. The Police Chief shall have a reasonable time in which to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Based upon such investigation, the Police Chief, or his or her designee, shall approve or deny the permit. 
(b)  The Police Chief or his or her designee shall not grant a permit if, based upon his or her investigation, he or she finds any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Evidence showing that the permit applicant has deliberately falsified the application; or 
(2)  The permit applicant fails to furnish the information and documents required by this article; or 
(3)  Any deficiencies or violations in facilities, equipment or courses of conduct which endangers the peace, health, safety and/or general welfare of the public; or 
(4)  The operation as proposed by the applicant, if permitted would not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, this Code; or 
(5)  The preceding record reveals that the permit applicant has conducted his or her business in an unlawful, unethical or discourteous manner; or 
(6)  The applicant is not of the age of 18 years or older. 
(c)  The Police Chief, after receiving the aforementioned and described information, may, grant or deny a permit based on the above listed criteria. In the event the permit is denied, written notice of such denial shall be given to the applicant, specifying the grounds for such denial. Notice of the denial of the permit shall be deemed to have been served upon personal service of applicant or when deposited in the United States mails with postage prepaid and addressed to the applicant at his or her last known address. Such refusal to issue a permit may be appealed to the City Manager under the procedures as set forth below. 
(d)  Within 30 days from the date of denial, any person denied a permit pursuant to these provisions may appeal to the City Manager in writing stating reasons why the permit should be granted. The City Manager may grant or deny the permit, and such decision shall be final upon the application. Also, the City Manager may elect, on his or her own motion, to review any determination of the grant or denial of a permit. 
(Code 1975, § 13-102; Ord. No. 86-05, § 1)  
Sec. 22-165. - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
(a)  The Police Chief may suspend or revoke the permit issued under this article when he determines that the permit holder, his or her agent, or employee was on notice, or knew of, or should have known of, a violation of the La Palma City Code, including, but not limited to the provisions of this article, and failed to comply with the La Palma City Code. 
(b)  No permit shall be suspended or revoked unless hearing notice thereof be given. Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing and served at least five days prior to the date of hearing thereon. The notice shall state the grounds of the complaint against the holder of such permit, or against the business carried on by the permittee at the tow service, and shall state the time and place where such hearing will be held. 
(c)  This notice shall be served upon the permit holder by delivering the same to such person or by leaving such notice at the place of business or residence of the permit holder. If the permit holder cannot be found with due diligence and the service of such notice cannot be made in the manner herein provided, a copy of such notice shall be mailed, postage fully prepaid, addressed to the permit holder at his or her place of business or residence at least five days prior to the date of such hearing. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person to conduct or carry on the business of towing illegally parked vehicles from private property until a permit, suspended or revoked, has been reinstated by the Police Chief. 
(Code 1975, § 13-103; Ord. No. 86-05, § 1)  
Sec. 22-166. - Business license. 
Nothing in this article shall constitute a waiver of the requirements for the issuance and possession of a business license. 
(Code 1975, § 13-104; Ord. No. 86-05, § 1)  
Sec. 22-167. - Term of permit; renewals. 
Subject to revocation or suspension, a permit issued pursuant to the terms of this article shall expire after a term of two years. The permit may thereafter be renewed. Applications for renewal shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 13-105; Ord. No. 86-05, § 1)  
Sec. 22-168. - Applicability of regulations to existing businesses. 
The provisions of this article shall be applicable to all persons and businesses described herein whether the herein described activities were established before or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, except that those in business as of the date of enactment of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall have ten days to make application for a permit. 
(Code 1975, § 13-106; Ord. No. 86-05, § 1)  
Sec. 22-169. - Violation and penalty. 
Every person, whether acting as an individual owner, employee of the owner, operator or employee of the operator, or whether acting as a mere helper for the owner, employer or operator, or whether acting as a participant or worker in any way, who operates or conducts a towing service without first obtaining a permit and paying for a license to do so from the City of La Palma, or who violates any provisions of this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1975, § 13-107; Ord. No. 86-05, § 1)  
Secs. 22-170—22-191. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - TAXI ADMINISTRATION PROGRAM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Local regulation of taxicabs, Government Code § 53075.5.; authority to regulate taxicabs and vehicles for hire, Vehicle Code § 21100(b). 
 
Sec. 22-192. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City authorization means City authorization to operate a taxicab business in the City. 
Driver means a person who drives or controls the movements of a taxicab. 
Driver's permit means a valid permit issued by OCTAP authorizing a person to drive or control the movements of a taxicab. 
OCTAP means the Orange County Taxi Administration Program administered by the Orange County Transportation Authority. 
Operate a taxicab means to drive a taxicab and either solicit or pick up passengers for hire in the City. 
Owner means the registered owner or lessor of a taxicab. 
Taxicab means a vehicle operated within the jurisdiction of the City, capable of carrying not more than eight persons, excluding the driver, and used to carry passengers for hire. The term shall exclude a vehicle operating as a charter party carrier licensed as such by any State agency, including public utilities commission, or any other vehicle having a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by any State agency, including the Public Utilities Commission. 
Taxicab business permit means a valid permit issued by OCTAP authorizing a person to operate a taxicab business. 
Taxicab vehicle permit means a valid permit issued by OCTAP authorizing a particular vehicle to be operated as a taxicab. 
(Code 1975, § 13-108; Ord. No. 97-09, § 1)  
Sec. 22-193. - City authorization. 
(a)  A person shall operate a taxicab in the City only if the taxicab is authorized by OCTAP to operate a taxicab business. 
(b)  An owner shall allow a taxicab owned by or under his or her control to be operated in the City only if the owner is authorized by OCTAP to operate a taxicab business. 
(c)  City's authorization to operate a taxicab and/or taxicab business in the City shall be deemed granted if the taxicab business and each taxicab driver have obtained all required OCTAP permits. 
(Code 1975, § 13-109; Ord. No. 97-09, § 1)  
Sec. 22-194. - Driver's permit required. 
A person shall only operate a taxicab if that person possesses a driver's permit and if City authorization has been obtained. An owner shall only allow a driver to operate a taxicab owned by the owner if that driver possesses a driver's permit and if City authorization has been obtained. 
(Code 1975, § 13-110; Ord. No. 97-09, § 1)  
Sec. 22-195. - Taxicab vehicle permit required. 
A person shall only operate a taxicab if that vehicle displays a taxicab vehicle permit and if City authorization has been obtained. An owner shall only allow a taxicab owned by the owner to be operated in the City if that vehicle displays a taxicab vehicle permit and if City authorization has been obtained. 
(Code 1975, § 13-111; Ord. No. 97-09, § 1)  
Sec. 22-196. - Taxicab business permit required. 
A person shall only operate a taxicab business in the City if that person possesses a taxicab business permit and if City authorization has been obtained. 
(Code 1975, § 13-112; Ord. No. 97-09, § 1)  
Sec. 22-197. - Application for permits. 
Application for a driver's permit, taxicab vehicle permit or taxicab business permit shall be made to OCTAP, upon a form provided by OCTAP and shall be accompanied by an application fee sufficient to cover the administrative costs of processing said application as established by the Orange County Transportation Authority. 
(Code 1975, § 13-113; Ord. No. 97-09, § 1)  
Sec. 22-198. - Testing for controlled substances and alcohol. 
A driver shall test negative for controlled substances and alcohol as required by applicable State statutes. 
(Code 1975, § 13-114; Ord. No. 97-09, § 1)  
Sec. 22-199. - Insurance required. 
A driver operating a taxicab in the City shall carry with him/her at all times proof of insurance covering that vehicle, with such policy limits and coverage as established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the City Council. Said proof of insurance must clearly identify the vehicle covered. 
(Code 1975, § 13-115; Ord. No. 97-09, § 1)  
Sec. 22-200. - Nontransferability. 
No permit issued under this article shall be assigned to, or used by, any person or vehicle other than the person or vehicle named in such permit. 
(Code 1975, § 13-116; Ord. No. 97-09, § 1)  
Sec. 22-201. - Equipment. 
A taxicab operated under the authority of this article shall be equipped according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the City Council. 
(Code 1975, § 13-117; Ord. No. 97-09, § 1)  
Sec. 22-202. - Mechanical condition. 
A taxicab operated under the authority of this article shall be maintained according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the City Council. 
(Code 1975, § 13-118; Ord. No. 97-09, § 1)  
Sec. 22-203. - Operational requirements. 
(a)  A driver shall only carry a passenger to his or her destination by the most direct and accessible route. 
(b)  A taxicab shall have all permits issued by OCTAP conspicuously displayed according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the City Council. 
(c)  A taxicab shall have the following information continuously posted in a prominent location in the taxicab passenger's compartment according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the City Council: 
(1)  A schedule of rates and charges for the hire of said taxicab; 
(2)  The driver's name and address; 
(3)  The owner's name, address and telephone number; 
(4)  The taxicab identification number; 
(5)  The driver's permit issued pursuant to this article; 
(6)  The taxicab vehicle permit issued pursuant to this article; and 
(7)  Any other information required by the City. 
(d)  A driver shall give a receipt for the amount charged upon the request of the person paying the fare. 
(e)  A taxicab shall only be operated if the passenger compartment is kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(f)  A driver shall not leave his or her taxicab to solicit passengers. 
(g)  The name or trade name of the owner and the number by which the taxicab is designated shall be printed, stamped or stenciled conspicuously on the outside of each taxicab according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the City Council. 
(Code 1975, § 13-119; Ord. No. 97-09, § 1)  
Sec. 22-204. - Rates and charges. 
No driver shall charge rates and charges other than those established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the City Council. 
(Code 1975, § 13-120; Ord. No. 97-09, § 1)  
Sec. 22-205. - Article requirements separate from business licensing. 
The requirements of this article are separate and independent from the business licensing and any other provisions under this Code. 
(Code 1975, § 13-121; Ord. No. 97-09, § 1)  
Sec. 22-206. - Penalties. 
(a)  The City intends to secure compliance with the provisions of this article by any of the following alternate, separate and distinct methods. Each method set forth herein is intended to be mutually exclusive and does not prevent concurrent or consecutive methods being used to achieve compliance against continuing violations. Each day a violation exists constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, each violation of the provisions of this article may be enforced alternatively as follows: 
(1)  Infraction. Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this article may be prosecuted for an infraction. Written citations for infractions may be issued by police officers or nonsafety employees designated by the City by separate resolution. Any person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this article shall be punished either by fines as specified in the currently adopted uniform infraction bail schedule used by the Orange County Municipal Courts, or, where no fine is specified therein, by: 
a.  A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation; 
b.  A fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation within one year; 
c.  A fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation within one year. 
(2)  Misdemeanor. Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this article may be prosecuted for a misdemeanor. Written citations for misdemeanors may be issued by police officers or by nonsafety employees designated by the City by separate resolution. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(3)  Civil action. The City Attorney by and at the request of the City Council, may institute an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to restrain, enjoin or abate the conditions found to be in violation of the provisions of this article, as provided by law. 
(4)  Administrative hearing. 
a.  Upon a finding by the City official vested with the authority to enforce the various provisions of this article that a violation exists, he/she may notify the person deemed responsible for said violation that a public hearing shall be held before the City Council to hear and determine the existence of said violation and the anticipated compliance necessary, i.e. abatement or other action required. 
b.  Said notification shall be in writing setting forth the alleged violation and the anticipated action sought, and shall be given not later than ten days prior to the scheduled date of the hearing. 
c.  The City Council may preside over the hearing or, in the alternative, appoint a hearing officer to conduct the hearing, receive relevant evidence and to submit to the City Council findings and recommendations to be considered by the City Council. 
d.  The City Council shall render its decision within 45 days from the date of the hearing or, in the event that a hearing officer has been appointed, within 45 days from the date on which the City Council receives the findings and recommendations of the hearing officer. The decision of the City Council shall be final and enforceable as provided by law. 
(Code 1975, § 13-122; Ord. No. 97-09, § 1)  
Secs. 22-207—22-235. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PRIVATE PATROL AND SECURITY SERVICE 
 
Sec. 22-236. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Private patrol means a person who, for any consideration whatsoever, agrees to furnish, or furnishes, a watchman, guard, patrolman, guard dog, or other person to protect persons or property, or to prevent the theft or unlawful taking of any goods, money, or property of any kind, or performs the service of such watchman, guard, or patrolman for any of said purposes. 
Security business means a business, that for any consideration whatsoever, agrees to protect persons or property, or to prevent the theft or unlawful taking of any goods, money, or property of any kind. Alarm businesses as defined in section 4-1 are not security businesses as defined herein. 
(Code 1975, § 19A-1; Ord. No. 85-02, § 1)  
Sec. 22-237. - Registration of private patrol and security businesses. 
(a)  No person shall engage in or conduct a private patrol or security business without registering with the City. To register with the City, a copy of the license issued by the State Department of Consumer Affairs to said person or business must be submitted to the City Clerk, as well as proof of State registration for each employee of the licensee who will perform work within the City. 
(b)  An accurate description of the specific location or area within the City in which the person or business proposes to operate must accompany the request for registration with the City. 
(Code 1975, § 19A-2; Ord. No. 85-02, § 2)  
Sec. 22-238. - Uniform and vehicle specification. 
(a)  A person carrying out his or her duties in the conduct of a private patrol or security business within the City shall wear a uniform which is readily distinguishable from La Palma Police Department uniforms. 
(b)  Any vehicle used in the conduct of a private patrol or security business within the City of La Palma shall be readily distinguishable from La Palma Police Department vehicles. 
(c)  The Police Chief shall verify whether any uniform or vehicle is distinguishable from those used by the La Palma Police Department. 
(Code 1975, § 19A-3; Ord. No. 85-02, § 3)  
Sec. 22-239. - City business license. 
The requirements set forth in sections 22-237 and 22-238 shall be satisfied prior to issuance of a City business license for a private patrol or security business. 
(Code 1975, § 19A-4; Ord. No. 85-02, § 4)  
Chapter 24 - LOCAL EMERGENCIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of local government regarding local emergency, Government Code § 8630 et seq.; preservation of local government during State of war emergency, Government Code § 8635 et seq.; emergency powers of local agency, Government Code § 53019 et seq. 
 
Sec. 24-1. - Purposes. 
(a)  The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for: 
(1)  The preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within the City in the event of an emergency; 
(2)  The direction of the emergency organization; and 
(3)  The coordination of the emergency function of this City with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons. 
(b)  Furthermore, this chapter establishes the National Incident Management System (NIMS), and the California Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS) as the means of effectively preparing and responding to emergencies in La Palma. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1(14-1), 4-7-2009)  
Sec. 24-2. - Definition. 
As used in this chapter, the term "emergency" shall mean the duly proclaimed existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the territorial limits of the City caused by such conditions as terrorism, air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, drought, sudden and severe energy shortage, plant or animal infestation or disease, the Governor's warning of an earthquake or volcanic prediction, or an earthquake, or other conditions which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of the City and require the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat, or with respect to regulated energy utilities, a sudden and severe energy shortage that requires extraordinary measures beyond the authority vested in the California Public Utilities Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1(14-2), 4-7-2009)  
Sec. 24-3. - Disaster Council membership. 
In accordance with Government Code § 8610, the City of La Palma Disaster Council is hereby created and shall consist of the following: 
(1)  The Mayor, who shall be Chairperson; 
(2)  The Director of Emergency Services for the La Palma Emergency Organization, as provided for in this chapter, who is the City Manager and shall be Vice-chairperson; 
(3)  The Emergency Manager, who will be appointed by the Director of Emergency Services; 
(4)  Department heads and other City management team members; 
(5)  Such heads of emergency services departments as are provided for within this chapter; and 
(6)  Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional, or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the Director of Emergency Services with advice and consent of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1(14-3), 4-7-2009)  
Sec. 24-4. - Disaster Council powers and duties. 
The La Palma Disaster Council shall develop plans for responding to any condition constituting a local emergency or State of emergency, including, but not limited to, earthquakes, natural or manmade disasters specific to the City, or State of war; such plans shall provide for the effective mobilization of all the resources within the City, both public and private. The Disaster Council shall supply a copy of any plans developed to the states Emergency Management Agency. The Disaster Council shall meet upon call of the Chairperson or, in his or her absence from the City or inability to call such a meeting, upon the call of the Vice-Chairperson. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1(14-4), 4-7-2009)  
Sec. 24-5. - La Palma Emergency Organization. 
(a)  There is hereby created the City of La Palma Emergency Organization. 
(b)  The City Manager shall be the Director of Emergency Services for the La Palma Emergency Organization and shall appoint an Assistant Director of Emergency Services. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1(14-5), 4-7-2009)  
Sec. 24-6. - Powers and duties of the Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services. 
(a)  The Director of Emergency Services for the La Palma Emergency Organization is hereby designated as the City's chief executive for all emergency services described herein such that, pursuant to Government Code § 8557, the Director is authorized by law to act on behalf of the governing body of the City and is hereby empowered to: 
(1)  Request the City Council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a "local emergency" if the City Council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the City Council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the Director, the local emergency shall not remain in effect for a period in excess of seven days unless it has been ratified by the City Council. Further, the City Council shall review, at its regularly scheduled meetings until the local emergency is terminated, the need for continuing the local emergency. However, in no event shall a review take place more than 21 days after the previous review; 
(2)  Request the Governor to proclaim a "State of emergency" when, in the opinion of the Director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency; 
(3)  Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this City for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter; 
(4)  Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this City; and resolve any questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them; 
(5)  Represent the City in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined in this chapter; and 
(6)  In the event of the proclamation of a "local emergency" as herein provided, or the proclamation of a "State of emergency" by the Governor or the Secretary of the California Emergency Management Agency, the La Palma Director of Emergency Services is hereby empowered to: 
a.  Make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency, provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the City Council; 
b.  Obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the City for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use; 
c.  Require emergency services of any City officer or employee and to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he/she deems necessary in the execution of his or her duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities that are provided by State law for registered disaster service workers; 
d.  Requisition necessary personnel or material of any City department or agency; and 
e.  Execute all of his or her ordinary power as City Manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him/her by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the City Council, all powers conferred upon him/her by any statute, by any agreement approved by the City Council, and by any other lawful authority. 
(b)  The Director of Emergency Services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the Director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his or her duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the City Council. 
(c)  The Assistant Director of Emergency Services, and/or the Emergency Manager shall, under the supervision of the Director and with assistance of emergency service department heads, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of the City; and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the Director. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1(14-6), 4-7-2009)  
Sec. 24-7. - Emergency organization. 
All officers and employees of this City, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups organizations, and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of section 24-6(6)c. of this Code, charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this City during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the City of La Palma. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1(14-7), 4-7-2009)  
Sec. 24-8. - Emergency plan. 
The La Palma Disaster Council shall be responsible for the development of the City of La Palma's Emergency Operations Plan, which plan shall use the National Incident Management System (NIMS), and the California Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS) to provide for the effective mobilization of all the resources of this City, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, State of emergency, or State of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1(14-8), 4-7-2009)  
Sec. 24-9. - Expenditures. 
Any expenditure made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the City of La Palma. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1(14-9), 4-7-2009)  
Sec. 24-10. - Punishment of violations. 
No person shall, during a State of war emergency, State of emergency, or local emergency: 
(1)  Willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him/her by virtue of this chapter. 
(2)  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to enemy, or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this City, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection thereof. 
(3)  Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the State. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1(14-10), 4-7-2009)  
Chapter 26 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of City to declare and abate nuisances, Health and Safety Code § 38771 et seq.; nuisances generally, Civil Code §§ 3479—3503; authority of City to declare and abate weed, rubbish, and other dangerous or injurious nuisance materials from property, Government Code § 39561 et seq.; authority of City to declare and abate abandoned excavations from property, Government Code § 50230 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Maintenance of premises so as to permit breeding or harboring of rodents or pests. 
A person shall not occupy, maintain, or cause or permit another person to occupy or maintain any building, lot, premises, vehicle or any other place in such a condition as to permit the breeding or harboring therein or thereon of rats, mice, fleas, bedbugs, cockroaches, lice, flies, or any other vermin. 
(Code 1975, § 12-4; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Secs. 26-2—26-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 26-21. - Declaration of prohibited nuisances. 
It is hereby declared a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of any premises in this City to maintain such premises in such manner that any of the following conditions are found to exist thereon: 
(1)  Buildings or structures which are structurally unsafe or which are not provided with adequate egress or which constitute a fire hazard, or which are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use constitute a hazard to safety or health or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment. 
(2)  Buildings or structures maintained in violation of Section 203 of the Uniform Building Code of this City. 
(3)  Land, the topography, geology or configuration of which, whether in natural state or as a result of grading operations, excavation or fill, causes erosion, subsidence, or surface water drainage problems of such magnitude as to be injurious or potentially injurious to the public health, safety and welfare or to adjacent properties. 
(4)  Premises maintained so as to constitute a fire hazard by reason of woods, rank overgrowth, or accumulation of debris. 
(5)  Buildings which are abandoned, boarded up, partially destroyed, or permitted to remain unreasonably in a state of partial construction. 
(6)  Unpainted buildings causing dry rot, warping, and termite infestation. 
(7)  Broken windows constituting hazardous conditions and inviting trespassers and malicious mischief. 
(8)  Overgrown vegetation: 
a.  Likely to harbor rats, vermin, and other nuisances; or 
b.  Causing detriment to neighboring properties or property values. 
(9)  Dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous trees, weeds and other vegetation, or debris: 
a.  Constituting unsightly appearance; or 
b.  Dangerous to public safety and welfare; or 
c.  Detrimental to nearby property or property values. 
(10)  Attractive nuisances dangerous to children in the form of: 
a.  Abandoned and broken equipment. 
b.  Hazardous pools, ponds, and excavations. 
c.  Neglected machinery. 
d.  Abandoned wells, shafts and basements. 
e.  Lumber, trash, garbage, rubbish, refuse, fences, debris, or vegetation which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors. 
(11)  Broken or discarded furniture and household equipment in front yard areas for unreasonable periods and causing damage or detriment to neighboring properties. 
(12)  Clotheslines in front yard areas. 
(13)  Garbage cans stored in front of side yards and visible from public streets. 
(14)  Packing boxes and other debris stored in yards and visible from public streets for unreasonable periods and causing detriment to neighboring properties. 
(15)  Neglect of premises. 
(16)  Maintenance of premises in such condition as to be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare, or in such manner as to constitute a public nuisance as defined by Civil Code § 3480. 
(17)  Property maintained in such condition as to become so defective, unsightly, or in such condition of deterioration or disrepair that the same causes appreciable diminution of the property values of surrounding properties or is materially detrimental to proximal properties and improvements. 
(18)  Maintenance of premises so out of harmony or conformity with the maintenance standards of adjacent properties as to cause substantial diminution of the enjoyment, use, or property values of such adjacent properties. 
(19)  Property maintained (in relation to others) so as to establish a prevalence of depreciated values, impaired investments, and social and economic maladjustments to such an extent that the capacity to pay taxes is reduced and tax receipts from such particular area are inadequate for the cost of public services rendered therein. 
(20)  The emanation of noise of such loud, unusual, unnecessary, penetrating, raucous, or boisterous nature as to unreasonably disturb, annoy, injure, interfere with, or endanger, the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety, or welfare of neighboring residents of normal sensitivity. 
(21)  Any developed real property that is not maintained pursuant to section 26-101 and is in such condition as to be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the public or the adjoining property. 
(22)  Any vacant real property that is not properly secured, fenced, boarded up, and maintained pursuant to section 26-102 and which is in such a condition as to be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the public or the adjoining property. 
(23)  A temporary solid waste container, as defined in section 18-1, is deposited, left, or placed anywhere by any person other than the City or its authorized franchise contractor. 
(24)  Artificial turf constituting unsightly appearance by reason of it being or having any of the following conditions or characteristics: 
a.  Faded; 
b.  Damaged; 
c.  Improperly installed; 
d.  Separated seams and/or visible seams; 
e.  Damaged edges (i.e., frayed or encroached upon by vegetation); 
f.  Uneven and/or "wavy" appearance due to sunken or raised soil beneath; 
g.  Lacking of a proper barrier separating live landscaping (e.g., a mow strip); 
h.  Stained; 
i.  Comprising noncompliant infill materials (e.g., rubber crumb); 
j.  Use of noncompliant nylon fibers; or 
k.  Displaying a permanent image (e.g., sports team moniker). 
(25)  Lattice constituting unsightly appearance by reason of it being or having any of the following conditions or characteristics: 
a.  Faded color; 
b.  Visible damage; 
c.  Improper installation; 
d.  Leaning, warping and/or uneven placement on a wall; 
e.  Comprised of non-pressure-treated wood and/or other noncompliant materials; 
f.  Lacking adequate or uneven vegetation growing on the lattice; or 
g.  Overgrown vegetation growing on the lattice. 
(Code 1975, § 17-6; Ord. No. 78-10, § 4; Ord. No. 2004-03, § 6; Ord. No. 2007-06, § 3; Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1(17-6(x)), 7-7-2009; Ord. No. 2011-02, § 1, 3-15-2011) 
State Law reference— List of conditions that endanger health, safety, and welfare of occupants so as to deem the structure a substandard building, Health and Safety Code § 17920.3.  
Sec. 26-22. - Abatement by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal. 
All or any part of premises found, as provided herein, to constitute a public nuisance shall be abated by rehabilitation, demolition, or repair pursuant to the procedures set forth herein. The procedures set forth herein shall not in any manner, however, limit or restrict the City from enforcing City ordinances or abating public nuisances in any other manner permitted by law. 
(Code 1975, § 17-7; Ord. No. 78-10, § 4) 
State Law reference— Administrative enforcement actions and proceedings to correct unsafe conditions or to abate nuisances in substandard buildings or the lot upon which they are situated, Health and Safety Code § 17980 et seq.  
Sec. 26-23. - Notice of intent to declare nuisances. 
Whenever the City Manager determines, that any premises within the City are in a condition specified in one or more of the provisions of section 26-21, then the City Manager shall schedule a public hearing before the City Council to determine whether the same does in fact constitute such public nuisance, the abatement of which is appropriate under the police power of the City. Said public hearing notice shall describe the premises involved by street address, referring to the street by the name under which it is officially or commonly known, shall further describe the property by giving the lot and block number thereof, shall give a brief description of the conditions specified by the provisions of section 26-21, and a brief statement of the methods of abatement thereof. 
(Code 1975, § 17-8; Ord. No. 78-10, § 4)  
Sec. 26-24. - Notice of hearing to abate. 
The City Clerk shall cause to be conspicuously posted on the premises, a certified copy of a notice of the time and place of hearing before the City Council, which said notice shall be titled "NOTICE OF HEARING" in letters not less than one inch in height. 
(Code 1975, § 17-9; Ord. No. 78-10, § 4)  
Sec. 26-25. - Posting and serving notice. 
The City Clerk shall cause to be served upon the owner of each of the affected premises, one copy of said notice, in accordance with the provisions of section 26-26. Said notice shall be posted and served, as aforesaid, at least ten days before the time fixed for such hearing. 
(Code 1975, § 17-10; Ord. No. 78-10, § 4)  
Sec. 26-26. - Form of proper service of notice. 
Service of said notice shall be by personal service upon the owner of the affected premises if he or she is found within the City limits; or if he or she is not found within the City limits, by depositing a copy of said notice in the U.S. postal service enclosed in a sealed envelope and with postage thereon fully prepaid. Said mail shall be registered or certified and addressed to said owner at the last known address of said owner, and if there is no known address, then in care of the property address. The service is complete at the time of such deposit. The term "owner" as used herein shall mean any person in possession and also any person having or claiming to have any legal or equitable interest in said premises, as disclosed by a search of the latest County Tax Assessor's records and other records on file or available in the La Palma City Hall. The failure of any person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of the proceedings hereunder. 
(Code 1975, § 17-11; Ord. No. 78-10, § 4)  
Sec. 26-27. - Hearing by City Council. 
(a)  At the time stated in the notice, the City Council shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, objections or protests, and shall receive testimony from owners, witnesses, City personnel and interested persons relative to such alleged public nuisance and to proposed rehabilitation, repair or demolition of such premises. Such hearing may be continued from time to time. 
(b)  Upon the conclusion of said hearing, the City Council shall, based upon such hearing, determine whether the premises, or any part thereof, as maintained constitutes a public nuisance as defined herein. If the City Council finds that such public nuisance does exist and that there is sufficient cause to rehabilitate, demolish, or repair the same, the City Council shall prepare a resolution declaring such premises to be a public nuisance and order the abatement of the same within 30 days, by having such premises, buildings or structures, rehabilitated, repaired or demolished in the manner and means specifically set forth in said resolution. 
(Code 1975, § 17-12; Ord. No. 78-10, § 4)  
Sec. 26-28. - Service on owner of resolution to abate. 
A copy of the resolution of the City Council ordering the abatement of said nuisance shall be served upon the owners of said property in accordance with the provisions of section 26-26 and shall contain a detailed list of needed corrections and abatement methods. Any property owner shall have the right to have any such premises rehabilitated or to have such building or structures demolished or repaired in accordance with said resolution and at his or her own expense, provided that same is done prior to the expiration of said 30 days abatement period. Upon such abatement in full by the owner, then proceedings hereunder shall terminate. 
(Code 1975, § 17-13; Ord. No. 78-10, § 4)  
Sec. 26-29. - Extension of abatement period. 
Time extensions, in 14-day increments, may be granted by the City Manager upon receipt of written justification from the owner and upon the advice and approval of the City Attorney. 
(Code 1975, § 17-14; Ord. No. 78-10, § 4)  
Sec. 26-30. - Summary abatement of nuisances posing immediate threat to public health and safety or to public property. 
(a)  Whenever the City Manager, upon recommendation of the Building Official, determines that the conditions of private property are hazardous or otherwise pose an immediate threat to public health and safety or to public property within the City so as to constitute a nuisance, the provisions of this section shall apply. 
(b)  When the City Manager, upon recommendation of the Building Official, determines that one or more nuisance conditions exist on private property that are hazardous or otherwise pose an immediate threat to public health and safety or to public property within the City, the Building Official shall notify the owner of the property causing such conditions of the following: 
(1)  The existence of the conditions constituting a nuisance requiring emergency abatement; 
(2)  An identification of the remedial action that are necessary to be completed on an emergency basis to abate the conditions; 
(3)  The time within which the conditions shall be abated by the property owner; and 
(4)  The time within which the property owner may protest the summary abatement determination in writing to the City Clerk, which shall be not less than 24 hours following the date and time of service of the notice upon the property owner. 
The written notice shall also inform the property owner that, in the event the property owner does not complete the proposed remedial action within the prescribed time, the City may upon consideration of the relevant circumstances undertake or complete such action and assess such costs against the property. 
(c)  Notice required under this section shall be provided to the owner(s) of the property who are listed on the latest equalized assessment roll by: 
(1)  Conspicuous posting on the property; and 
(2)  Express mail or other method of providing for overnight delivery. Alternatively, and if feasible, notice may be provided by personal delivery. Service shall be deemed to be complete at the time the notice is posted on the property and is deposited with the overnight delivery carrier, or at the time of personal delivery. The failure of any person to receive any notice under this section shall not affect the validity of the proceedings hereunder. 
(d)  Upon receipt of a timely protest, the City Manager or his or her designee shall at the earliest practicable time hear and consider all relevant evidence, objections or testimony by property owners, witnesses, City personnel and other interested persons relative to the alleged nuisance requiring emergency abatement and/or the proposed abatement of the nuisance. After conducting the hearing, the City Manager or his or her designee shall determine either to: 
(1)  Terminate the proceedings by concluding that no nuisance exists that requires emergency abatement; or 
(2)  Declare the property or any part thereof to be a public nuisance requiring emergency abatement and order the emergency abatement of the nuisance in a manner or means specifically set forth in the determination. A property owner may appeal the determination of the City Manager or his or her designee to the City Council by filing a written appeal within five calendar days of the date of the determination. 
(e)  If the property owner does not completely abate the nuisance in a manner and within the time required by the written notice pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, and the City Manager has not terminated the emergency abatement proceeding in accordance with subsection (e) of this section, the City Manager may cause the nuisance to be abated on an emergency basis by City forces or private contract. To the extent it may be necessary, the City Manager is authorized to pursue any and all legal means available to enter upon the premises for such purpose. 
(f)  After abatement of the nuisance, the City Council shall hold a hearing in compliance with section 26-27 to assess the property the costs of abatement: 
(1)  The City Manager shall keep an account of the costs (including incidental expenses) of abating such nuisance on each separate lot or parcel of land where the work is done and shall render an itemized report in writing to the City Council showing the cost of abatement and the rehabilitating, demolishing or repairing of the premises, buildings or structures, including any salvage value relating thereto; provided, that before the report is submitted to the City Council, a copy of the same shall be posted on such premises at least five days prior to the City Council consideration thereof, together with a notice of the time when the report shall be heard by the City Council for confirmation; a copy of the report and notice shall also be served upon the owners of property on which the nuisance conditions existed in accordance with the provisions of section 26-26, at least five days prior to consideration by the City Council. 
(2)  During that hearing, the City Council shall determine, among other things, whether the conditions of private property were hazardous or otherwise posed an immediate threat to public health and safety or to public property within the City, and thereby required immediate action, as well as the cost of abatement based upon the report of the City Manager. 
(g)  If the City Council determines that the conditions of the property were hazardous or otherwise posed an immediate threat to public health and safety or to public property within the City and thereby required immediate action, the City Council shall assess the owner of property for the cost of abatement in accordance with section 26-26.  
Sec. 26-31. - Report. 
At the time and place fixed for receiving and considering said report, the City Council shall hear and pass upon the report of the City Manager, together with any objections or protests. Thereupon the City Council may make such revision, correction or modification in the report as it may deem just, after which by resolution the report, as submitted or as revised, corrected or modified, shall be confirmed. The decision of the City Council on all protests and objections made shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1975, § 17-17; Ord. No. 78-10, § 4)  
Sec. 26-32. - Assessment of costs against property; lien. 
(a)  The total cost for abating such nuisance, as so confirmed by the City Council, shall constitute a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel of land to which it relates, and upon recordation in the office of the County recorder of a notice of lien, as so made and confirmed, shall constitute a lien on said property for the amount of such assessment. 
(1)  After such confirmation and recordation, a copy may be turned over to the Tax Collector for the City, whereupon it shall be the duty of said Tax Collector to add the amounts of the respective assessments to the next regular tax bills levied against said respective lots and parcels of land for municipal purposes, and thereafter said amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes; or 
(2)  After such recordation, such lien may be foreclosed by judicial or other sale in the manner and means provided by law. 
(b)  The City clerk shall, by certified mail, to the property owner, if the property owner's identity can be determined from the County assessor's or County recorder's records, provide the property owner with a copy of the assessment and a written notice specifying the amount of the assessment and that the property may be sold after three years by the Tax Collector for unpaid delinquent assessments. 
(Code 1975, § 17-18; Ord. No. 78-10, § 4)  
Sec. 26-33. - Alternates. 
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prevent the City Council from directing the City Attorney to commence a civil or criminal proceeding to abate a public nuisance under applicable Civil or Penal Code provisions as an alternative to the proceedings set forth herein. 
(Code 1975, § 17-19; Ord. No. 78-10, § 4)  
Secs. 26-34—26-54. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Removal of parked and abandoned vehicles generally, Vehicle Code § 22650 et seq.; authority of City to abate and remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles from private or public property, Vehicle Code § 22660. 
 
Sec. 26-55. - Findings and declarations; definitions. 
(a)  In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the State of California under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code (Vehicle Code § 22660) to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the City Council hereby makes the following findings and declarations: 
(1)  The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property not including highways is hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety to minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof on private or public property not including highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Highway means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purpose of vehicular travel. The term "highway" includes street. 
Owner of land means the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. 
Owner of the vehicle means the last registered owner and legal owner of record. 
Public property does not include the term "highway." 
Vehicle means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1975, § 17-20; Ord. No. 87-06, § 1)  
Sec. 26-56. - Applicability of article. 
(a)  This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  A vehicle or parts thereof which is completely enclosed within a building, in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
(2)  A vehicle or parts thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Vehicle Code § 22650 and this article. 
(Code 1975, § 17-21; Ord. No. 87-06, § 1)  
Sec. 26-57. - Article deemed supplemental. 
This article is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles within the City. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the City, the State, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Code 1975, § 17-22; Ord. No. 87-06, § 1)  
Sec. 26-58. - Administration and enforcement. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced by the Community Development Director. In the enforcement of this article, the Community Development Director and his or her authorized agents may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof to obtain information as to the identification of the vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1975, § 17-23; Ord. No. 87-06, § 1)  
Sec. 26-59. - Removal of vehicles by franchisee or person under contract. 
When the City Council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1975, § 17-24; Ord. No. 87-06, § 1)  
Sec. 26-60. - Authority to establish administrative costs. 
The City Council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs (excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or any parts thereof) under this article, which amount shall be set as a fixed sum per vehicle removed or as a percentage of the actual cost of removal. 
(Code 1975, § 17-25; Ord. No. 87-06, § 1)  
Sec. 26-61. - Community Development Director authorized to cause abatement and removal. 
Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof on private property or public property within the City, the Community Development Director shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed herein. 
(Code 1975, § 17-26; Ord. No. 87-06, § 1)  
Sec. 26-62. - Notice of intention to abate and remove. 
(a)  A ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered mail to the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located and to the owner of the vehicle itself, unless the property owner and the owner of the vehicle have signed releases authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof. 
(b)  The notice of intention is not required for removal of a vehicle or part thereof that is inoperable due to the absence of a motor, transmission, or wheels and incapable of being towed, is valued at less than $200.00 by a person specified in Vehicle Code § 22855, and is determined by the City Council to be a public nuisance presenting an immediate threat to public health or safety, provided that the property owner has signed a release authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof. 
(Code 1975, § 17-27; Ord. No. 87-06, § 1)  
Sec. 26-63. - Request for public hearing; notice of hearing; removal of vehicle without hearing. 
(a)  Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land received by the Community Development Director within ten days after the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the City Manager or his or her designate on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof against the property on which it is located. 
(b)  If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his or her land within such ten-day period, said statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his or her presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered mail, at least ten days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not received within said ten days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the City shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. 
(Code 1975, § 17-28; Ord. No. 87-06, § 1)  
Sec. 26-64. - Hearings before City Manager; when costs not to be assessed. 
(a)  All hearings under this article shall be held before the City Manager or his or her designate which shall hear all relevant facts and testimony. Said facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the said private property or public property. The City Manager or his or her designate shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his or her reasons for such denial. 
(b)  The City Manager or his or her designate may impose such conditions and take such other action as he or she deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this article. It may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if, in his or her opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Manager or his or her designate may find that a vehicle or parts thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. 
(c)  If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he or she has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the City Manager or his or her designate shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from owner of the land. 
(d)  If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his or her land but does not appear, or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the City Manager but does not appear, he or she shall be notified in writing of the decision. 
(Code 1975, § 17-29; Ord. No. 87-06, § 1)  
Sec. 26-65. - Hearings before council. 
If the owner of the vehicle or the owner of the land is aggrieved by any decision of the City Manager or his or her designate at the hearing, he or she may appeal the decision of the City Manager or his or her designate to the City Council by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk and paying a fee in the amount as established by the City Council from time to time, within five days after the decision of the City Manager. The Council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the City Clerk shall give written notice of the time and place thereof in accordance with the requirements provided for the original hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in the same manner as provided for the hearing by the City Manager or his or her designate, and the City Council may affirm, modify or reverse the order or take other action deemed appropriate. 
(Code 1975, § 17-30; Ord. No. 87-06, § 1)  
Sec. 26-66. - Removal of vehicle to scrapyard or dismantler's yard; subsequent use of removed vehicles. 
Five days after the decision of the City Manager or his or her designate, or the City Council if appealed, declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance, or five days from the date of mailing of notice of the decision if such notice is required by section 26-64 or 26-65, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard or automobile dismantler's yard. After a vehicle has been removed it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable, unless the vehicle qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates pursuant to Vehicle Code § 5004, in which case the vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable. 
(Code 1975, § 17-31; Ord. No. 87-06, § 1)  
Sec. 26-67. - Notice of removal of vehicle to Department of Motor Vehicles. 
Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. 
(Code 1975, § 17-32; Ord. No. 87-06, § 1)  
Sec. 26-68. - Assessment of administrative and removal costs. 
If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to section 26-64 are not paid within 30 days of the date of the decision, or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to State law and shall have the same priority as other City taxes. 
(Code 1975, § 17-33; Ord. No. 87-06, § 1)  
Sec. 26-69. - Abandonment; misdemeanor. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to abandon, park, store, or leave or permit the abandonment, parking, storing, or leaving off any licensed or unlicensed vehicle or parts thereof which is in abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative condition upon any private property or public property not including highways within the City, for a period in excess of three days unless such vehicle or parts thereof is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not plainly visible from the street or other public or private property, or unless such vehicle is stored or parked in a lawful manner upon private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or a junkyard. 
(Code 1975, § 17-34; Ord. No. 87-06, § 1; Ord. No. 2003-01, § 2)  
Sec. 26-70. - Refusal to abate nuisance. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail or refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof or refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this article or State law where such State law is applicable. 
(Code 1975, § 17-35; Ord. No. 87-06, § 1)  
Sec. 26-71. - Vehicle not in condition to be lawfully operated. 
It is unlawful to park, stop, or leave sitting for a period of time longer than 12 consecutive hours upon any public street or highway in the City, any vehicle not in a condition to be lawfully operated on the public highways. 
(Code 1975, § 17-36; Ord. No. 2003-01, § 3)  
Secs. 26-72—26-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 26-101. - Developed property. 
All developed real property in the City shall be maintained at a level not less than the following standards: 
(1)  Condition of structures. Structures shall not be partially destroyed, abandoned, unsecured, or permitted to remain in an unchanged state of partial construction for more than 30 days. Buildings or structures shall not be boarded up for a period in excess of ten days without a valid demolition or building permit on file, except in compliance with section 26-102. 
(2)  Building exteriors and roofs. Exterior building surfaces and roofs shall be maintained free of significant surface cracks, missing materials, warping, and dry rot which either threatens the structural integrity, or results in a dilapidated, decaying, disfigured, or partially ruined appearance. 
(3)  Use of tarps. Excluding emergency repairs, it is prohibited to use tarps for roof and building repairs. Additionally, the use of tarps for vehicle covers, or temporary canopies, enclosures, and/or awnings is prohibited in any outdoor area visible from any public right-of-way. 
(4)  Paint. Painted surfaces on buildings, trash enclosures, walls, retaining walls, fences, and structures shall be maintained in order to prevent, and remain free of, decay, excessive checking, cracking, peeling, chalking, dry rot, warping, or termite infestation. 
(5)  Graffiti. All structures, equipment, walls, and fencing on the property shall be maintained free of graffiti. 
(6)  Lighting. All exterior light fixtures shall be maintained in good working order free of broken lamps, lenses, and light bulbs. Furthermore, the structural integrity of all supporting poles and mounting fixtures shall be properly maintained. All insulation and connections shall be intact and free of exposed wire. 
(7)  Windows. Broken and missing windows and glass doors and the use of materials other than glass as a replacement or covering of windowpanes are prohibited. 
(8)  Window screens. All window and glass door screens shall be maintained free of tears, rips, and holes. On residential rental properties, window screens are required on all windows. 
(9)  Trash bins. Trash bins or dumpsters shall be kept within an enclosed building, trash enclosure, or screened from public view to the maximum extent feasible. Overflowing trash bins or dumpsters due to an inadequate number of bins and/or requests for service from the trash hauler are prohibited. Use of commercial trash bins for residential uses in the R-1 Zone is prohibited, except during construction, remodel, or as approved by the Community Development Director. 
(10)  Walls, fences, lattice and trash enclosures. All walls, lattice extensions, retaining and crib walls, and fences abutting public rights-of-way and all trash enclosures shall be maintained free of significant surface cracks, dry rot, warping, deterioration, leaning, missing panels or blocks which either threaten the structural integrity, or result in a dilapidated, decaying, disfigured, or partially ruined appearance. 
(11)  Parking areas, sidewalks. Parking areas, private alleys, driveways, sidewalks, and walkways shall be maintained free of potholes, cracks, breaks, lifting, and other deteriorated conditions. 
(12)  Signs. All signs shall be maintained in order to prevent deterioration, disrepair, and unsightliness and shall be consistent with article III, division 5, of chapter 44, entitled "Signs." 
(13)  Excavations. Excavations, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, and other holes shall be properly secured to prevent access by unauthorized persons. 
(14)  Landscaping. All landscaping visible from public rights-of-way shall be maintained in a healthy condition free of dying, dead, diseased, decayed, discarded, and/or overgrown vegetation. All artificial turf visible from public rights-of-way shall be maintained in a manner so as to mimic the appearance of a maintained, green, thriving lawn free of fading, visible seams, dents, ruts, trash, debris, damaged areas, stains, and/or exhibiting a worn out unnatural appearance. 
(15)  Parkway landscaping. In areas with public parkways, the parkway shall be landscaped and maintained by the property owners abutting said parkway. The landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy condition free of dying, dead, diseased, decayed, discarded, and/or overgrown vegetation. All artificial turf located in a parkway shall be maintained in a manner so as to mimic the appearance of a maintained, green, thriving lawn free of fading, visible seams, dents, ruts, trash, debris, damaged areas, stains, and/or exhibiting a worn out unnatural appearance. 
(16)  Refuse, litter, and weeds. All landscaped, concrete, dirt, or paved open areas on the real property and adjoining public parkway shall be kept clear of refuse, litter, and weeds. 
(17)  Drainage. Onsite drainage improvements shall be maintained in order to prevent deterioration, disrepair, and ineffectiveness. 
(18)  Rodent and vermin control. All property, including landscaped areas, buildings, and structures, shall be maintained free of rodents and other vermin. 
(19)  Outdoor drying. In all residential zones or residential developments, the outdoor airing and/or drying of laundry, clothes, other household linens, or food is permitted only in rear or side yards, provided that the items are not visible from public rights-of-way. 
(20)  Pools. Barrier fencing and gates for swimming pools and spas shall be maintained as required by the California Building Code. Swimming pools and spas shall not contain unfiltered or stagnant water. 
(21)  Construction sites. Buildings for which a valid building permit is on file may contain missing or partially assembled elements, including roofing, windows, walls, and paint, provided that the site remains free of weeds, trash, and debris and all construction materials are stored in an orderly fashion. All landscaping unaffected by the construction shall be maintained throughout the construction process. Appropriate fencing shall be installed around the area of construction to ensure the safety and security of the site. If chainlink fencing is installed on a construction site, screening shall also be installed and maintained in accordance with section 26-102(b)(2). Dust control measures and other best management practices for preventing stormwater pollution shall be implemented and adhered to at all times. Portable sanitation devices shall be serviced regularly and placed the furthest distance possible from adjacent properties. 
(Code 1975, § 17-37; Ord. No. 2004-03, § 7; Ord. No. 2009-04, § 2(17-37(n), (o)), 7-7-2009; Ord. No. 2011-02, § 2, 3-15-2011)  
Sec. 26-102. - Vacant real property. 
(a)  Mandatory standards. All vacant real property in the City shall be secured and maintained in compliance with section 26-101. 
(b)  Additional standards. When deemed necessary by the Community Development Director, and/or in order to maintain the safety of persons or property, the following standards may also be imposed on vacant real property: 
(1)  Access points. All windows, doors, and other open access features to the structures on the real property shall be boarded up and secured. All boards visible from the building's exterior shall be painted to match the building's exterior color. 
(2)  Fencing. The property shall be fenced on all sides along the property line with a chainlink fence or other type of secure fencing at a minimum height of six feet from grade. The fence shall be properly posted with no trespassing signs, and kept clear of all other signs, except lawfully installed real estate signs for the lease or sale of the property and signs identifying ownership of the property or fencing. All mesh screening, wood or vinyl slats, or similar screening materials installed on the fencing shall be properly installed and be kept free from breaks, significant cracks, deterioration, missing slats and panels, rips, tears, dry rot, and excessive fading. 
(3)  Security lighting. All structures that could be used for human habitation shall have an operable and effective exterior security lighting system. The front and rear yards shall each be illuminated with a minimum of one light. The lighting shall be capable of illuminating the structure's exterior so as to be visible from the street or alley from dusk to dawn. Each light shall be shielded to avoid lighting adjacent properties. 
(Code 1975, § 17-38; Ord. No. 2004-03, § 7)  
Sec. 26-103. - Compliance responsibility. 
Compliance with the standards contained in this article shall be achieved at the sole cost of the property owner, tenant, or responsible party for the real property and shall not limit the right of any party to pursue available remedies or seek recovery of costs for the abatement of any real property found to be in violation under this Code. 
(Code 1975, § 17-39; Ord. No. 2004-03, § 7)  
Secs. 26-104—26-134. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - AIR POLLUTION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of City to establish and enforce stricter standards for control of nonvehicular air pollution than those set forth by State law or the State Air Resources Board, Health and Safety Code § 41508; authority of City to adopt and enforce regulations in addition to and not in conflict with the Noise Control Act, Health and Safety Code § 46001; California Noise Control Act of 1973, Health and Safety Code § 46010 et seq. 
 
Sec. 26-135. - Permitting or causing air pollution a nuisance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or cause the escape of dust, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, and gases in such place or manner as to enter upon the property of another person or to be detrimental to any person or to the public or to endanger the health, safety and welfare of any such person or the public; or in such manner as to cause or have the tendency to cause injury or damage to persons, property or businesses. The escape of such matter is declared to be a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by the City or its authorized representative. 
(Code 1975, § 12-12; Ord. No. 154, § 1)  
Sec. 26-136. - Avoidance of interference with enjoyment of life and property. 
Any person shall conduct and carry out excavation, leveling, earth moving, or any other activity upon his or her property in such manner as to avoid interference with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by an entire community or neighborhood, or by any considerable number of persons. All persons shall take appropriate measures to prevent, in the performance of any such work, any noise, dust, unsightly debris, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, or gases which so interfere. 
(Code 1975, § 12-13; Ord. No. 154, § 2)  
Sec. 26-137. - Disturbance of sleep. 
Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., no person shall use, except with the express written permission of the City Engineer or in the case of an emergency, any tool, appliance or equipment producing noise, vibration, dust, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, or gases, of sufficient volume to disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of the neighboring property. 
(Code 1975, § 12-14; Ord. No. 154, § 3)  
Sec. 26-138. - Abatement of nuisance. 
If any person continues to create such an interference and annoyance to others, the City Manager or his or her designated representative may, in addition to other remedies, notify such offender and direct a hearing to be held within 24 to 72 hours for the purpose of determining responsibility and the costs of correcting such conditions. Witnesses may appear and offer evidence respecting such matter. The costs of abating such interference or nuisance may be assessed against the person responsible therefor and collected with attorney fees by court proceeding or collected as a lien against the property. 
(Code 1975, § 12-15; Ord. No. 154, § 4)  
Sec. 26-139. - Nonliability of City. 
This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the City or any officer or employee thereof any liability or responsibility for damages to any person or property injured in any manner by the performance of any work which has otherwise been authorized by the City; nor shall the City or any officer or employee thereof be deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by reason of inspections, the issuance of permits or the approval of excavation work. 
(Code 1975, § 12-16; Ord. No. 154, § 5)  
Secs. 26-140—26-161. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SWIMMING POOL MAINTENANCE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— The Swimming Pool Safety Act, Health and Safety Code § 115920 et seq. 
 
Sec. 26-162. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Swimming pool or pool means any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that contains water over 18 inches deep. The term "swimming pool" includes in-ground and above-ground structures and includes, but is not limited to, hot tubs, spas, portable spas, and nonportable wading pools.  
Sec. 26-163. - Unclean water a nuisance. 
The City Council finds and determines that swimming pools, when not properly maintained and operated so as to keep pool water clean and clear, constitute a severe hazard to the health and safety of the citizens of the City. 
(Code 1975, § 12-17; Ord. No. 75-10, § 1)  
Sec. 26-164. - Clarity of water. 
Every owner or resident of property on which there is located a swimming pool, wading pool or other similar body of water shall maintain the water therein in a sufficiently clear and clean condition so that a black disc, six inches in diameter when placed at the bottom of such body of water at its deepest point against a white field, is clearly visible from the areas around such body of water at all distances up to ten yards from such disc. 
(Code 1975, § 12-18; Ord. No. 75-10, § 2)  
Sec. 26-165. - Cleanliness. 
Floating scum, sputum, and debris shall not be allowed to accumulate in any swimming pool, wading pool, or other similar body of water in the City. Skimmers, where provided, and water levels shall be maintained and operated so as to remove such material. The bottom and sides of such body of water shall be cleaned as often as necessary to keep them in a clean condition. The sides and bottom of such bodies of water, as well as decks and other surfaces near such bodies of water, shall be kept free of slime and algae so as to prevent unnecessary slipperiness and danger of accidents or drownings. 
(Code 1975, § 12-19; Ord. No. 75-10, § 2)  
Sec. 26-166. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The Community Development Director or his or her designee is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Whenever any swimming pool, wading pool or other similar body of water shall become foul or stagnant through lack of maintenance as described in this article, the owner or resident of the property on which such body of water or such condition prohibited by this article exists shall be given written notice of noncompliance herewith by the Community Development Director, or his or her designee. Such notice shall include a date, as determined by the Community Development Director in his or her discretion, on which the City shall conduct a re-inspection to determine whether the person is in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  If upon re-inspection by the Community Development Director or his or her designee, after the date specified in subsection (b) of this section, the person found to be in violation of this article has not complied with the provisions hereof, said person shall be assessed a fee equal to the actual cost and expense of enforcement of this article. Said fee shall include the cost of re-inspections referenced in subsections (c) and (e) of this section and shall be established by the City Council. 
(d)  If upon re-inspection by the Community Development Director or his or her designee, after the date specified in subsection (b) of this section, the person found to be in violation of this article has not yet complied with the provisions hereof, that person shall again be given written notice of noncompliance. Such notice shall include a date, as determined by the Community Development Director, in his or her discretion, on which the City shall conduct a re-inspection to determine whether the person is in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(e)  If, upon re-inspection by the Community Development Director or his or her designee, after the date specified in subsection (d) of this section, the person previously found to be in violation is then determined to have complied with the provisions of this article, one-half of the fee assessed pursuant to subsection (c) of this section shall be reimbursed to said person. 
(f)  Failure to comply with provisions of this article on or before the date specified in subsection (d) of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as described in sections 2-350 through 2-352. 
(g)  Failure to comply with the same provision of this article, by the same person upon the same property, two times within any six-month period, notwithstanding the payment or nonpayment of any fee described in this section, shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(h)  The City Manager, or his or her designee, is hereby authorized to procure professional services, as authorized by section 2-197(3)b, in order to secure payment of any fee described in this section. 
(Code 1975, § 12-20; Ord. No. 75-10, § 2; Ord. No. 90-03, § 3)  
Chapter 28 - OFFENSES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 28-1. - Juvenile nighttime curfew. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any minor to remain in any public place or establishment within the City between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. However, the provisions of this section shall not apply if any of the following apply: 
(1)  The minor is accompanied by his or her parent, legal guardian, or by his or her spouse 18 years of age or older. 
(2)  The minor's parent or legal guardian has given the minor permission to remain in a public place or establishment during curfew hours. 
(3)  The minor is involved in an emergency. 
(4)  The minor is attending, going to or returning home without any detour or stop from an official meeting, school activity, civic organization, educational, religious, or recreational activity supervised by adults. 
(5)  The minor is engaged in lawful employment activity or is going to or returning from a lawful employment activity without any detour or stop. 
(6)  The minor is in a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel. 
(7)  The minor is exercising his or her First Amendment rights, such as freedom of speech, right of assembly, or free exercise of religion. 
(8)  The minor is on the sidewalk adjacent to his or her residence. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency means one or more unforeseen circumstances or resulting state requiring immediate action, such as a fire, natural disaster, accident, or situation requiring immediate action to prevent or treat serious injury or loss to person or property. 
Establishment means any privately owned place of business to which the public is invited, included but not limited to places of amusement or entertainment. 
Guardian means a person ordered to be such by a court or a public or private agency with whom the minor has been placed. 
Minor means any natural person under 18 years of age. 
Parent means a person who is a natural, adoptive or step-parent or someone at least 18 years old authorized by a parent or guardian to have care, custody or control of the minor. 
Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways and the common areas of school, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops. 
(Code 1975, § 18-3; Ord. No. 97-06, § 2)  
Sec. 28-2. - Loitering on school grounds. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Authorized City or school employee means any person employed by the City or a school or school district located wholly or in part within the City who is present on school property between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the following day within the scope of his or her employment. 
Child means any person under 18 years of age. 
Loiter means to remain in or near the place which is the subject of this section in an idle or apparently idle manner, aimlessly, and without real necessity or purpose. 
(b)  No person shall loiter or play in or upon the grounds of any public school in the City between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day. This section shall not apply to children occupying or playing in or upon the grounds of such school in the presence and under the supervision of any authorized City or school employee or to any other person on the premises pursuant to school-sponsored or other lawfully authorized activity. 
(c)  Any person who violates this section is guilty of an infraction and shall be subject to the general penalty described in section 2-351 (Infraction penalty). 
(Code 1975, § 18-5; Ord. No. 75-1, §§ 1—3)  
Sec. 28-3. - Public urination or defecation. 
No person shall urinate or evacuate his or her bowels on private property in an area exposed to the public view, or on any public street, sidewalk, alley, park, or other public place, except in a public restroom. 
(Code 1975, § 18-23; Ord. No. 87-01, § 1)  
Sec. 28-4. - Public nudity prohibited. 
(a)  Intent. The intent and purpose of this section is to guarantee that the parks, playgrounds, and public rights-of-way owned, operated and/or maintained by the City are operated and maintained for the use, benefit, recreation, and enjoyment of all citizens and residents of the City as well as to eliminate, to the greatest extent possible, the secondary effects associated with the presentation of nudity in adult oriented businesses. The City Council finds that it is both in the public interest and necessary to protect and promote the public health, safety, and welfare and that said parks, playgrounds, and public rights-of-way be utilized and enjoyed by as many persons as possible; that maximum utilization and enjoyment of said parks, playgrounds, and public rights-of-way can only be obtained through imposition of regulations regarding activities thereon; the appearance of persons utilizing said parks, playgrounds, and public rights-of-way without clothing and with the private parts of their bodies exposed, unreasonably interferes with the rights of all persons to use and enjoy said parks, playgrounds, and public rights-of-way by causing many persons to leave and others not to use said parks, playgrounds, and public rights-of-way; that such conduct and behavior imposes an extraordinary unusual burden on City employees charged with the maintenance of said parks, playgrounds, and public rights-of-way and public safety personnel who are diverted from fulfilling their primary obligation to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public at large; that the presence of persons who are unclothed and exposed to public view in or on public rights-of-way, parks, and playgrounds, or on any private property open to public view from public parks and playgrounds, or other public ways tends to discourage the use and enjoyment of said public parks and public ways of the City, and creates a nuisance and is offensive to members of the public who wish to use and enjoy said public parks, playgrounds, and public rights-of-way, and who are unwillingly exposed to such conduct; that the presentation of nude entertainment in adult oriented businesses results in secondary effects which include the proliferation of prostitution, the increase in sexual assaults, and increase in other crimes; that the prohibition of nudity in adult oriented businesses tends to reduce the existence of such secondary effects; and, based upon the foregoing findings, this section will protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(b)  Prohibition of public nudity. It is unlawful for any person to appear, bathe, sunbathe, walk, or be on any public park, playground, or on any other public land, or on any private property open to public view from any playground, park, public place, or public right-of-way, or in any adult oriented business as that term is defined in section 44-195, in such a manner so as to knowingly and intentionally: 
(1)  Expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum, anal region, or pubic hair region; or 
(2)  Appear in any device, costume, or covering which gives the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum, anal region, nipple and/or areola of the female breast, or pubic hair region; or 
(3)  Expose the nipples and/or areola of the female breasts except as necessary while engaging in the breast feeding of an infant under the age of two years old; or 
(4)  Allow any person to engage in any of the activities described in subsections (b)(1) through (3) of this section in an adult oriented business when such person has ownership or managerial control over the adult oriented business. 
(Code 1975, § 18-26; Ord. No. 96-1, § 2) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Penal Code § 314.  
Secs. 28-5—28-26. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - AMUSEMENTS AND GAMING 
 
Sec. 28-27. - Closing hours. 
No person shall carry on or assist in carrying on any amusement or entertainment to which the public is invited, or in which the public may participate, at any time between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Code 1975, § 18-1; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 28-28. - Bingo without permit prohibited. 
Except for a bingo game as operated under a permit issued under the provisions of this article, no person shall conduct a bingo game within the City.  
Sec. 28-29. - Bingo games for charity. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "bingo" means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols that are marked or covered by the player on a tangible card in the player's possession, and which conform to numbers or symbols selected at random and announced by a live caller. Notwithstanding Penal Code § 330c (Punchboard definition), as used in this section, the game of bingo includes tangible cards having numbers or symbols that are concealed and preprinted in a manner providing for distribution of prizes. 
(b)  No person shall conduct a bingo game within the City without having applied for and received a permit from the City Manager. City administered bingo games that meet the intent of these provisions and otherwise comply with State laws, shall be exempt from the permitting requirement. 
(c)  A permit issued pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Only those organizations exempted from payment of the bank and corporation tax by Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g, 23701k, 23701w, and 23701l, and mobile home park associations, senior citizens organizations, and charitable organizations affiliated with a school district, if the receipts of those games are used only for charitable purposes, may receive a permit to conduct a bingo game. 
(2)  Any authorized organization enumerated in subsection (c)(1) of this section shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, or property whose use is donated to the organization, and used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which such organization is organized. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require that the property owned or leased by, or whose use is donated to, the organization be used or leased exclusively by, or donated exclusively to, that organization. 
(3)  All bingo games shall be open to the public, not only to the members of such authorized organization. 
(4)  A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the authorized organization which organized it. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage, or salary from any bingo game. Only the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game shall operate such game or participate in the promotion, supervision, or any other phase of such game. This subsection does not preclude the employment of security personnel who are not members of the authorized organization at a bingo game by the organization conducting the game. 
(5)  No individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity other than the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game and holding a permit therefor, shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game. 
(6)  With respect to organizations exempt from payment of the bank and corporation tax by Revenue and Taxation Code § 23701d, all profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. 
(7)  With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct bingo games pursuant to this section, all proceeds derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Proceeds are the receipts of bingo games conducted by organizations not within subsection (c)(6) of this section. Those proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes, except as follows: 
a.  The proceeds may be used for prizes. 
b.  A portion of the proceeds, not to exceed 20 percent of the proceeds before the deduction for prizes, or $2,000.00 per month, whichever is less, may be used for the rental of property and for overhead, including the purchase of bingo equipment, administrative expenses, security equipment, and security personnel. 
c.  The proceeds may be used to pay license fees. 
(8)  No minors, as defined by Penal Code § 313(g), shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. 
(9)  No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless he or she is physically present at the time when and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. 
(10)  The total value of prizes awarded for each separate bingo game held shall not exceed $500.00 in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held. 
(11)  No person shall receive a profit, wage, or salary from any bingo game. However, security personnel employed by the organization conducting the bingo game may be paid from the revenues of bingo games. 
(d)  Card-minding devices. 
(1)  Players who are physically present at a bingo game may use hand-held, portable card-minding devices, as described in this subsection, to assist in monitoring the numbers or symbols announced by a live caller as those numbers or symbols are called in a live game. Card-minding devices may not be used in connection with any game where a bingo card may be sold or distributed after the start of the ball draw for that game. A card-minding device shall do all of the following: 
a.  Be capable of storing in the memory of the device bingo faces of tangible cards purchased by a player. 
b.  Provide a means for bingo players to input manually each individual number or symbol announced by a live caller. 
c.  Compare the numbers or symbols entered by the player to the bingo faces previously stored in the memory of the device. 
d.  Identify winning bingo patterns that exist on the stored bingo faces. 
(2)  A card-minding device shall perform no functions involving the play of the game other than those described in subsection (d)(1) of this section. Card-minding devices shall not do any of the following: 
a.  Be capable of accepting or dispensing any coins, currency, or other representative of value or on which value has been encoded. 
b.  Be capable of monitoring any bingo card face other than the faces of the tangible bingo card or cards purchased by the player for that game. 
c.  Display or represent the game result through any means, including, but not limited to, video or mechanical reels or other slot machine or casino game themes, other than highlighting the winning numbers or symbols marked or covered on the tangible bingo cards or giving an audio alert that the player's card has a prize-winning pattern. 
d.  Determine the outcome of any game or be physically or electronically connected to any component that determines the outcome of a game or to any other bingo equipment, including, but not limited to, the ball call station, or to any other card-minding device. No other player-operated or player-activated electronic or electromechanical device or equipment is permitted to be used in connection with a bingo game. 
(3)  A card-minding device shall be approved in advance by the California Gambling Control Commission as meeting the requirements of this State law and any additional requirements stated in regulations adopted by the commission. 
(e)  A violation of subsection (c)(10) of this section shall constitute a violation of Penal Code § 326.5 and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $10,000.00, which fine shall be deposited in the General Fund of the City. 
(Code 1975, § 18-1.1; Ord. No. 76-10) 
State Law reference— Local regulation of bingo, Penal Code § 326.5.  
Secs. 28-30—28-46. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - GRAFFITI[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of City to adopt ordinance regulating the sale of aerosol containers of paint or other liquid substances capable of defacing property and governing the placement of graffiti on public or private, real or personal property, Penal Code § 594.5. 
 
Sec. 28-47. - Paint spray cans; sale to minors. 
(a)  No person shall sell or direct the sale of any paint spray can to any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  The City Council hereby determines that this section is necessary for the preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City, in that such section is necessary to restrict the use of paint spray cans in the City by persons under the age of 18 years. Paint spray cans have been used and are being used with increasing frequency by persons under the age of 18 years for the purpose of defacing block walls along public right-of-ways throughout the City. Such defacement constitutes blight and a public nuisance and the restoration of such defacement imposes an unnecessary and undue financial burden on the taxpayers of the City. 
(Code 1975, § 18-7; Ord. No. 73-15, §§ 1, 2) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Penal Code § 594.1.  
Sec. 28-48. - Purpose; definitions. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose and intent of the City council through the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, to provide additional enforcement tools to protect public and private property from acts of vandalism and defacement, especially, but not limited to graffiti on privately and publicly owned walls which are inimical and destructive of the rights and values of private property owners as well as the total community. The power of graffiti to create fear within the community and blight upon the landscape, devaluing property and detracting from the sense of community enjoyed by the residents of La Palma, is beyond the cost of cleanup or removal. Not only is graffiti a property crime, but it is also a social crime on the quality of life and freedom from intimidation citizens deserve within their neighborhoods. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aerosol paint container means any aerosol container, regardless of the material from which it is made, which is adapted or made for the purpose of spraying paint or other substance capable of defacing property. 
Etching cream means any caustic cream, gel, liquid, or solution capable, by means of a chemical action, of defacing, damaging, or destroying hard surfaces in a manner similar to acid. 
Felt tip marker means any broad-tipped marker pen with a tip exceeding three-eighths of one inch in width, or any similar implement containing an ink that is not water soluble. 
Graffiti means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, mark, or design that is written, marked, etched, scratched, drawn, or painted on any surface, regardless of the nature of the material of that structural component. 
Graffiti implement means an aerosol paint container, a felt tip marker, gum label, or a paint stick, etching tool, or etching cream capable of scarring glass, metal, concrete or wood. 
Gum label means any sheet of paper, fabric, plastic, or other substance with an adhesive back which, when placed on a surface, is not easily removable. 
Paint stick or graffiti stick means a device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and upon application, leaving a mark at least 1/16 of an inch in width. 
(Code 1975, § 18-7.1; Ord. No. 93-02, § 1)  
Sec. 28-49. - Unlawful to apply on structures within City limits. 
It is unlawful for any person to apply graffiti on any public or privately owned structure located on publicly or privately owned real property within the City limits. 
(Code 1975, § 18-7.2; Ord. No. 93-02, § 1) 
State Law reference— Vandalism, Penal Code § 594.  
Sec. 28-50. - Implement possession—By minors. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to have in his or her possession any graffiti implement while upon public property, or upon private property, without the prior written consent of the owner of such private property. 
(b)  The foregoing provision shall not apply while the person is attending or traveling to or from a school at which the person is enrolled, if the person is participating in a class at said school which has, as a written requirement of said class, the need to use any graffiti implement. 
(Code 1975, § 18-7.3; Ord. No. 93-02, § 1)  
Sec. 28-51. - Same—In designated public places. 
No person shall have in his or her possession any graffiti implement while doing any activity in any public park, playground, swimming pool, recreational facility, or while loitering in or near any underpass, bridge abutment, storm drain, and other similar types of infrastructure not normally used by the public, except as they may be used in planned, adult-supervised activities. 
(Code 1975, § 18-7.4; Ord. No. 93-02, § 1)  
Sec. 28-52. - Furnishing to minors prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person, other than a parent or legal guardian, to sell, exchange, give, loan, or otherwise furnish or cause or permit to be exchanged, given, loaned, or otherwise furnished, any felt tip marker or graffiti implement to any person under the age of 18 years without the consent of the parent or other lawfully designated custodian of the person, which custodial consent shall be given in advance in writing. 
(Code 1975, § 18-7.5; Ord. No. 93-02, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Penal Code § 594.1.  
Sec. 28-53. - Parental civil liability. 
Any parent or legal guardian whose child under the age of 18 possesses a graffiti implement shall be personally liable for any and all costs to any person incurred in connection with the removal of graffiti caused by said child, or by said graffiti implement, and for all attorney's fees and court costs included in connection with the civil prosecution or any claim for damages. 
(Code 1975, § 18-7.6; Ord. No. 93-02, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Government Code § 38772.  
Sec. 28-54. - Graffiti removal. 
(a)  Authorization to remove graffiti from both public and private property. Whenever the Community Services Director, or other person designated by the City Manager, determines that graffiti or other inscribed material is so located on public or privately-owned permanent structures on public or privately-owned real property within the City, so as to be capable of viewing by any person utilizing the public rights-of-way of this City or from rights-of-way owned by other public entities, the Community Services Director, or other person designated by the City Manager, is authorized to provide for the removal of such graffiti or other inscribed material, upon the following conditions: 
(1)  In removing graffiti or other inscribed material, the painting or repair of an area more extensive than that minimally required for such removal shall not be authorized; 
(2)  Where a structure is owned by a public entity other than the City, the removal of such graffiti or other inscribed material is authorized only upon securing the written consent of the public entity having jurisdiction with respect to such structure and such entity executes a release and waiver approved as to form and substance by the City Attorney, and the City obtains property owner consent to access any necessary non-City lands to conduct the graffiti removal; and 
(3)  Where a structure is owned by a private person or entity, the removal of such graffiti or other inscribed material is authorized only upon securing the written consent of the owner thereof, and such owner executes a release and waiver approved as to form and substance by the City Attorney, and the City obtains property owner consent to access any necessary non-City lands to conduct the graffiti removal. 
(b)  Civil remedies available. Nothing in this article shall preclude the abatement of graffiti by the City through civil process by means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisance. 
(Code 1975, § 18-7.8; Ord. No. 93-02, § 1; Ord. No. 2007-03, § 1)  
Sec. 28-55. - Graffiti reward. 
(a)  Authorization. A reward in an amount established by resolution of the City Council may be authorized, offered and may be paid by the City to any person who provides information leading to the determination of the identity of, and the apprehension of, any person who willfully or maliciously paints, marks, or defaces any public property within the City. 
(b)  Reward. The exact amount of any reward to be paid by the City shall be determined by the City Council after receipt of a report from the City Manager indicating that information was received leading to the determination of the identity of, and the apprehension of, a person who willfully or maliciously painted, marred or defaced a structure located on public or private property located within the City, and indicating the final disposition of such matter. No law enforcement officer, municipal officer, official or employee of the City shall be eligible for such reward. 
(c)  Repayment by violators. Any person violating the provisions of sections this article shall pay the City the amount of any reward paid pursuant to this section, and if such person is an unemancipated minor, such minor's parents or guardian are so liable and shall pay the amount of any reward to the City. Failure to pay any amount demanded by the City pursuant to this section within 30 days of written demand therefor shall itself be a violation of the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1975, § 18-7.9; Ord. No. 93-02, § 1)  
Secs. 28-56—28-83. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC PEACE 
 
Sec. 28-84. - Discharging firearms. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or set off within the City limits any gun, rifle, pistol, shotgun or other firearm or any airgun or other contrivance discharging or propelling shots, slugs, bullets, darts, arrows, rocks, metal or plastic projectiles, or any other missiles. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any peace officer or person summoned to aid or discharge any official duty or where such act is necessary for the protection of human life or property. 
(Code 1975, § 18-10; Ord. No. 66, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 79-3, § 10)  
Sec. 28-85. - Sound trucks—Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings described below; provided, however, that with regard to technical terms, the terminology of the American National Standards Institute Standard shall govern: 
Decibel (dB) means a unit which denotes the ratio between two quantities which are proportional to power. The number of decibels corresponding to the ratio of two amounts of power is ten times the logarithm to the base ten of this ratio. 
Noise level means the "A" weighted sound pressure level in decibels obtained by using a sound level meter at slow response with a reference pressure of 20 micropascals (micronewtons per square meter). The unit of measurement shall be designated as dB(A). 
Sound amplifying equipment. 
(1)  The term "sound amplifying equipment" means, as used herein, any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music, or any other sound. 
(2)  The term "sound amplifying equipment," as used herein, shall not be construed as including standard automobile radios when used and heard only by occupants of the vehicle in which installed or warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on other vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes. 
Sound truck , as used herein, means any motor vehicle, or horse-drawn vehicle, having mounted thereon, or attached thereto, any sound amplifying equipment. 
(Code 1975, § 18-11; Ord. No. 78-12, § 1)  
Sec. 28-86. - Same-Regulations for use. 
The use of sound trucks in the City with sound amplifying equipment in operation for commercial or noncommercial purposes shall be subject to the following time and manner regulations: 
(1)  Operations are permitted each day, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except on Saturday and Sunday and legal holidays when no operations shall be authorized. 
(2)  Sound trucks shall be operated in a manner that does not impede the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic and that does not create traffic or safety concerns. 
(3)  The volume of sound emitted from a sound truck shall be controlled so that it will not be loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing or a nuisance to persons within the area of audibility 
In addition to the above, sound trucks used for commercial purposes shall comply with the provisions of this Code relating to licensing.  
Sec. 28-87. - Same—Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of sections 28-85 to 28-86 shall be deemed guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined according to the general penalties described in section 2-351 (Infraction penalty) of this Code. 
(Code 1975, § 18-17; Ord. No. 78-12, § 2)  
Sec. 28-88. - Drinking in public places. 
No person shall drink any malt, spirituous, or vinous liquor containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, parkway, or other public place within this City, whether such person is or is not in or upon any automobile or other vehicle or conveyance, except as expressly authorized by section 30-1(d) or other permit issued by the City Manager. 
(Code 1975, § 18-18; Ord. No. 80-5, § 1)  
Sec. 28-89. - Disorderly houses. 
It is unlawful for any person to keep a riotous house, or permit any riotous, or disorderly conduct in any house, yard, or premises connected therewith, owned or occupied by such person, or be guilty of any riotous or disorderly conduct in any house, yard, or premises whereby the peace, quiet, or decency of any person in the neighborhood of such house, may be disturbed. 
(Code 1975, § 18-19; Ord. No. 80-5, § 2) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Penal Code § 316.  
Secs. 28-90—28-114. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - DRUG PARAPHERNALIA 
 
Sec. 28-115. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Police Chief. The Police Chief of the City of La Palma or his or her designee. 
City Manager. The City Manager of the City of La Palma or his or her designee. 
Drug paraphernalia. As defined in Health and Safety Code § 11364.5(d). 
Entitlement. Any license, permit or other type of entitlement issued to an individual or entity by the City. 
Responsible official. The original approval body that issued the entitlement at issue. For entitlements issued under chapter 44 of this Code, the responsible official shall be the person or body designated in sections 44-485, 44-486 and 44-487 as having the authority to make a decision with respect to the entitlement. For ministerial entitlements issued by City staff other than those specified in chapter 44, the responsible official for purposes of this article shall be the Chief of Police.  
Sec. 28-116. - Penalty for drug paraphernalia related violations. 
(a)  Pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 11364.5, any violation of Health and Safety Code § 11364.5 regarding the permissible conduct of businesses in which drug paraphernalia is kept, displayed, or offered in any manner, sold, furnished, transferred or given away, shall constitute grounds for revocation or nonrenewal by the City of any entitlement previously issued by the City to the violating business in accordance with subsections (b) or (c) of this section, and shall be grounds for denial of any future entitlement authorizing the conduct of such business or any other business, if the business includes the sale of drug paraphernalia. 
(b)  An entitlement for which revocation is not provided for in chapter 44, article IV, division 5 of this Code, shall be subject to revocation in accordance with this subsection (b) of this section: 
(1)  When the responsible official determines, based on reasonable evidence, that a person or business possessing an entitlement issued by the City has violated any provision of Health and Safety Code § 11364.5, the responsible official shall provide the violator 15 days notice of the City's intention to revoke said entitlement by personal service or by first class or certified mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the violating person/business at the address set forth on the entitlement application. Notice shall be deemed given upon personal service or upon placing written notice in the United States mail as provided herein. If within such 15-day period the violating person/business fails to correct the violation, if the violation can be corrected, so as to conform to the requirements of State law, and fails to file an appeal pursuant to this section, the entitlement for which notice was provided shall be revoked at the expiration of such 15-day period. 
(2)  A violator may, within 15 days after a notice of revocation is given pursuant to this section, appeal any action of the responsible official taken pursuant to the provisions of this article to the City Council, by filing with the City Clerk a notice of appeal, setting forth the facts and circumstances regarding the appeal. The City Council shall hold a hearing on the matter within 15 days from the date on which the appeal is filed. At such hearing, the City Council shall consider all relevant evidence produced by the violator, the responsible official, and other interested parties, and make findings and determine the merits of the appeal. The City Council may affirm, overrule or modify the decision of the responsible official and the decision on such appeal shall be final. 
(c)  An entitlement for which revocation is provided for in chapter 44, article IV, division 5 of this Code, shall be subject to revocation in accordance with the procedures set forth in that chapter.  
Sec. 28-117. - Public nuisance. 
The distribution or possession of drug paraphernalia for the purpose of sale, exhibition, or display in any place of business from which minors are not excluded as required by State law, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and may be abated pursuant to the procedures set forth in chapter 26 of this Code. This remedy is in addition to any other remedy provided by law, including but not limited to the penalties provided for in this article and the penalties applicable for violation of any term or provision of this Code.  
Chapter 30 - PARKS AND RECREATION 
 
Sec. 30-1. - Parks and recreational areas; conduct in. 
(a)  One of the principal goals of the City is to provide maximum open space and recreational facilities. This chapter is adopted to ensure that the residents of the City will be able to enjoy the full benefits thereof in peace and safety. 
(b)  The Community Services Director shall prepare regulations for conduct in public parks and recreational areas within the City, which regulations shall be subject to approval of the City Council. 
(c)  Any person dissatisfied with any decision of the Community Services Director relating to conduct in public parks and recreational areas may appeal that decision to the City Council by filing written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten days of first learning of such decision. The City Council shall consider any such appeal at its next regular meeting after the filing of the notice of appeal. The determination of the City Council shall be final. 
(d)  The possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited in any public park, public building, or public recreational facility in the City except as may be expressly authorized by a permit issued by the City Manager. The fees for such permit and appropriate standards by which the permit shall be issued shall be established from time to time by resolution of the City Council. 
(e)  It is unlawful to ride a skateboard within or about the Central Park Facilities, including the Community Center. 
(f)  It is unlawful to ride roller or blade skates within or about the amphitheater facility located within Central Park. 
(Code 1975, § 18-8; Ord. No. 75-20, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 76-2, § 1; Ord. No. 79-8, § 1; Ord. No. 88-09, § 1; Ord. No. 94-10; Ord. No. 95-07) 
State Law reference— Possession of open receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage in City owned park prohibited, Business and Professions Code § 25620.  
Sec. 30-2. - Park curfew. 
(a)  It is unlawful to enter, remain, or loiter, including using or parking a vehicle, in or upon the grounds of any City park between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day. This section shall not apply to persons authorized to be in or upon the grounds pursuant to City sponsored or other lawfully authorized activity. 
(b)  Every person who violates this section is guilty of an infraction and shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $50.00 for the first violation, $100.00 for the second violation within the same year and $250.00 for every subsequent violation within the same year. 
(Code 1975, § 18-8.1; Ord. No. 87-05, § 1)  
Sec. 30-3. - Civic Center facilities; conduct in. 
It is unlawful to ride a skateboard or roller or blade skates within or about the Civic Center Facility. 
(Code 1975, § 18-9; Ord. No. 88-08, § 2; Ord. No. 94-10; Ord. No. 95-07)  
Sec. 30-4. - Smoking prohibited in public parks and city facilities and immediately adjacent thereto. 
(a)  Smoking of any kind as defined in this section is prohibited and unlawful in any public park or City facility and within 25 feet of any public park or City facility, including, but not limited to, public sidewalks, streets, and alleys, except for smoking in a private vehicle that is in motion on a public street or alley, unless smoking in the private vehicle is otherwise prohibited by state law. A vehicle is in motion if it is moving or if it is stopped at a stop sign or red light. It is prohibited and unlawful to dispose of any part of lighted or unlighted cigars or cigarettes or cigarette butts, electronic cigarettes of any kind as defined in this section, or any other tobacco-related waste, in or within 25 feet of any portion of any public park or City facility, including parking lots contained within, except in areas designated for smoking by City Council resolution, and indicated by visible signage as smoking areas. Nothing in this section is intended to or shall be construed to preempt or otherwise limit the provisions of California Health and Safety Code Section § 104495 relating to smoking near playgrounds and tot lot sandbox areas. 
(b)  No person shall dispose of any part of a cigarette, electronic cigarette, or cigar or tobacco of any kind, except in a designated waste disposal container. 
(c)  The following words, terms and phrases when used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Smoke or smoking means the inhaling, exhaling, carrying, possessing or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, or any other lighted smoking product or equipment used to burn any tobacco products, weed, plant, or any other combustible substance; using or operating an electronic cigarette of any kind that may or may not include nicotine; and using chew tobacco or tobacco of any kind. 
Electronic cigarette , also known as an e-cigarette, means a device intended to emulate smoking, which can be used to deliver an inhalable dose of nicotine or any other substance through a vaporized solution. Electronic cigarette includes any such electronic or battery-powered device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed or sold as an electronic cigarette, e-cigarette, an electronic vaping device, a personal vaporizer, an electronic nicotine delivery system ("ENDS"), an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe or any other product name or descriptor. Electronic cigarette shall include any refill, cartridge and any other component of an electronic cigarette. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 1, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2016-07, § 1, 8-2-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-07, § 1, adopted August 2, 2016, amended § 30-4, to read as set out herein. Former § 30-4 was titled "Prohibition of smoking in Central Park."  
Sec. 30-5. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall subject to the general penalties described in Section 2-351 (Infraction Penalty). 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 1, 10-19-2010; Ord. No. 2016-07, § 1, 8-2-2016)  
Chapter 32 - PUBLIC SAFETY  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 32-1. - Use of police personnel at loud or unruly assemblages held without prior notification. 
(a)  When any loud or unruly assemblage occurs or is held without prior written notification to the Police Chief, and in the event that the senior police officer at the scene determines that there is a threat to the public peace, health, safety, or general welfare, then that senior officer shall notify the owner of the premises or the person in charge of the premises or the person responsible for the assemblage that that person, or, if that person is a minor, that the parents and guardians of that person will be held personally liable for the costs of providing police personnel on special security assignment over and above the normal services provided by the police department to those premises. 
(b)  A first warning shall be deemed to be the normal services provided. The personnel utilized after the first warning to control the threat to the public peace, health, safety, or general welfare shall be deemed to be on special security assignment over and above the normal services provided. The costs of such special security assignment may include damages to City property and/or injuries to City personnel. The accounting and billing procedures as set forth in section 14-5 of the La Palma City Code shall apply. 
(Code 1975, § 18-22; Ord. No. 86-15)  
Sec. 32-2. - Distribution of harmful matter. 
(a)  Blinders required. No person shall distribute, show, or otherwise display in any location which is visually accessible to minors, any harmful matter, as defined in subsection (b) of this section without the placement of a completely opaque material covering the display such that the lower two-thirds of the material is not exposed to view. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Harmful matter means any matter, taken as a whole, which to the average person, applying contemporary statewide standards, appeals to the prurient interest, and is matter which, taken as a whole, depicts or describes in a patently offensive way sexual conduct and which, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value for minors. 
Minor means any natural person under the age of 18 years. 
Location visually accessible to minors means any location on a public or private street, sidewalk, or right-of-way as well as any location on private property which is visible from a public street, sidewalk or other right-of-way or from an area in which the public is invited and minors are not excluded. 
(c)  Punishment. A violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor punishable according to the general penalties described in section 2-350 (Misdemeanor penalty). 
(Code 1975, § 18-25; Ord. No. 94-05, § 1) 
State Law reference— Authority of City to require blinders in front of material harmful to minors, Penal Code § 313.1(d).  
Sec. 32-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charging admission means the demand and/or receipt of a benefit, monetary or otherwise, in exchange for admittance to a party. The customary courtesies such as gifts, sharing of expenses for food and beverages or reciprocal hospitality shall not be considered a charge for admission. The term "charging admission" shall not include a donation for a political, charitable, or religious purpose. A circulated flier, pamphlet or leaflet containing information about the party including or suggesting an admission fee shall be prima facie evidence that admission is being charged. 
Party means a group of persons assembled for social, recreational, or amusement purposes. 
Person responsible for the event means: 
(1)  The person who owns the property where the party takes place; 
(2)  The person in charge of the property where the party takes place; 
(3)  The person authorizing use of the premises for the event; and/or 
(4)  The person who organized the event. 
Police services fee includes all costs of personnel and equipment for the amount of time actually spent in responding to or in remaining at the party at a rate established by resolution of the City Council, including but not limited to the salaries of the police personnel, the actual cost of any medical treatment to injured officers, the cost of repairing any damaged City equipment or property, and overhead and administrative costs related to all of the foregoing. 
Residential zone means all residential zones as defined in the City of La Palma Development Code. 
(Code 1975, § 18-25.1; Ord. No. 95-04, § 1)  
Sec. 32-4. - Acts prohibited. 
It is unlawful to charge admission to any party conducted in any residential zone of the City of La Palma, except for a block party for which a permit has been granted by the City. 
(Code 1975, § 18-25.2; Ord. No. 95-04, § 1)  
Sec. 32-5. - Police services fee recoverable. 
After police have notified the person responsible for the event of its unlawfulness, any subsequent costs of providing police services at that location relating to the unlawful event, are recoverable from the person responsible for the event. If the person responsible for the event is a minor, then the parents or guardians of that minor shall be jointly and severally liable for such costs. 
(Code 1975, § 18-25.4; Ord. No. 95-04, § 1)  
Secs. 32-6—32-28. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - POLICE [1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal police protection generally, Government Code § 38630 et seq. 
 
Sec. 32-29. - Department—Created; composition. 
There is hereby created a Police Department for the City. The Police Department shall consist of a Police Chief and such other officers and employees thereof as the City Council may from time to time create by resolution. 
(Code 1975, § 19-1; Ord. No. 64, §§ 1, 2)  
Sec. 32-30. - Same—Compensation. 
The compensation for members of the Police Department shall be fixed by the City Council from time to time by adoption of appropriate resolutions. 
(Code 1975, § 19-2; Ord. No. 64, § 3)  
Sec. 32-31. - Same—Duties. 
The duties of the positions herein created, as well as those that may be created from time to time by the City Council, shall be established, governed and controlled by the provisions of the laws of the State applicable thereto and appropriate resolutions of the City Council. 
(Code 1975, § 19-3; Ord. No. 64, § 4) 
State Law reference— Powers and duties of municipal police chief, Government Code §§ 38630, 38631, 41601—41611.  
Sec. 32-32. - Qualification for State aid for training officers and public safety dispatchers. 
(a)  The City declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the State under the provisions of the State Penal Code. 
(b)  Pursuant to State law, the City will adhere to standards for recruitment and training of police officers and public safety dispatchers established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. 
(c)  Pursuant to State law, the Commission and its representatives may make such inquiries as deemed appropriate by the Commission to ascertain that the La Palma Police Department personnel adhere to standards for selection and training established by the Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. 
(Code 1975, § 19-4; Ord. No. 155, § 2; Ord. No. 88-15, § 1) 
State Law reference— Standards and training of local law enforcement officers, Penal Code § 13500 et seq.; rules establishing minimum standards relating to physical, mental, and moral fitness that govern the recruitment and training of City police officers, Penal Code § 13510; authority of Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training to make inquiries in order to determine whether the City is adhering to the standards for recruitment and training of local law enforcement officers, Penal Code § 13512.  
Chapter 34 - SEWERS AND STORM DRAINS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of City to construct, establish, and maintain drains and sewers, Government Code § 38900 et seq.; Community Facilities Law of 1911, Health and Safety Code § 4600 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 34-1. - Monthly charges. 
(a)  The charges for sewer service within the City Municipal Sewer District No. 1 shall be as established by resolution of the City Council. 
(b)  The charges established in this section shall be collected on a monthly or bi-monthly basis, and may be collected with the water or sanitation charges billed for said services. 
(Code 1975, § 21-1; Ord. No. 72-18, §§ 2—4; Ord. No. 82-9, § 1; Ord. No. 97-04, § 1)  
Sec. 34-2. - Deposit for service. 
A deposit for sewer service shall be equal to a two-month charge for service, and shall be required and returned or applied at the same time and in the same manner as the water deposit pursuant to section 42-30. 
(Code 1975, § 21-1.1; Ord. No. 82-25, § 1)  
Sec. 34-3. - Performance of sewer billing functions. 
The City shall have the authority to perform billing and/or collection functions for the sewer service either by City employees or by private contractors, as determined by the City Council. In the event that the City contracts with one or more private contractors to perform any or all of the sewer billing and collection functions, each such private contractor shall be an agent of the City for the limited purpose of performing of such function or functions. 
(Code 1975, § 21-1.2; Ord. No. 97-04, § 3)  
Sec. 34-4. - Payment of bills. 
All sewer bills shall be due and payable upon presentation and shall become delinquent if no payment is received by 5:00 p.m. on the due date shown on the statement. 
(Code 1975, § 21-1.3; Ord. No. 82-25, § 3; Ord. No. 83-6, § 2; Ord. No. 84-22, § 2)  
Sec. 34-5. - Property owner responsible. 
All charges for sewer service shall constitute a valid and subsisting claim in favor of the City and against the owner of the property. In addition, the City may sue in any court of competent jurisdiction for any amount due and payable, attorney's fees, costs of such suit, and for such other and further relief as to the court appears appropriate in the circumstances. 
(Code 1975, § 21-1.4)  
Sec. 34-6. - Connections. 
(a)  A uniform sewer connection charge shall be established by resolution of the City Council for each residential unit and such other uses attached to the sewer system of the City. 
(b)  This charge shall be collected only once per each connection, and is collectible by the City Manager or his or her authorized agent at any time prior to the recording of the final tract map or issuance of a building permit. If the connection is not to new construction, it shall be collected and paid prior to or concurrently with connection approval. 
(c)  The City Council may, upon the affirmative vote of four of its number, modify, reduce or waive the sewer connection charge herein established, upon their finding and determination that to do so would be in the best interests of the City and comport with the public peace, health, safety and welfare. 
(d)  If it is determined by a majority of the City Council that there is an area outside of City limits that, from a combination of engineering and economic reasons, should be served by the City sewer system and such service would not be to the City's disadvantage, such sewer service may be provided and charges shall be paid therefor if not less than those provided for herein. 
(Code 1975, § 21-2; Ord. No. 139, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 159, §§ 1—4; Ord. No. 205, §§ 1—4; Ord. No. 78-15, § 1; Ord. No. 82-9, § 2) 
State Law reference— City has authority, by two-thirds vote, to require property owners within sewer district to pay a connection fee for connecting to sewer improvement constructed pursuant to this State law, Health and Safety Code § 4640.6.  
Sec. 34-7. - Permits—Compliance with chapter. 
No person shall undertake the installation of sewer laterals and mains or any work in connection therewith unless a permit is obtained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that no permit or fees shall be required for work pursuant to subdivision improvement agreements. 
(Code 1975, § 21-3; Ord. No. 78-15, § 1)  
Sec. 34-8. - Same—Required. 
(a)  A person who installs sewer mains, manholes, laterals, and appurtenances shall comply with applicable City standards, including the provisions of chapter 36 of this Code, for the construction of these facilities, shall be licensed by the State to do this type of construction work, and possess a current City business license. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to lay or construct any sewer facilities in, over, along, across or through any public right-of-way or attach to the sewer system of the City without first obtaining a permit therefor from the City Engineer as provided herein and chapter 36 of this Code. 
(Code 1975, § 21-4; Ord. No. 78-15, § 1)  
Sec. 34-9. - Same—Application fee. 
Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by an issuance fee to be established by resolution of the City Council, no part of which shall be returned to the applicant regardless of the action taken on the application. This application fee shall be in addition to an application fee for excavations in the public right-of-way. 
(Code 1975, § 21-5; Ord. No. 78-15, § 1; Ord. No. 82-9, § 3)  
Sec. 34-10. - Application—Content. 
Applications for permits required by this chapter shall be filed in writing with the City Engineer. The application shall be signed by the applicant and shall state: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The location, purpose, extent and nature of the proposed excavation, fill or obstruction. 
(3)  The time during which it is estimated that the excavation, fill or obstruction will exist. 
(4)  That the applicant agrees to indemnify, defend and save the City, its authorized agents, officers, representatives and employees, harmless from and against any and all penalties, liabilities or annoyances or loss resulting from claims or court action and arising out of any accident, loss or damage to persons or property happening or occurring as a proximate result of any work undertaken under the permit granted pursuant to the application. 
(5)  That the applicant agrees that if any tank, pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel or other installation of any nature or kind placed in the excavation, fill or obstruction for which the permit is issued shall at any time in the future interfere with the use, repair, improvement, widening or change of grade of the highway, the applicant, or his or her successors or assigns, within ten days after the receipt of a written notice from the City Engineer to do so, will at his or her own expense either remove such tank, pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel or other installation, or, subject to the approval of the City Engineer, relocate them to a site which may be designated by the Engineer. 
(6)  Any additional information which the City Engineer may deem necessary for the proper disposition of the application. 
(Code 1975, § 21-6; Ord. No. 78-15, § 1)  
Sec. 34-11. - Same—Accompanying material. 
(a)  The application shall be accompanied by a plat showing the location, dimension, nature of the proposed excavation, obstruction or fill, and other detail which the City Engineer may require. 
(b)  Each applicant for permit shall submit to the City Engineer satisfactory proof of the applicant's right to use the highway for the purpose set forth in the application. 
(Code 1975, § 21-7; Ord. No. 78-15, § 1)  
Sec. 34-12. - Same—Changes required by engineer. 
The City Engineer may require such changes in the application in respect to the location, dimensions, character or number of the proposed excavations, fills or obstructions as in his or her opinion may be necessary for the protection of the highway, the prevention of undue interference with traffic, or to assure the safety of persons using the highway. 
(Code 1975, § 21-8; Ord. No. 78-15, § 1)  
Sec. 34-13. - Same—Deadline for filing. 
Applications for permits hereunder shall be filed not less than 48 hours, two regular working days, before the work is proposed to be done. 
(Code 1975, § 21-9; Ord. No. 78-15, § 1)  
Sec. 34-14. - Permit—Issuance. 
If the applicant for a permit complies in all respects with this chapter and with all other applicable laws, rules, regulations or ordinances of the City and/or of any other public agency and pays the fees and deposits required by this chapter, the City Engineer shall approve the application and issue the permit. 
(Code 1975, § 21-10; Ord. No. 78-15, § 1)  
Sec. 34-15. - Same—Conditions. 
The permit shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The permit must be kept at the site of the work and be shown on demand to any authorized representative of the City or any law enforcement officer. 
(2)  The permit shall authorize work to be performed only as to such portion of the highway over which the City has jurisdiction. 
(3)  All work shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and of all applicable laws, rules and regulations of the City and any other public agency and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. 
(4)  The permit shall be nontransferable. 
(5)  The City Engineer may cancel the permit unless the work authorized therein is commenced within 60 days of the issuance of the permit and thereafter, in the opinion of the City Engineer, is diligently prosecuted to completion. Cancellation may be effected by giving written notice thereof by sending such notice to the applicant by ordinary mail to the address shown on the application. 
(6)  The City Engineer may, either at the time of the issuance of the permit or at any time thereafter until the completion of the work, prescribe such additional conditions as he or she may deem reasonably necessary for the protection of the highway or for the prevention of undue interference with traffic or to assure the safety of persons using the highway. 
(Code 1975, § 21-11; Ord. No. 78-15, § 1)  
Sec. 34-16. - Issuance fee. 
This permit and issuance fee provided for in this article is an addition to that permit and fee required for excavating in the public right-of-way and the pavement breakage deposit required therein. 
(Code 1975, § 21-12; Ord. No. 78-15, § 1)  
Sec. 34-17. - Sewer maintenance, repair, design and restrictions of deposit into sewers. 
(a)  Responsibility; main house and connecting sewer, repair and upkeep. 
(1)  The property owner or agent is responsible for the maintenance, repair and upkeep of the connecting sewer and house sewer from the property owner's structure up to and including the point of connection (e.g., wyes, tees, saddles, manhole structures, etc.) to the main sewer line. The property owner or agent is responsible for all routine and emergency cleaning of the connecting sewer and house sewer lines. 
(2)  The City is responsible for the maintenance, repair and upkeep of the main sewer. It shall be the responsibility of the City to keep the main sewer free and clear for the even flow of sewage. 
(3)  Should repairs to or replacement of the house sewer or connecting sewer be needed, which will require excavation in the public right-of-way, the property owner or agent must first obtain an encroachment permit from the City of La Palma before the work can begin, in accordance with sections 34-7 through 34-16. 
(b)  Restrictions of deposit in sewer. No person shall throw or deposit any material or liquid into any vessel or receptacle directly or indirectly connected to a public sewer that is not in conformance with current Orange County Sanitation District regulations. This shall include, but not be limited to, storm drain discharge, groundwater discharge, and toxic or malodorous gases or materials. In addition, the City shall enforce the general and specific prohibitions of the national pretreatment program under Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Section 403.5 (40 CFR 403.5), as they pertain to the City's status as a collector system for the Orange County Sanitation District. No person shall therefore introduce any of the following into the City's sewer system: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the sewer collection system or the publicly owned treatment works (POTW), including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Centigrade using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
(2)  Pollutants which cause corrosive structural damage to the sewer collection pipes and structures, but in no case discharges with a pH lower than five, unless the works are specifically designed to accommodate such discharges. 
(3)  Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts which will cause obstruction to the flow in the sewer collection system or the POTW, resulting in interference. 
(4)  Any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference with the POTW. 
(5)  Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case heat in such quantities that the temperature at the POTW treatment plant exceeds 104 degrees Fahrenheit or 40 degrees Centigrade, unless the approval authority, upon request of the POTW, approves alternate temperature limits. 
(6)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
(7)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gasses, vapors or fumes within the sewer collection system or the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(8)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the POTW. 
(Code 1975, § 21-11.1; Ord. 2007-02 § 1)  
Secs. 34-18—34-37. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FATS, OILS AND GREASE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 34-38. - Definitions. 
(a)  Unless otherwise defined herein, terms related to water quality shall be as adopted in the latest edition of Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Environment Federation. The testing procedures for waste constituents and characteristics shall be as provided in 40 CFR 136. 
(b)  Other terms not herein defined are defined as being the same as set forth in the latest adopted applicable editions of the California Codes applicable to building construction adopted pursuant to the California Building Standards Law. 
(c)  The words "includes" and "including" shall mean including but not limited to. 
(d)  Subject to the foregoing provisions, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Best management practices (BMP) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other practices to prevent or reduce the introduction of FOG to the sewer facilities. 
Composite sample means a collection of individual samples obtained at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time. The combination of individual samples forms a representative sample of the wastestream discharged during the sample period. 
Discharger means any person who discharges or causes a discharge of wastewater directly or indirectly to a public sewer. The term "discharger" includes the term "user." 
Effluent means any liquid outflow from the food service establishment that is discharged to the sewer. 
Fats, oils and grease (FOG) means any substance that is used in, or is a byproduct of, the cooking or food preparation process that turns, or may turn, viscous with a change in temperature or other conditions. 
FOG control program means the FOG control program required by and developed pursuant to RWQCB Order No. R8-2002-0014, Section (c)(12)(viii). 
FOG Control Program Manager means the individual designated by the City to administer the FOG control program. The FOG Control Program Manager is responsible for all determinations of compliance with the program, including approval of discretionary waivers. References to the FOG Control Program Manager include his or her designee. 
FOG wastewater discharge permit means a permit issued by the City subject to the requirements and conditions established by the City authorizing the permittee to discharge wastewater into the City's facilities or into sewer facilities which ultimately discharge into a City facility. 
Food grinder means any device installed in the plumbing or sewage system that grinds or chops food waste or food preparation byproducts for the purpose of disposal in the sewer system. 
Food service establishment means facilities defined in California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law (CURFFL) § 113785, and any commercial entity within the boundaries of the City, operating in a permanently constructed structure maintained, used, or operated for the purpose of storing, preparing, serving, or manufacturing, packaging, or otherwise handling food for sale to other entities or for consumption by the public, its members, or employees, and which has any process or device that uses or produces FOG or grease vapors, steam, fumes, smoke, or odors that are required to be removed by a Type I or Type II hood, as defined in CURFFL § 113785. 
Grab sample means a sample taken from a wastestream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the wastestream and without consideration of time. 
Grease control device means any grease interceptor, grease trap, or other mechanism, device, or process, which attaches to, or is applied to, wastewater plumbing fixtures and lines, the purpose of which is to trap, collect, or treat FOG prior to being discharged into the sewer system. May also include any other proven method to reduce FOG subject to the approval of the City. 
Grease disposal mitigation fee means a fee charged to an owner/operator of a food service establishment when there are physical limitations to the property that make the installation of the usual and customary grease interceptor or grease control device for the food service establishment under consideration impossible or impractical. The grease disposal mitigation fee is intended to cover the costs of increased maintenance of the sewer system for inspection and cleaning of FOG that a properly employed grease control device would otherwise prevent from entering the sewer system. 
Grease interceptor means a multi-compartment device that is constructed in different sizes and is generally required to be located underground between a food service establishment and the connection to the sewer system. These devices primarily use gravity to separate FOG from the wastewater as it moves from one compartment to the next. The term "grease interceptor" includes the term "interceptor." 
Grease trap means a grease control device that is used to serve individual fixtures. 
Infiltration means water entering a sewer system, including sewer service connections, from the ground through such means as defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manhole walls. 
Inflow means water entering a sewer system through a direct stormwater runoff connection to the sanitary sewer, which may cause an almost immediate increase in wastewater flows. 
Inspector means a person authorized by the City to inspect any existing or proposed wastewater generation, conveyance, processing, and/or disposal facility. 
Interference means any discharge which, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the City's sewer system, treatment processes, or operations; or is a cause of violation of the City's NPDES or waste discharge requirements or prevents lawful sludge use or disposal. 
Limited food preparation establishment means a facility engaged only in reheating, hot holding, or assembly of ready-to-eat food products resulting in no wastewater discharge containing significant amounts of FOG. This term does not include any operation that changes the form, flavor, or consistency of food. 
National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) means the permit issued to control the discharge of liquids or other substances or solids to surface waters of the United States as detailed in Public Law 92-500, Section 402 (33 USC 1251 et seq.). 
Permittee means a person who has received a permit to discharge wastewater into the City's sewer facilities subject to the requirements and conditions established by the City. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, or public agency, including the State of California and the United States of America. 
Public agency means the State of California and/or any City, County, special district, other local governmental authority, or public body of or within this State. 
Regulatory agencies means those agencies having regulatory jurisdiction over the operations of the City, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  United States Environmental Protection Agency, Region IX, San Francisco and Washington, DC (EPA); 
(2)  California State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB); 
(3)  California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region (RWQCB); 
(4)  South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD); 
(5)  California Department of Public Health (CDPH). 
Remodeling means a physical change to a food service establishment that could cause the amount of FOG to exceed the current amount of FOG discharge to the sewer system and that alone or collectively causes or creates a potential for sanitary sewer overflows to occur. The term "remodeling" includes any physical change to a food service establishment that requires a building permit for which the project valuation exceeds $50,000.00 and involves at least one of the following: 
(1)  Under slab plumbing in the food processing area; 
(2)  A 30 percent increase in the net public seating area; 
(3)  A 30 percent increase in the size of the kitchen area; or 
(4)  Any change in the size or type of food preparation equipment excluding a direct removal and replacement of existing food preparation equipment. 
Sample point means a location approved by the City, from which wastewater can be collected that is representative in content and consistency of the entire flow of wastewater being sampled. 
Sampling facilities means a structure for the City or user to measure and record wastewater constituent mass, concentrations, collect a representative sample, or provide access to plug or terminate a discharge. 
Sanitary sewer overflow (SSO) means any overflow, spill, release, discharge, or diversion of wastewater from a sanitary sewer system. An overflow or release is an SSO, regardless of whether the wastewater reaches the waters of the United States. The term "sanitary sewer overflow (SSO)" includes wastewater backups into buildings and on private property that are caused by blockages or flow conditions in a sanitary sewer other than a building lateral. Wastewater backups into buildings caused by a blockage or other malfunction of a building lateral that is privately owned is an SSO when sewage is discharged off of private property into streets, storm drains, or waters of the State of California. 
Sewer facility or system means any property belonging to the City used in the treatment, reclamation, reuse, transportation, or disposal of wastewater, or sludge. The term" sewer facility or system" includes the term "public sewer." 
Sewer lateral means a building sewer as defined in the latest edition of the California Plumbing Code. It is the wastewater connection between the building's wastewater facilities and a public sewer system. 
Sludge means any solid, semi-solid, or liquid decant, subnate, or supernate from a manufacturing process, utility service, or pretreatment facility. 
Waste means sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous, or radioactive, associated with human habitation or of human or animal nature, including such wastes placed within containers of whatever nature prior to and for the purpose of disposal. 
Waste minimization practices means plans or programs intended to reduce or eliminate discharges to the sewer system or to conserve water, including, product substitutions, housekeeping practices, inventory control, employee education, and other steps to minimize wastewater produced. 
Wastehauler means any person carrying on or engaging in vehicular transport of waste as part of, or incidental to, any business for that purpose. 
Wastewater means the liquid-carried wastes of the community and all constituents thereof, whether treated or untreated, discharged into or permitted to enter a public sewer. The "wastewater" includes the term "sewage." 
Wastewater constituents and characteristics means the individual chemical, physical, bacteriological, and other parameters, including volume and flow rate, that serve to define, classify, or measure the quality and quantity of wastewater. 
(Code 1975, § 21-13; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Secs. 34-39—34-64. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LIMITATIONS, PROHIBITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS ON DISCHARGES 
 
Sec. 34-65. - FOG discharge requirement. 
No food service establishment shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the sewer system FOG that exceeds a concentration level adopted by the City or that may accumulate and/or cause or contribute to blockages in the sewer system or at the sewer system lateral which connects the food service establishment to the sewer system. 
(Code 1975, § 21-14; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Sec. 34-66. - Prohibitions. 
The following prohibitions shall apply to all food service establishments: 
(1)  Introduction of any additives into a food service establishment's wastewater system for the purpose of emulsifying FOG, unless a specific written authorization from the FOG Control Program Manager is obtained; 
(2)  Disposal of waste cooking oil into drainage pipes. All waste cooking oils shall be collected and stored properly in receptacles such as barrels or drums for recycling or other acceptable methods of disposal; 
(3)  Discharge of wastewater from dishwashers to any grease trap or grease interceptor; 
(4)  Discharge of wastewater with temperatures in excess of 140 degrees Fahrenheit to any grease control device, including grease traps and grease interceptors; 
(5)  The use of biological additives for grease remediation or as a supplement to interceptor maintenance without prior authorization from the FOG Control Program Manager; 
(6)  Discharge of wastes from toilets, urinals, wash basins, and other fixtures containing human bodily wastes to a grease interceptor; 
(7)  Discharge of any waste including FOG and solid materials removed from the grease control device to the sewer system. Grease removed from grease interceptors shall be removed from the premises by a wastehauler periodically as part of the operation and maintenance requirements for grease interceptors; 
(8)  Installation of a new food grinder in any food service establishment without the written authorization of the FOG Control Program Manager. 
(Code 1975, § 21-15; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Sec. 34-67. - FOG wastewater discharge permit required. 
(a)  No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any wastewater from a food service establishment directly or indirectly into the sewer system without first obtaining a FOG wastewater discharge permit pursuant to this article. 
(b)  A limited food preparation establishment is not considered a food service establishment and is exempt from obtaining a FOG wastewater discharge permit. Exempted establishments shall not discharge wastewater containing significant amounts of FOG. 
(Code 1975, § 21-16; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Sec. 34-68. - Best management practices required. 
Every food service establishment shall implement best management practices to minimize the discharge of FOG to the sewer system. These may include kitchen practices and employee training efforts that are essential in minimizing FOG discharge. Detailed requirements for best management practices shall be specified in the FOG wastewater discharge permit. 
(Code 1975, § 21-17; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Sec. 34-69. - FOG pretreatment required. 
Every food service establishment shall install, operate, and maintain an approved type and adequately sized grease interceptor necessary to maintain compliance with the objectives of this article. The grease interceptor shall be adequate to separate and remove FOG contained in wastewater discharges from food service establishments prior to discharge to the sewer system. Fixtures, equipment, and drain lines located in the food preparation and clean up areas of food service establishments that are sources of FOG discharges shall be connected to the grease interceptor. Compliance with this section shall be established as follows: 
(1)  New construction of food service establishments. Whenever a new food service establishment is constructed, a grease interceptor shall be installed prior to commencing any discharges of wastewater to the sewer system. 
(2)  Existing food service establishments. Existing food service establishments undergoing remodeling shall be required to install a grease interceptor as part of the remodeling project. 
(Code 1975, § 21-18; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Sec. 34-70. - Multi-tenant commercial properties. 
Property owners of multi-tenant commercial properties or their official designees shall be responsible for the installation and maintenance of any grease interceptor serving multiple food service establishments. If a grease interceptor that receives wastewater from a single food service establishment is installed on a multi-tenant commercial property, the operator of the food service establishment shall be responsible for the maintenance of the grease interceptor. 
(Code 1975, § 21-19; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Sec. 34-71. - Conditional waiver of grease interceptor requirement. 
(a)  Basis for granting a conditional waiver. A conditional waiver from the grease interceptor requirements may be granted to food service establishments by the FOG Control Program Manager under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  The food service establishment has an alternative pretreatment technology that is at least as effective in controlling the FOG discharge as a grease interceptor. Such determination shall be based upon evaluation of the following conditions: 
a.  The food service establishment can justify that the alternative pretreatment technology is equivalent or better than a grease interceptor in controlling its FOG discharge; and 
b.  The food service establishment can demonstrate, after installation, the effectiveness of the alternative pretreatment to control FOG discharge through downstream monitoring of the sewer system for at least three months. 
(2)  The food service establishment has negligible FOG discharge and insignificant impact to the sewer system. The determination shall be based upon evaluation of the following conditions: 
a.  Quantity of FOG discharge as measured or as indicated by the size of the food service establishment based on seating capacity, number of meals served, menu, water usage, amount of onsite consumption of prepared food, and other conditions that may reasonably be shown to contribute to FOG discharges; 
b.  Adequacy of implementation of best management practices and compliance history; 
c.  Sewer size, grade, condition, level of FOG deposition in the sewer, and history of maintenance and sewage spills in the receiving sewer system; and 
d.  Any other condition reasonably related to the generation of FOG discharges. 
(b)  Application for a conditional waiver. A food service establishment may submit an application for a conditional waiver from the grease interceptor requirement to the FOG Control Program Manager. Upon determination by the FOG Control Program Manager that reasons are sufficient to justify a waiver, a FOG wastewater discharge permit will be issued that includes the waiver relieving the food service establishment from the requirement. In approving such waiver, the FOG Control Program Manager may impose reasonable conditions to ensure compliance with this article. 
(c)  Revoking a conditional waiver. A waiver may be revoked at any time when any of the terms or conditions for its issuance is not satisfied or if the conditions upon which the waiver was based change so that the justification for the waiver no longer exists. 
(Code 1975, § 21-20; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Sec. 34-72. - Grease disposal mitigation fee. 
(a)  Authority to impose fee. Food service establishments that operate without a grease interceptor may be required to pay an annual grease disposal mitigation fee to equitably cover the costs of increased maintenance of the sewer system as a result of the food service establishment's inability to adequately remove FOG from its wastewater discharge. Food service establishments shall only be permitted to pay the annual grease disposal mitigation fee and operate without an approved grease interceptor if the City has determined that it is impossible or impractical to install or operate a grease interceptor for the subject facility. Such determination shall be based upon evaluation of the following conditions: 
(1)  There is no adequate space for installation and/or maintenance of a grease interceptor; 
(2)  There is no adequate slope for gravity flow between kitchen plumbing fixtures and the grease interceptor and/or between the grease interceptor and the private collection lines or the public sewer; and 
(3)  A conditional waiver cannot be granted. 
(b)  Fee amount. The grease disposal mitigation fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council and shall be based on the estimated annual increased cost of maintaining the sewer system for inspection and removal of FOG attributable to the food service establishment resulting from the lack of a grease interceptor or grease control device. 
(Code 1975, § 21-21; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Secs. 34-73—34-102. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FOG WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS 
 
Sec. 34-103. - Application. 
(a)  Any person required to obtain a FOG wastewater discharge permit shall submit an application for a permit prior to commencing discharges. The applicable fees shall accompany this application. At a minimum, the applicant shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, telephone number, and assessor's parcel number for the food service establishment. If the establishment is located in a leased space, the name and address of the property owner or lessor and the property manager where the food service establishment is located shall be provided; 
(2)  Name, address, and contact information of any and all principals/owners/major shareholders of the food service establishment; 
(3)  Description of the food service establishment, including hours of operation, cuisine, service activities, or clients using the applicant's services; 
(4)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, FOG control devices, grease interceptors, or other pretreatment equipment and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation; 
(5)  Description of best management practices to be implemented to control FOG; 
(6)  Proof of a valid City business license; and 
(7)  Any other information as specified in the application form or as required by the FOG Control Program Manager to properly evaluate the application. 
(b)  After evaluation of the data furnished, the FOG Control Program Manager may issue a FOG wastewater discharge permit, request additional information, or deny the application. 
(Code 1975, § 21-22; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Sec. 34-104. - Permit conditions. 
The issuance of a FOG wastewater discharge permit may be subject to any of the following conditions or limits: 
(1)  Limits on discharge of FOG and other priority pollutants; 
(2)  Requirements for proper operation and maintenance of grease interceptors and other grease control devices; 
(3)  Grease interceptor maintenance frequency and schedule; 
(4)  Requirements for implementation of best management practices; 
(5)  Requirements for maintaining and reporting status of best management practices; 
(6)  Requirements for maintaining and submitting logs and records, including wastehauling records and waste manifests; 
(7)  Requirements to self-monitor; 
(8)  Requirements to construct, operate, and maintain a FOG control device and/or sampling facilities; 
(9)  Additional requirements as otherwise determined to be reasonably appropriate to protect the City's system or to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Code 1975, § 21-23; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Sec. 34-105. - Permit fee. 
The FOG wastewater discharge permit fee shall be paid by the applicant prior to the issuance or renewal of a permit in an amount adopted by resolution of the City Council. A permittee shall also pay any delinquent invoices in full prior to permit renewal. Payment of a fee for the FOG wastewater discharge permit does not exempt the permit holder from any other sewer fees or any other charges established by the City or required by this Code. 
(Code 1975, § 21-24; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Sec. 34-106. - Modification of terms and conditions. 
(a)  The terms and conditions of an issued permit may be subject to modification by the FOG Control Program Manager should the information that was used as the basis for determining the original terms and conditions change during the life of the permit. 
(b)  At any time, the permittee may request a modification to the terms and conditions of an issued permit, in writing, stating the requested change and the reasons for the change. The FOG Control Program Manager shall review the request, make a determination on the request, and prepare a written response within 30 days. 
(c)  The permittee shall be informed of any change in the permit limits, conditions, or requirements at least 45 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(Code 1975, § 21-25; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Sec. 34-107. - Duration and renewal. 
FOG wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a period not to exceed four years. Upon expiration of the permit, the user shall apply for renewal of the permit in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1975, § 21-26; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Sec. 34-108. - Permits not transferable. 
Permits issued under this article are for a specific food service establishment or a specific operation and create no vested rights. No permit holder shall assign, transfer, or sell any FOG wastewater discharge permit or use any such permit for or on any facilities or discharges not expressly encompassed within the underlying permit. Any permit which is transferred to a new owner or operator or to a new facility is void. 
(Code 1975, § 21-27; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Secs. 34-109—34-129. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - FACILITIES REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 34-130. - Grease interceptor—General requirements. 
(a)  Grease interceptor sizing and installation shall conform to the current edition of the California Plumbing Code. Grease interceptors shall be constructed in accordance with the design approved by the FOG Control Program Manager and shall have a minimum of two compartments with fittings designed for grease retention. 
(b)  The grease interceptor shall be installed at a location where it shall be at all times easily accessible for inspection, cleaning, and removal of accumulated grease. 
(c)  Access manholes, with a minimum diameter of 24 inches, shall be provided over each grease interceptor chamber and sanitary tee. The access manholes shall extend at least to the finished grade and shall be designed and maintained to prevent water inflow or infiltration. The manholes shall also have readily removable covers to facilitate inspection, grease removal, and wastewater sampling activities. 
(Code 1975, § 21-28; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Sec. 34-131. - Grease interceptor—Maintenance requirements. 
(a)  Grease interceptors shall be maintained in efficient operating condition by periodic removal of the full content of the interceptor. The term "full content" shall include wastewater, accumulated FOG, floating materials, sludge and solids. 
(b)  Grease interceptors shall be maintained in a manner consistent with a maintenance frequency approved by the FOG Control Program Manager. The maintenance frequency shall be determined in one of the following methods: 
(1)  Grease interceptors shall be fully pumped out and cleaned at a frequency such that the combined FOG and solids accumulation does not exceed 25 percent of the total liquid depth of the grease interceptor. This is to ensure that the minimum hydraulic retention time and required available volume is maintained to effectively intercept and retain FOG discharged to the sewer system. 
(2)  Grease interceptors shall be maintained not less than once every six months based on the effective date of the FOG wastewater discharge permit. 
(3)  Grease interceptors shall be fully pumped out and cleaned quarterly based on the effective date of the FOG wastewater discharge permit when the frequency described in subsection (b)(1) of this section has not been established. The maintenance frequency shall be adjusted when sufficient data has been obtained to establish an average frequency based on the requirements described in subsection (b)(1) of this section and guidelines adopted pursuant to the FOG control program. The City may change the maintenance frequency at any time to reflect changes in actual operating conditions in accordance with the FOG control program. 
(4)  If the grease interceptor, at any time, contains FOG and solids accumulation that does not meet the requirements described in subsection (b)(1) of this section, the food service establishment shall be required to have the grease interceptor serviced immediately to remove the full content of the grease interceptor. 
(c)  No FOG that has accumulated in a grease interceptor shall be allowed to pass into any sewer lateral, sewer system, storm drain, or public right-of-way during maintenance activities. 
(d)  Food service establishments with grease interceptors may be required to submit data and information necessary to establish that required maintenance has been conducted. 
(Code 1975, § 21-29; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Sec. 34-132. - Grease trap requirements. 
(a)  Food service establishments may be required to install grease traps in the waste line leading from drains, sinks, and other fixtures or equipment where grease may be introduced into the sewer system in quantities that can cause blockage. 
(b)  Sizing and installation of grease traps shall conform to the current edition of the California Plumbing Code. 
(c)  Grease traps shall be maintained in efficient operating condition by removing accumulated grease on a daily basis. 
(d)  Grease traps shall be maintained free of all food residues and any FOG waste removed during the cleaning and scraping process. 
(e)  Grease traps shall be inspected periodically to check for leaking seams and pipes and for effective operation of the baffles and flow regulating device. Grease traps and their baffles shall be maintained free of all built up FOG and waste. Removable baffles shall be removed and cleaned during the maintenance process. 
(f)  Dishwashers and food waste disposal units shall not be connected to or discharged into any grease trap. 
(Code 1975, § 21-30; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Sec. 34-133. - Monitoring facilities requirements. 
(a)  The City may require food service establishments to construct and maintain flow monitoring, constituent monitoring, and/or sampling facilities. 
(b)  The location of the monitoring or metering facilities shall be subject to approval by the FOG Control Program Manager. 
(c)  Food service establishments may be required to provide immediate, clear, safe, and uninterrupted access to the FOG Control Program Manager or inspectors to all monitoring and metering facilities. 
(d)  Food service establishments may be required by the FOG Control Program Manager to submit waste analysis plans, contingency plans, and meet other necessary requirements to ensure proper operation and maintenance of the grease control device and compliance with this article. 
(e)  No food service establishment shall increase the use of water or in any other manner attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for treatment to achieve compliance with this article. 
(Code 1975, § 21-31; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Sec. 34-134. - Requirements for best management practices. 
(a)  Generally. All food service establishments shall implement best management practices in accordance with the requirements and guidelines established by the City under its FOG control program in an effort to minimize the discharge of FOG to the sewer system. 
(b)  Compliance preconditions. All food service establishments shall be required, at a minimum, to comply with the following best management practices, where applicable: 
(1)  Installation of drain screens. Drain screens shall be installed on all drainage pipes in food preparation areas. 
(2)  Segregation and collection of waste cooking oil. All waste cooking oil shall be collected and stored properly in recycling receptacles such as barrels or drums. Such recycling receptacles shall be maintained properly to ensure that they do not leak. Licensed wastehaulers or an approved recycling facility must be used to dispose of waste cooking oil. 
(3)  Employee training. All FOG training shall be documented and employee signatures shall be retained for a period of not less than two years indicating the attendance of each employee and a description of the practices reviewed. Training records shall be available for review at any reasonable time by the FOG Control Program Manager or an inspector. Employees of the food service establishment shall be trained twice each calendar year on the following: 
a.  "Dry wiping" pots, pans, dishware, and work areas before washing to remove grease; 
b.  Properly disposing food waste and solids in an enclosed plastic bag prior to disposal in trash bins or containers to prevent leaking and odors; 
c.  Using absorbent products to clean under fryer baskets and other locations where grease may be spilled or dripped; 
d.  Properly disposing grease or oils from cooking equipment into a grease receptacle such as a barrel or drum without spilling. 
(4)  Maintenance of kitchen exhaust filters. Exhaust filters and hoods shall be cleaned as frequently as necessary to be maintained in good operating condition. The wastewater generated from cleaning the exhaust systems shall be disposed of properly. 
(5)  Kitchen signage. Best management and waste minimization practices shall be posted conspicuously in the food preparation and dishwashing areas at all times. 
(Code 1975, § 21-32; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Secs. 34-135—34-151. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - MONITORING, REPORTING, NOTIFICATION AND INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 34-152. - Monitoring and reporting conditions. 
(a)  Monitoring and reporting requirements. 
(1)  The FOG Control Program Manager may require periodic reporting of the status of implementation of best management practices, in accordance with the FOG control program. 
(2)  The FOG Control Program Manager may require visual monitoring to observe the actual conditions of the sewer lateral from the food service establishment and sewer lines downstream. 
(3)  The FOG Control Program Manager may require reports on self-monitoring of wastewater constituents and FOG characteristics needed for determining compliance with any conditions or requirements specified in the FOG wastewater discharge permit or this article. Monitoring reports shall be in a manner and form approved by the FOG Control Program Manager and shall be submitted upon request of the FOG Control Program Manager. Failure by the permittee to perform any required monitoring and/or to submit monitoring reports constitutes a violation of this article and shall be cause for the City to initiate all necessary tasks and analyses to determine the wastewater constituents and FOG characteristics on behalf of the permittee. The permittee shall be responsible for any and all expenses of the City in undertaking such monitoring analyses and preparation of reports. 
(4)  Other reports may be required such as compliance schedule progress reports, FOG control monitoring reports, and any other reports deemed reasonably appropriate by the FOG Control Program Manager to ensure compliance with this article. 
(b)  Recordkeeping requirements. The permittee shall be required to keep all manifests, receipts, and invoices of all cleaning, maintenance, and grease removal activities for not less than two years. Such documents shall include the name, address, and contact information of the disposal carrier and disposal site location. The permittee shall, upon request, make the manifests, receipts, and invoices available to any City representative or inspector. These records may include: 
(1)  A logbook of grease interceptor, grease trap, or grease control device cleaning and maintenance practices; 
(2)  A record of best management practices being implemented, including employee training; 
(3)  Copies of records and manifests of wastehauling interceptor contents; 
(4)  Records of sampling data and sludge height monitoring for FOG and solids accumulation in the grease interceptors; 
(5)  Any other information required to ensure compliance with this article. 
(c)  Falsifying information or tampering with process. It shall be unlawful to make any false statement, representation, record, report, plan, or other document that is filed with the City, or to tamper with or knowingly render inoperable any grease control device, monitoring device, or method or access point required under this article. 
(Code 1975, § 21-33; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Sec. 34-153. - Inspection and sampling conditions. 
(a)  The FOG Control Program Manager may inspect and sample the wastewater discharges of any food service establishment to determine compliance with this article. The permittee shall allow the City access to the food service establishment premises, during normal business hours, for purposes of inspecting grease control devices or interceptors and reviewing the manifests, receipts, and invoices relating to the cleaning, maintenance, and inspection of the grease control devices or interceptors. 
(b)  The FOG Control Program Manager shall have the right to place or order the placement of such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. Where a food service establishment has security measures in force, the permittee shall make necessary arrangements so that representatives of the City shall be permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(c)  The permittee shall make available for inspection and copying by the City all notices, monitoring reports, waste manifests, and records related to wastewater generation and wastewater disposal without restriction but subject to the confidentiality provisions set forth in this article. 
(Code 1975, § 21-34; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Sec. 34-154. - Right of entry. 
Persons or occupants of permitted food service establishments shall allow the FOG Control Program Manager reasonable access to all parts of the wastewater generating and disposal facilities for the purposes of inspection and sampling during all times the facility is open, operating, or any other reasonable time. No person shall interfere with, delay, resist, or refuse entrance to City representatives attempting to inspect any facility involved directly or indirectly with a discharge of wastewater to the City's sewer system. 
(Code 1975, § 21-35; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Sec. 34-155. - Notification of spill. 
(a)  In the event a permittee is unable to comply with any permit condition due to a breakdown of equipment, accident, or human error or the permittee has reasonable opportunity to know that a discharge will exceed the discharge provisions of the FOG wastewater discharge permit or this article, the permittee shall immediately notify the City in person or by telephone at the number specified in the permit. If the material discharged to the sewer has the potential to cause or result in sewer blockages or sanitary sewer overflows, the discharger shall immediately notify the local health department and the City. 
(b)  Confirmation of this notification shall be made in writing to the FOG Control Program Manager at the address specified in the permit no later than five working days from the date of the incident. The written notification shall state the date of the incident, the reasons for the discharge or spill, what steps were taken to immediately correct the problem, and what steps are being taken to prevent the problem from recurring. 
(c)  Such notification shall not relieve the permittee of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage or loss to the City or any other damage or loss to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the permittee of any fees or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law. 
(Code 1975, § 21-36; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Secs. 34-156—34-178. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 34-179. - Determination of noncompliance. 
(a)  Noncompliance with permit discharge conditions, or any discharge provisions of this article, may be determined by an inspection of a grease control device, manifests and documentation, and/or analysis of a grab or composite sample of the effluent of a food service establishment. 
(b)  Sampling and inspection of food service establishments shall be conducted in the time, place, manner, and frequency determined at the sole discretion of the FOG Control Program Manager. 
(c)  Any sample taken from a sample point shall be considered to be representative of the overall discharge to the public sewer. 
(Code 1975, § 21-37; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Sec. 34-180. - Compliance schedule. 
(a)  Upon determination that a permittee is in noncompliance with the terms and conditions specified in its permit or any provision of this article, the FOG Control Program Manager shall require the permittee to submit a schedule of compliance to the FOG Control Program Manager for review and approval. 
(b)  The schedule of compliance shall include the actions that will be required to return the food service establishment to a state of compliance including requirements for installation of a grease control device, submittal of drawings or reports, audit of waste hauling records, best management and waste minimization practices, payment of fees, or other provisions to ensure compliance with this article. The schedule of compliance shall include a time frame for conducting the required actions and an identification of the person responsible for conducting the required actions. 
(c)  Within 30 days of receipt of a proposed schedule of compliance, the FOG Control Program Manager shall review the document and approve or deny the proposed schedule of compliance. In approving the schedule of compliance, the FOG Control Program Manager may attach such conditions as are necessary to ensure the permittee adheres to this article. 
(d)  If compliance is not achieved in accordance with the terms and conditions of the schedule of compliance during its term or if the schedule of compliance is denied, the FOG Control Program Manager may issue an order suspending or revoking the discharge permit pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1975, § 21-38; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Sec. 34-181. - Permit—Suspension. 
(a)  The City Manager may suspend any permit when it is determined that a permittee: 
(1)  Fails to comply with the terms and conditions of an approved schedule of compliance; 
(2)  Knowingly provides a false statement, representation, record, report, or other document to the City; 
(3)  Refuses to provide records, reports, plans, or other documents required by the City to determine permit terms or conditions, discharge compliance, or compliance with this article; 
(4)  Falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or sample collection method; 
(5)  Refuses reasonable access to the premises for the purpose of inspection and monitoring; 
(6)  Does not make timely payment of all amounts owed to the City for permit fees, cleanup costs attributable to the permittee, or any other fees imposed pursuant to this article; 
(7)  Causes interference, sewer blockages, or sanitary sewer overflows with the City's collection, treatment, or disposal system; 
(8)  Violates grease interceptor maintenance requirements, any condition or limit of the permit, or any provision of this article. 
(b)  (1) When the FOG Control Program Manager has reason to believe that grounds exist for permit suspension, the FOG Control Program Manager shall give written notice thereof by certified mail to the permittee setting forth a statement of the facts and grounds deemed to exist, together with the time and place where an administrative hearing shall be heard. The hearing and notice thereof shall be conducted according to the administrative hearing provisions established in section 2-385 with the City Manager acting as the hearing officer. 
(2)  Within the time period specified in section 2-385, the City Manager shall make a determination. If the City Manager finds that grounds exist for suspension of the permit, the City Manager shall prepare an order of suspension. The findings and order shall be sent by certified mail to the permittee at the business address identified on the permit. 
(c)  Effect. 
(1)  An order of suspension shall take effect and be final in all respects on the 16th day following the mailing of such order. The order of suspension may be subject to judicial review pursuant to this article. 
(2)  Upon an order of suspension becoming final, the permittee shall immediately cease and desist its discharge and shall have no right to discharge any wastewater containing FOG directly or indirectly to the City's system for the duration of the suspension. All costs for physically terminating and reinstating service shall be paid by the permittee. 
(3)  Any owner or responsible management employee of the permittee shall be bound by the order of suspension. 
(Code 1975, § 21-39; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Sec. 34-182. - Same—Revocation. 
(a)  The City Manager may revoke any permit when it is determined that a permittee commits any of the following violations: 
(1)  Commits any of the actions identified in section 34-181(a); 
(2)  Fails to comply with the terms and conditions of permit suspension; 
(3)  Discharges effluent to the City's sewer system while its permit is suspended. 
(b)  When the FOG Control Program Manager has reason to believe that grounds exist for the revocation of a permit, the FOG Control Program Manager and City Manager, as appropriate, shall follow the notice and hearing procedures identified in section 34-181(b) except that, within the time specified, if the City Manager determines that sufficient grounds exist for revoking the permit, an order of revocation shall be issued by the City Manager instead of an order of suspension. In the event the City Manager does not revoke the permit, the City Manager may order other enforcement actions, including suspension of the permit under terms and conditions deemed appropriate by the City Manager. 
(c)  Effect. 
(1)  An order of revocation shall take effect and be final in all respects on the sixteenth day following the mailing of such order. The order of revocation may be subject to judicial review pursuant to this article. 
(2)  Upon an order of revocation by the City Manager becoming final, the permittee shall permanently lose all rights to discharge any wastewater containing FOG directly or indirectly to the City's system. All costs for physical termination shall be paid by the permittee. 
(3)  Any owner or responsible management employee of the permittee shall be bound by the order of revocation. 
(4)  Any future application for a permit at any location within the City by any person associated with an order of revocation will be considered by the City after fully reviewing the records of the revoked permit, which records may be the basis for denial of a new permit. 
(Code 1975, § 21-40; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Sec. 34-183. - Damage to facilities or interruption of normal operations. 
(a)  Any person who discharges any waste which causes or contributes to any sewer blockage, sanitary sewer overflows, obstruction, interference, damage, or any other impairment to the City's sewer facilities or to the operation of those facilities shall be liable for all costs required to clean or repair the facilities, together with expenses incurred by the City to resume normal operations. 
(b)  Any person who discharges a waste which causes or contributes to the City violating its discharge requirements established by any regulatory agency incurring additional expenses or suffering losses or damage to the facilities, shall be liable for any costs or expenses incurred by the City, including regulatory fines, penalties, and assessments made by other agencies or a court. 
(c)  Sewer lateral failures and sanitary sewer overflows caused by food service establishments, alone or collectively, are the responsibility of the private property owners, food service establishments, and/or responsible officers or owners of the food service establishments. 
(d)  If the City must act immediately to contain and clean up a sanitary sewer overflow caused by blockage of a private or public sewer lateral or system serving a food service establishment, or if the City acts at the request of a property owner or operator of a food service establishment to abate a blockage caused by a food service establishment, or if the City must act because of the failure of the property owner or food service establishment to abate a condition causing immediate threat of injury to the health, safety, welfare, or property of the public, the City's costs for such clean up and abatement may be entirely borne by the property owner, the food service establishment, and/or responsible officers or owners of the food service establishment. Such clean up costs may constitute a debt to the City. 
(Code 1975, § 21-41; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Sec. 34-184. - Public nuisance. 
(a)  Sanitary sewer overflows may cause threat and injury to public health, safety, and welfare of life and property and are hereby declared to be public nuisances. 
(b)  Food service establishments found to have contributed to a sanitary sewer overflow containing FOG shall be required to create and effectuate a plan to abate the nuisance and prevent any future health hazards created by sanitary sewer overflows. Such plan may include the requirement to install and maintain a grease interceptor. 
(c)  Discharge of wastewater in any manner in violation of this article or of any order issued by the FOG Control Program Manager or City Manager, as authorized by this article, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the FOG Control Program Manager or City Manager. Any person creating a public nuisance shall be subject to any and all of the enforcement provisions of article XI of chapter 2. 
(Code 1975, § 21-42; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Sec. 34-185. - Termination of service. 
(a)  The City, by order of the City Manager, may physically terminate sewer service to any property as follows: 
(1)  On a term of any order of suspension or revocation of a permit; 
(2)  Upon the failure of any person without a valid FOG wastewater discharge permit to immediately cease the discharge, whether direct or indirect, to the City's sewer facilities when such discharge contains or has the potential to contain FOG. 
(b)  All costs for physical termination shall be paid by the owner or operator of the food service establishment or permittee as well as all costs for reinstating service. 
(Code 1975, § 21-43; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Sec. 34-186. - Emergency suspension order. 
(a)  The City may, by order of the FOG Control Program Manager, suspend sewer service when the FOG Control Program Manager determines that such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or impending discharge which: 
(1)  Presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health and welfare of persons or the environment; 
(2)  May cause sanitary sewer overflows, sewer blockages, interference to the City's sewer facilities; or 
(3)  May cause the City to violate any State or federal law or regulation. Any discharger notified of and subject to an emergency suspension order shall immediately cease and desist the discharge of all wastewater containing FOG to the sewer system. 
(b)  As soon as reasonably practicable following the issuance of an emergency suspension order, but in no event more than five business days following the issuance of such order, the City Manager shall hold a hearing to provide the food service establishment or permittee the opportunity to present information in opposition to the issuance of the emergency suspension order. Such a hearing shall not stay the effect of the emergency suspension order. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the City Manager and approved by the City Attorney and, to the extent possible, shall follow the procedures set forth in section 2-384. The City Manager shall issue a written decision and order within two business days following the hearing, which decision shall be sent by certified mail to the food service establishment at the business address listed on the permit. The decision of the City Manager following the hearing shall be final but may be subject to judicial review pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1975, § 21-44; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Sec. 34-187. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  All users of the City's system and facilities are subject to enforcement actions administratively or judicially by the City, U.S. EPA, State of California Regional Water Quality Control Board, the County of Orange or the City Attorney. Said actions may be taken pursuant to the authority and provisions of several laws, including: 
(1)  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, commonly known as the Clean Water Act (33 USCA 1251 et seq.); 
(2)  California Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act (California Water Code § 13000 et seq.); 
(3)  California Hazardous Waste Control Law (California Health and Safety Code §§ 25100 through 25250); 
(4)  Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 USCA 6901 et seq.); and 
(5)  California Government Code §§ 54739 and 54740. 
(b)  In the event the City is subject to the payment of fines or penalties pursuant to the legal authority and actions of other regulatory or enforcement agencies based on a violation of law or regulation or its permits and said violation can be established by the City as having been caused by the discharge of any user of the City's system which is in violation of any provision of this article or the user's permit, the City shall be entitled to recover from the user all costs and expenses, including the full amount of said fines or penalties to which it has been subjected. 
(c)  Pursuant to the authority of California Government Code §§ 54739 and 54740, any person who violates any provision of this article; any permit condition, prohibition, or effluent limit; or any suspension or revocation order shall be liable civilly for a sum not to exceed $25,000.00 per violation for each day in which such violation occurs. Pursuant to the authority of the Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1251 et seq., any person who violates any provision of this article or any permit condition, prohibition, or effluent limit shall be liable civilly for a sum not to exceed $25,000.00 per violation for each day in which such violation occurs. The City Attorney, upon request of the City Manager, shall petition the Superior Court to impose, assess, and recover such penalties, or such other penalties as the City may impose, assess, and recover pursuant to federal and/or State legislative authorization. 
(Code 1975, § 21-45; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3) 
State Law reference— Enhanced penalties authorized for violation of sanitation or sewer system requirements, Government Code § 54740.  
Sec. 34-188. - Administrative citations. 
The violation of any provision of this article, any permit condition, prohibition, or effluent limit, or any suspension or revocation order shall be subject to the administrative fines established in division 3 of article XI of chapter 2 as well as the administrative complaint process established in California Government Code §§ 54740.5 and 54740.6. 
(Code 1975, § 21-46; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Sec. 34-189. - Appeals to City Manager. 
Any food service establishment, permit applicant, or permittee affected by any decision, action or determination made by the FOG Control Program Manager or notice of violation issued by any City Inspector may file a written request for an appeal with the City Manager. The appeal process shall be conducted according to the administrative hearing provisions established in section 2-385 with the City Manager acting as the hearing officer. The order of the City Manager shall be final in all respects. 
(Code 1975, § 21-47; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Sec. 34-190. - Judicial review. 
Any food service establishment, permit applicant, or permittee adversely affected by a decision, action, or determination made by the City Manager pursuant to this article may seek judicial review through the methods established in section 2-386. 
(Code 1975, § 21-48; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Sec. 34-191. - Payment of charges. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided, all fees, charges, and penalties established by this article are due and payable upon receipt of notice thereof. All such amounts are delinquent if unpaid 30 days after date of invoice. When the charge becomes delinquent, penalties may accrue according to the standards established in this Code. 
(b)  Any invoice outstanding and unpaid after 90 days shall be cause for immediate initiation of permit revocation proceedings or immediate suspension of the permit. 
(c)  Payment of a charge is required irrespective of whether the permittee is disputing the charge with the City Manager and/or is seeking judicial review. The City shall refund the full amount of any payment which has been successfully appealed. 
(d)  The City at its discretion may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies for the collection of unpaid fees and charges. Pursuit of one remedy does not preclude the pursuit of any other remedies until the total fines and penalties owed by a person under this article have been collected. 
(Code 1975, § 21-49; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3)  
Secs. 34-192—34-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 34-221. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Authorized inspector means the City Manager and persons designated by and under his or her instruction and supervision who are assigned to investigate compliance and detect violations of this article. 
Co-permittee means the County of Orange, the Orange County Flood Control District, and/or any one of the 31 municipalities, including the City of La Palma, which are responsible for compliance with the terms of the NPDES permit. 
DAMP means the Orange County Drainage Area Management Plan, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
Development project guidance means DAMP Chapter VII and the Appendix thereto, entitled Best Management Practices for New Development Including Nonresidential Construction Projects. 
Discharge means any release, spill, leak, pump, flow, escape, leaching (including subsurface migration or deposition to groundwater), dumping or disposal of any liquid, semi-solid or solid substance. 
Discharge exception means the group of activities not restricted or prohibited by this article, including only: 
(1)  Discharges composed entirely of stormwater, discharges covered under current EPA or Regional Water Quality Control Board issued NPDES permits, or other waivers, permits or approvals granted by an appropriate government agency; 
(2)  Discharges to the stormwater drainage system from potable water line flushing, firefighting activities, landscape irrigation systems, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, and de minimis groundwater infiltration to the stormwater drainage system (from leaks in joints or connections or cracks in water drainage pipes or conveyance systems); 
(3)  Discharges from potable water sources such as passive foundation drains, air conditioning condensation and other building roof runoff, agricultural irrigation water runoff, water from crawlspace pumps, passive footing drains, lawn watering, noncommercial vehicle washing at residences, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, public street wash waters when related to cleaning and maintenance by, or on behalf of, the City, the County of Orange, or the Orange County Flood Control District; and 
(4)  Discharges authorized pursuant to federal or State laws or regulations. The discharge exception shall not include discharges resulting from active groundwater dewatering systems. 
Domestic sewage exception means discharges which are exceptions to this article and excluded from the definition of "prohibited discharge," as defined herein, including only discharges composed entirely of accidental spills of untreated sanitary wastes (commonly called domestic sewage) and other wastes, but limited solely to wastes that are controlled by and are within publicly owned wastewater treatment system collection facilities immediately prior to the accidental spill. 
Enforcing attorney means the City Attorney or District Attorney as applicable and his or her designee, which counsel is authorized to take enforcement action as described herein. 
EPA means the Environmental Protection Agency of the United States. 
Hearing officer means the City Manager, or his or her designee, who shall preside at the administrative hearings authorized by this article and issue final decisions on the matters raised therein. 
Illicit connection means any manmade conveyance or drainage system, pipeline, conduit, inlet or outlet, through which the discharge of any pollutant to the stormwater drainage system occurs or may occur. The term "illicit connection" shall not include legal nonconforming connections or connections to the stormwater drainage system that are hereinafter authorized by the agency with jurisdiction over the system at the location at which the connection is made. 
Invoice for costs means the actual costs and expenses of the City, including but not limited to administrative overhead, salaries, and other expenses recoverable under State law, incurred during any inspection conducted pursuant to section 34-224, where a notice of noncompliance, administrative compliance order or other enforcement option under section 34-225 is utilized to obtain compliance with this article. 
Legal nonconforming connection means connections to the stormwater drainage system existing as of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived that were in compliance with all federal, State, and local rules, regulations, statutes and administrative requirements in effect at the time the connection was established, including but not limited to any discharge permitted pursuant to the terms and conditions of an individual discharge permit issued pursuant to the Industrial Waste Ordinance, County Ordinance No. 703. 
New development means all public and private residential (whether single-family, multi-unit or planned unit development), industrial, commercial, retail and other nonresidential construction projects, or mass grading for future construction, for which either a discretionary land use approval, grading permit, building permit or safety permit is required. 
NPDES permit means the municipal discharge permits issued by the Santa Ana Regional Water Quality Control Board and entitled Waste Discharge Requirements for the County of Orange, Orange County Flood Control District and the Incorporated Cities of Orange County Within the Santa Ana Region Storm Water Runoff Management Program (Areawide Urban Storm Water Runoff), Orange County Order No. 90-71 (NPDES No. CA 8000180) (the "Santa Ana Regional Board Permit"). The Santa Ana Regional Board NPDES permit shall be referred to hereinafter as the "NPDES permit." 
Person means any natural person as well as any corporation, partnership, government entity or subdivision, trust, estate, cooperative association, joint venture, business entity, or other similar entity, or the agent, employee, or representative of any of the above. 
Pollutant means the following liquid, solid or semi-solid substances, or combination thereof: 
(1)  Artificial materials, chips or pieces of natural or manmade materials such as floatable plastics, wood, or metal shavings; 
(2)  Household waste such as trash, paper, plastics, lawn clippings, and yard wastes; animal fecal materials; excessive pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; used oil and fluids from vehicles, lawn mowers, and other common household equipment; 
(3)  Metals, such as cadmium, lead, zinc, copper, silver, nickel, chromium, and non-metals, such as phosphorus and arsenic; 
(4)  Petroleum hydrocarbons such as fuels, lubricants, surfactants, waste oils, solvents, coolants, and grease; 
(5)  Excessive eroded soils, sediment, and particulate materials; 
(6)  Animal wastes such as discharge from confinement facilities, kennels, pens, and recreational facilities, including, stables, show facilities, or polo fields; 
(7)  Substances having characteristics such as a pH less than 6.5 or greater than 8.5, or unusual coloration, or turbidity, or excessive levels of fecal coliform, fecal streptococcus or enterococcus; 
(8)  Waste materials and wastewater generated on construction sites and by construction activities such as painting, staining; use of sealants, glues, limes; excessive pesticides, fertilizers or herbicides; use of wood preservatives and solvents; disturbance of asbestos fibers, paint flakes, or stucco fragments; application of oils, lubricants, hydraulic, radiator, or battery fluids; construction equipment washing, concrete pouring and cleanup wash water, or use of concrete detergents; steam cleaning or sand blasting residues; use of chemical degreasing or diluting agents; and super chlorinated water generated by potable water line flushing; 
(9)  Materials causing an increase in biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand, or total organic carbon; 
(10)  Materials which contain base/neutral or acid extractible organic compounds; 
(11)  Those pollutants defined in title 33 USC 1362(6) of the Federal Clean Water Act (33 USCA 1251 et seq.); 
(12)  Any other constituent or material that may interfere with or adversely affect the beneficial uses of the receiving waters, flora or fauna of the State. 
The term "pollutant" shall not include uncontaminated stormwater, potable water, or reclaimed water generated by a lawfully permitted water treatment facility. 
Private property means any real property, irrespective of ownership, which is not open to the general public. 
Prohibited discharge. 
(1)  The term "prohibited discharge" means any discharge which is not composed entirely of stormwater and which contains any pollutant from public or private property to: 
a.  The stormwater drainage system; 
b.  Any upstream flow, which is tributary to the stormwater drainage system; 
c.  Any groundwater, river, stream, creek, wash or dry weather arroyo, wetlands area, marsh, coastal slough; or 
d.  Any coastal harbor, bay, or the Pacific Ocean. 
(2)  The term "prohibited discharge" shall not include: 
a.  Discharges occurring in compliance with the NPDES permit; 
b.  Discharges occurring pursuant to a State General Permit or other Regional Water Quality Control Board, State Water Resources Control Board or U.S. Environmental Protection Agency issued NPDES permit or permit waiver; 
c.  Discharges authorized pursuant to a permit issued under section 34-226; 
d.  Discharges allowable under the discharge exception; or 
e.  Discharges allowable under the domestic sewage exception. 
Responsible party means the persons identified in and responsible for compliance with the provisions of a water quality management plan approved by the City. 
Significant redevelopment means the rehabilitation or reconstruction of public or private residential (whether single-family, multi-unit or planned unit development), industrial, commercial, retail, or other nonresidential structures, for which either a discretionary land use approval or grading permit, building permit or safety permit is required. 
State General Permit means either the State General Industrial Storm Water Permit or the State General Construction Permit and the terms and requirements of either or both. In the event the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency revokes the in-lieu permitting authority of the State Water Resources Control Board, then the term "State General Permit" shall also refer to any EPA administered stormwater control program for industrial and construction activities. 
Stormwater drainage system means street gutter, channel, storm drain, constructed drain, lined diversion structure, wash area, inlet, outlet or other facility, which is a part of or tributary to the countywide stormwater runoff system and owned, operated, maintained, or controlled by the County of Orange, the Orange County Flood Control District or any co-permittee City, and used for the purpose of collecting, storing, transporting, or disposing of stormwater. 
(Code 1975, § 25-73; Ord. No. 94-9) 
State Law reference— Orange County Flood Control Act, Water Code Appendix § 36-1 et seq.; Orange County Water District Act, Water Code Appendix § 40-1 et seq.  
Sec. 34-222. - Prohibition on illicit connections and prohibited discharges. 
(a)  No person shall: 
(1)  Construct, maintain, operate, and/or utilize any illicit connection; 
(2)  Cause, allow, or facilitate any prohibited discharge; 
(3)  Act, cause, permit, or suffer any agent, employee, or independent contractor to construct, maintain, operate, or utilize any illicit connection, or cause, allow, or facilitate any prohibited discharge. 
(b)  The prohibition against illicit connections shall apply irrespective of whether the illicit connection was established prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived; however, legal nonconforming connections shall not become illicit connections until the earlier of the following: 
(1)  For all structural improvements to property installed for the purpose of discharge to the stormwater conveyance system, the expiration of five years from the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived; 
(2)  For all nonstructural improvements to property (including natural surface flow patterns, depressions or channels traversing one or more properties) existing for the purpose of discharge to the stormwater conveyance system, the expiration of six months following delivery of a notice to the owner or occupant of the property, which states a legal nonconforming connection has been identified. The notice of a legal nonconforming connection shall state the date of expiration of use under this article. 
(c)  A civil or administrative violation of subsection (a) of this section shall occur irrespective of the negligence or intent of the violator to construct, maintain, operate, or utilize an illicit connection or to cause, allow or facilitate any prohibited discharge. 
(d)  If an authorized inspector reasonably determines that a discharge, which is otherwise within the discharge exception, may adversely affect the beneficial uses of receiving waters, then the authorized inspector may give written notice to the owner of the property or facility that the discharge exception shall not apply to the subject discharge following expiration of the 30-day period commencing upon delivery of the notice. Upon expiration of the 30-day period any such discharge shall constitute a violation of subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  The owner or occupant of property on which a legal nonconforming connection exists may request an administrative hearing, pursuant to the procedures set forth in sections 34-225(a)(6) through (10), for an extension of the period allowed for continued use of the connection. A reasonable extension of use may be authorized by the City Manager or his or her designee upon consideration of the following factors: 
(1)  The potential adverse effects of the continued use of the connection upon the beneficial uses of receiving waters; 
(2)  The economic investment of the discharger in the legal nonconforming connection; and 
(3)  The financial effect upon the discharger of a termination of the legal nonconforming connection. 
(Code 1975, § 25-74; Ord. No. 94-9)  
Sec. 34-223. - Control of urban runoff. 
(a)  New development and significant redevelopment. 
(1)  All new development and significant redevelopment within the City of La Palma shall be undertaken in accordance with: 
a.  A water quality management plan, which shall be prepared in accordance with the development project guidance; and 
b.  Any conditions and requirements established by the City, which are reasonably related to the reduction or elimination of pollutants in stormwater runoff from the project site. 
(2)  Prior to the issuance by the City of a grading permit, building permit, and/or safety permit for any new development or significant redevelopment, the property owner shall submit to and obtain the approval of the City Building Department or Community Services Department of a water quality management plan. If the new development or significant redevelopment will be approved without application for a grading permit, building permit or safety permit, the property owner shall submit to and obtain the approval of the City Building Department or Community Services Department of a water quality management plan prior to the issuance of a discretionary land use approval or, at the City's discretion, prior to recordation of a subdivision map. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the foregoing subsections (a) and (b) of this section, a water quality management plan shall not be required for construction, modifications, changes or improvements to one single-family detached residence, or townhomes and/or condominiums within a single building, unless the City Community Services Department or Building Department determines that the construction may result in the discharge of significant levels of a pollutant into a tributary to the stormwater drainage system. 
(4)  Compliance with the conditions and requirements of a water quality management plan shall not exempt any person from the requirement to independently comply with each provision of this article. 
(5)  If the City Community Services Department or Building Department determines that the project will have a de minimis impact on the quality of stormwater runoff, then it may issue a written waiver of the requirement for preparation and approval of a water quality management plan. 
(6)  Each water quality management plan shall name a responsible party for the project. 
(7)  The owner of a new development or significant redevelopment project, their successors and assigns, and each named responsible party, shall implement and adhere to the terms, conditions, and requirements of the approved water quality management plan. Each failure by the owner of the property, their successors or assigns, or a named responsible party, to implement and adhere to the terms, conditions, and requirements of an approved water quality management plan shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(8)  The City Community Services Department or Building Department may require that the water quality management plan be recorded with the County recorder's office by the property owner. The signature of the owner of the property, any successive owner, or the named responsible party shall be sufficient for the recording of the plan or any revised plan and a signature on behalf of the City shall not be required for recordation. 
(b)  Cost recovery. The costs and expenses of the City Community Services Department or Building Department incurred in the review, approval or revision of any water quality management plan or in the approval or revision of any such plan shall be assessed to the property owner or responsible party and shall be due and payable to the City. The City Community Services Department or Building Department may elect to require a deposit of estimated costs and expenses, and the actual costs and expenses shall be deducted from the deposit, and the balance, if any, refunded to the property owner or responsible party. 
(c)  Litter control. No person shall discard any waste material, including but not limited to common household rubbish or garbage of any kind (whether generated or accumulated at a residence, business, or other location), upon any public or private property, whether occupied, open or vacant, including but not limited to any street, sidewalk, alley, right-of-way, open area, or point of entry to the stormwater drainage system. Every person occupying or having charge and control of private property on which a prohibited disposal of waste materials occurs shall cause the proper collection and disposal of same. A prohibited disposal of waste materials creates a danger to public health, safety and welfare, and otherwise threatens the environment, surface waters and groundwater; therefore, any owner or occupant of private property who fails to remove waste material within a reasonable time may be charged with creating a nuisance upon the property. 
(Code 1975, § 25-75; Ord. No. 94-9)  
Sec. 34-224. - Inspections. 
(a)  Right to inspect. Except where exigent circumstances require immediate entry, prior to commencing any inspection as hereinbelow authorized, an authorized inspector shall obtain either the consent of the owner or occupant of the private property or shall obtain an administrative inspection warrant or criminal search warrant. 
(b)  Entry to inspect. An authorized inspector may enter private property to investigate the source of any discharge to any public street, inlet, gutter, storm drain, or the stormwater drainage system located within the jurisdiction of the City of La Palma. 
(c)  Compliance assessments. An authorized inspector may inspect private property for the purpose of verifying compliance with this article, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Identifying products produced, processes conducted, chemicals used, and materials stored on or contained within the property; 
(2)  Identifying points of discharge of all wastewater, process water systems, and pollutants; 
(3)  Investigating the natural slope at the location, including drainage patterns and manmade conveyance systems; 
(4)  Establishing the location of all points of discharge from the private property, whether by surface runoff or through a storm drain system; 
(5)  Locating any illicit connection or the source of prohibited discharge; 
(6)  Evaluating compliance with any water quality management plan; 
(7)  Evaluating compliance with any permit issued pursuant to section 34-226; and 
(8)  Investigating the condition of any legal nonconforming connection. 
(d)  Portable equipment. For purposes of verifying compliance with this article, an authorized inspector may inspect any vehicle, truck, trailer, tank truck, or other mobile equipment. 
(e)  Records review. An authorized inspector may inspect all records of the owner or occupant of private property relating to chemicals or processes presently or previously occurring on-site, including material and/or chemical inventories, facilities maps or schematics and diagrams, material safety data sheets, hazardous waste manifests, business plans, pollution prevention plans, State General Permits, stormwater pollution prevention plans, monitoring program plans and any other records relating to illicit connections, prohibited discharges, a legal nonconforming connection or any other source of contribution or potential contribution of pollutants to the stormwater drainage system. 
(f)  Sample and test. An authorized inspector may inspect, sample and test any area runoff, soils area (including groundwater testing), process discharge, materials within any waste storage area (including any container contents), and/or treatment system discharge for the purpose of determining the potential for contribution of pollutants to the stormwater drainage system. An authorized inspector may investigate the integrity of all storm drain and sanitary sewer systems, any legal nonconforming connection or other pipelines on the property using appropriate tests, including but not limited to smoke and dye tests or video surveys. An authorized inspector may take photographs or video tape, make measurements or drawings, and create any other record reasonably necessary to document conditions on the property. 
(g)  Monitoring. An authorized inspector may erect and maintain monitoring devices for the purpose of measuring any discharge or potential source of discharge to the stormwater drainage system. 
(h)  Test results. The owner or occupant of property subject to inspection shall, on submission of a written request, receive copies of all monitoring and test results conducted by an authorized inspector. 
(Code 1975, § 25-76; Ord. No. 94-9)  
Sec. 34-225. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. 
(1)  Notice of noncompliance. An authorized inspector may deliver to the owner or occupant of any private property, or to any person responsible for an illicit connection or prohibited discharge a notice of noncompliance. The notice of noncompliance shall be delivered in accordance with subsection (a)(5) of this section. 
a.  The notice of noncompliance shall identify the provisions of this article, the applicable water quality management plan or the permit which has been violated. The notice of noncompliance shall state that continued noncompliance may result in additional enforcement actions against the owner, occupant and/or person. 
b.  The notice of noncompliance shall state a compliance date that must be met by the owner, occupant and/or person; provided, however, that the compliance date may not exceed 90 days unless the authorized inspector extends the compliance deadline an additional 90 days where good cause exists for the extension. 
(2)  Administrative compliance orders. 
a.  An authorized inspector may issue an administrative compliance order. The administrative compliance order shall be delivered in accordance with subsection (a)(5) of this section. The administrative compliance order may be issued to: 
1.  The owner or occupant of any private property requiring abatement of conditions on the property that cause or may cause a prohibited discharge or an illicit connection in violation of this article; 
2.  The owner of private property or a responsible party subject to the requirements of any water quality management plan to ensure implementation of and adherence to the terms, conditions and requirements of the plan; and/or 
3.  A permittee subject to the requirements of any permit issued pursuant to section 34-226 to ensure compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of the permit; 
4.  Any person responsible for an illicit connection or prohibited discharge. 
b.  The administrative compliance order may include the following terms and requirements: 
1.  Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as reasonably necessary to prevent threatened or future unauthorized discharges, including but not limited to the threat of a prohibited discharge from any pond, pit, well, surface impoundment, holding, or storage area; 
2.  Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as reasonably necessary to discontinue any illicit connection; 
3.  Specific requirements for containment, cleanup, removal, storage, installation of overhead covering, or proper disposal of any pollutant having the potential to contact stormwater runoff; 
4.  Any other terms or requirements reasonably calculated to prevent continued or threatened violations of this article, including, but not limited to requirements for compliance with best management practices guidance documents promulgated by any federal, State of California, or regional agency; 
5.  Any other terms or requirements reasonably calculated to achieve full compliance with the terms, conditions, and requirements of any water quality management plan, or permit issued pursuant hereto. 
(3)  Cease and desist orders. 
a.  An authorized inspector may issue a cease and desist order. A cease and desist order shall be delivered in accordance with subsection (a)(5) of this section. A cease and desist order may direct the owner or occupant of any private property and/or other person responsible for a violation of this article to: 
1.  Immediately discontinue any illicit connection, or prohibited discharge to the stormwater drainage system; 
2.  Immediately contain or divert any flow of water off the property, where the flow is occurring in violation of any provision of this article; 
3.  Immediately discontinue any other violation of this article; 
4.  Clean up the area affected by the violation. 
b.  An authorized inspector may direct by cease and desist order that the owner of any private property, the responsible party subject to the terms and conditions of any water quality management plan, or any permittee under any permit issued pursuant to section 34-226, immediately cease any activity not in compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of the applicable water quality management plan or permit. 
(4)  Recovery of costs. An authorized inspector may deliver to the owner or occupant of any private property, any permittee or any responsible party, or any other person who becomes subject to a notice of noncompliance or administrative order, an invoice for costs. An invoice for costs shall be delivered in accordance with subsection (a)(5) of this section. An invoice for costs shall be immediately due and payable to the City for the actual costs incurred by the City. If any owner or occupant, permittee or responsible party, or any other person fails to either pay the invoice for costs or appeal successfully the invoice for costs in accordance with subsection (a)(5) of this section, then the enforcing attorney may institute collection proceedings. 
(5)  Delivery of notice. Any notice of noncompliance, administrative compliance order, cease and desist order, or invoice of costs to be delivered pursuant to the requirements of this article shall be subject to the following: 
a.  The notice shall state that the recipient has a right to appeal the matter as set forth in subsections (a)(6) through (10) of this section. 
b.  Delivery shall be deemed complete upon: 
1.  Personal service to the recipient; 
2.  Deposit in the U.S. mail, postage prepaid for first class delivery; or 
3.  Facsimile service with confirmation of receipt. 
c.  Where the recipient of notice is the owner of the property, the address for notice shall be the address from the most recently issued equalized assessment roll for the property or as otherwise appears in the current records of the City. 
d.  Where the owner or occupant of any private property cannot be located after the reasonable efforts of the authorized inspector, a notice of noncompliance or cease and desist order shall be deemed delivered after posting on the property for a period of ten business days. 
(6)  Administrative hearing for notices of noncompliance, administrative compliance orders, invoices for costs and adverse determinations. Except as set forth in section (a)(8) of this section, any person receiving a notice of noncompliance, administrative compliance order, a notice of legal nonconforming connection, an invoice for costs, or any person who is subject to any adverse determination made pursuant to this article, may appeal the matter by requesting an administrative hearing. 
(7)  Request for administrative hearing. Any person appealing a notice of noncompliance, an administrative compliance order, a notice of legal nonconforming connection, an invoice for costs or an adverse determination shall, within 30 days of receipt thereof, file a written request for an administrative hearing, accompanied by an administrative hearing fee as established by resolution of the City Council, with the office of the City Clerk, with a copy of the request for administrative hearing mailed on the date of filing to the City Manager. Thereafter, a hearing on the matter shall be held before the hearing officer within 45 business days of the date of filing of the written request unless, in the reasonable discretion of the hearing officer and pursuant to a written request by the appealing party, a continuance of the hearing is granted. 
(8)  Administrative hearing for cease and desist orders and emergency abatement actions. An administrative hearing on the issuance of a cease and desist order or following an emergency abatement action shall be held within five business days following the issuance of the order or the action of abatement, unless the hearing (or the time requirement for the hearing) is waived in writing by the party subject to the cease and desist order or the emergency abatement. A request for an administrative hearing shall not be required from the person subject to the cease and desist order or the emergency abatement action. 
(9)  Hearing proceedings. An authorized inspector shall appear in support of the notice, order, determination, invoice for costs or emergency abatement action, and the appealing party shall appear in support of withdrawal of the notice, order, determination, invoice for costs, or in opposition to the emergency abatement action. The City shall have the burden of supporting any enforcement or other action by a preponderance of the evidence. Each party shall have the right to present testimony and other documentary evidence as necessary for explanation of the case. 
(10)  Final decision and appeal. The final written decision of the hearing officer shall issue within ten business days of the conclusion of the hearing and shall be delivered by first-class mail, postage prepaid, to the appealing party. The final decision shall include notice that any legal challenge to the final decision shall be made pursuant to the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure §§ 1094.5 and 1094.6 and shall be commenced within 90 days following issuance of the final decision. The administrative hearing fee paid by a prevailing party in an appeal shall be refunded. Notwithstanding this subsection (a)(10) of this section, the final decision of the hearing officer in any proceeding determining the validity of a cease and desist order or following an emergency abatement action shall be mailed within five business days following the conclusion of the hearing. 
(11)  City abatement. In the event the owner of private property, the operator of a facility, a permittee, a responsible party, or any other person fails to comply with any provision of a compliance schedule issued pursuant to this article, the authorized inspector may request the enforcing attorney to obtain an abatement warrant or other appropriate judicial authorization to enter the property, abate the condition and restore the area. Any costs incurred by the City in obtaining and carrying out an abatement warrant or other judicial authorization may be recovered pursuant to subsection (b)(4) of this section. 
(b)  Nuisance. Any condition in violation of the prohibitions of this article, including but not limited to the maintenance or use of any illicit connection or the occurrence of any prohibited discharge, constitutes a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance pursuant to Government Code § 38771. 
(1)  Court order to enjoin or abate. At the request of the City Manager, the enforcing attorney may seek a court order to enjoin and/or abate the nuisance. 
(2)  Notice to owner and occupant. Prior to seeking any court order to enjoin or abate a nuisance or threatened nuisance, the City Manager shall provide notice of the proposed injunction or abatement to the owner and occupant, if any, of the property where the nuisance or threatened nuisance is occurring. 
(3)  Emergency abatement. In the event the nuisance constitutes an imminent danger to public safety or the environment, the City Manager or his or her designee may enter the property from which the nuisance emanates, abate the nuisance and restore any property affected by the nuisance, without prior notice to or consent from the owner or occupant thereof and without judicial warrant. An imminent danger shall include, but is not limited to, exigent circumstances created by the dispersal of pollutants, where the same presents a significant and immediate threat to the public safety or the environment. Notwithstanding the authority of the City to conduct an emergency abatement action, an administrative hearing pursuant to subsection (a)(8) of this section shall follow the abatement action. 
(4)  Reimbursement of costs. All costs incurred by the City in responding to any nuisance, all administrative expenses, all legal expenses, including attorneys' fees, and all other expenses recoverable under State law, shall be recoverable from the person creating, causing, committing or maintaining the nuisance. 
(5)  Nuisance lien. All costs shall become a lien against the property from which the nuisance emanated and a personal obligation against the owner thereof in accordance with Government Code §§ 38773.1 and 38773.5. The owner of record of the property subject to any lien shall be given notice of the lien prior to recording as required by Government Code § 38773.1. At the direction of the City Manager, the enforcing attorney is authorized to collect nuisance abatement costs or enforce a nuisance lien in an action brought for a money judgment or by delivery to the County assessor of a special assessment against the property in accord with the conditions and requirements of Government Code § 38773.5. 
(c)  Criminal sanctions. 
(1)  Prosecutor. The enforcing attorney may act on the request of the City Manager to pursue enforcement actions in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Infractions. Any person who may otherwise be charged with a misdemeanor under this article may be charged, at the discretion of the prosecuting attorney, with an infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00 for a first violation, $200.00 for a second violation, and a fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation occurring within one year. 
(3)  Misdemeanors. Any person who negligently or knowingly violates any provision of this article, undertakes to conceal any violation of this article, continues any violation of this article after notice thereof, or violates the terms, conditions and requirements of any water quality management plan or permit, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or both. 
(d)  Consecutive violations. Each day in which a violation occurs and each separate failure to comply with either a separate provision of this article, an administrative compliance order, a cease and desist order, an applicable water quality management plan, or a permit issued pursuant to this article, shall constitute a separate violation of this article punishable by fines or sentences issued in accordance herewith. 
(e)  Non-exclusive remedies. Each and every remedy available for the enforcement of this article shall be non-exclusive and it is within the discretion of the authorized inspector or enforcing attorney to seek cumulative remedies, except that multiple monetary fines or penalties shall not be available for any single violation of this article. 
(f)  Citations. Pursuant to Penal Code § 836.5, the authorized inspector shall have the authority to cause the arrest of any person committing a violation of this article. The person shall be released and issued a citation to appear before a magistrate in accordance with Penal Code §§ 853.5, 853.6, and 853.9, unless the person demands to be taken before a magistrate. Following issuance of any citation the authorized inspector shall refer the matter to the enforcing attorney. Each citation to appear shall state the name and address of the violator, the provisions of this article violated, and the time and place of appearance before the court, which shall be at least ten business days after the date of violation. The person cited shall sign the citation giving his or her written promise to appear as stated therein. If the person cited fails to appear, the enforcing attorney may request issuance of a warrant for the arrest of the person cited. 
(g)  Violations of other laws. Any person acting in violation of this article also may be acting in violation of the Federal Clean Water Act (33 USCA § 1251 et seq.) or the State Porter-Cologne Act (Water Code § 13000 et seq.) and other laws and also may be subject to sanctions including civil liability. Accordingly, the enforcing attorney is authorized to file a citizen suit pursuant to Federal Clean Water Act (33 USCA 1251 et seq.), seeking penalties, damages, and orders compelling compliance, and other appropriate relief. The enforcing attorney may notify EPA, the Santa Ana or San Diego Regional Water Quality Control Boards, or any other appropriate State or local agency, of any alleged violation of this article. 
(h)  Injunctions. At the request of the City Manager, the enforcing attorney may cause the filing, in a court of competent jurisdiction, of a civil action seeking an injunction against any threatened or continuing noncompliance with the provisions of this article. 
(i)  Order for reimbursement. Any temporary, preliminary or permanent injunction issued pursuant hereto may include an order for reimbursement to the City of all costs incurred in enforcing this article, including costs of inspection, investigation and monitoring, the costs of abatement undertaken at the expense of the City, costs relating to restoration of the environment, all legal expenses, including attorneys' fees, and all other expenses as may be authorized by law. 
(j)  Other civil remedies. 
(1)  The City Manager upon direction from the City Council may cause the enforcing attorney to file an action for civil damages in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking recovery of: 
a.  All costs incurred in enforcement of the article, including but not limited to costs relating to investigation, sampling, monitoring, inspection, administrative expenses, all other expenses as authorized by law, and consequential damages; 
b.  All costs incurred in mitigating harm to the environment or reducing the threat to human health; and 
c.  Damages for irreparable harm to the environment. 
(2)  The enforcing attorney is authorized to file actions for civil damages resulting from any trespass or nuisance occurring on public land or to the stormwater drainage system from any violation of this article where the same has caused damage, contamination or harm to the environment, public property or the stormwater drainage system. 
(3)  The remedies available to the City (County of Orange, Orange County Flood Control District) pursuant to the provisions of this article shall not limit the right of the City to seek any other remedy that may be available by law. 
(Code 1975, § 25-77; Ord. No. 94-9)  
Sec. 34-226. - Permits. 
(a)  Discharge permit procedure. 
(1)  Permit. On application of the owner of private property or the operator of any facility, which property or facility is not otherwise subject to the requirements of a State General Permit, the City Manager, or his or her designee, may issue a permit authorizing the release of non-stormwater discharges to the stormwater drainage system if: 
a.  The discharge of material or constituents is reasonably necessary for the conduct of otherwise legal activities on the property; and 
b.  The discharge will not cause a nuisance, impair the beneficial uses of receiving waters, or cause any reduction in established water quality standards. 
(2)  Application. The applicant shall provide all information requested by the City Manager for review and consideration of the application, including but not limited to specific detail as to the activities to be conducted on the property, plans and specifications for facilities located on the property, identification of equipment or processes to be used on-site and other information as may be requested in order to determine the constituents, and quantities thereof, which may be discharged if permission is granted. 
(3)  Permit issuance. The permit shall be granted or denied by the City Manager or his or her designated representative, no later than 60 business days following the completion and acceptance of the application as determined by the City Manager. The applicant shall be notified in person or by first-class mail, postage prepaid, of the action taken. 
(4)  Permit conditions. The permit may include terms, conditions, and requirements to ensure compliance with the objectives of this article and as necessary to protect the receiving waters, including but not limited to: 
a.  Identification of the discharge location on the property and the location at which the discharge will enter the stormwater drainage system; 
b.  Identification of the constituents and quantities thereof to be discharged into the stormwater drainage system; 
c.  Specification of pollution prevention techniques and structural or nonstructural control requirements as reasonably necessary to prevent the occurrence of potential discharges in violation of this article; 
d.  Requirements for self-monitoring of any discharge; 
e.  Requirements for submission of documents or data, such as technical reports, production data, discharge reports, self-monitoring reports, and waste manifests; and 
f.  Consent by the applicant to a general inspection of the facility upon 24 hours notice; 
g.  Other terms and conditions appropriate to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article and the protection of receiving waters, including requirements for compliance with best management practices guidance documents approved by any federal, State of California or regional agency. 
(5)  General permit. In the discretion of the City Manager, the permit may, in accordance with the conditions identified in subsection (a)(4) of this section, be prepared as a general permit applicable to a specific category of activities. If a general permit is issued, any person intending to discharge within the scope of the authorization provided by the general permit may do so by filing an application to discharge with the City Manager. No discharge within the scope of the general permit shall occur until such application is so filed. Notwithstanding the foregoing in this subsection (a)(5) of this section, the City Manager, in his or her discretion, may eliminate the requirement that an application for a general permit be filed for any specific activity for which a general permit has been issued. 
(6)  Permit fees. The permission to discharge shall be conditioned upon the applicant's payment of the City's costs, in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by resolution of the City Council, as follows: 
a.  For individually issued permits, the costs of reviewing the permit application, preparing and issuing the permit, and the costs reasonably related to administrating this permit program; 
b.  For general permits, the costs of reviewing the permit application, that portion of the costs of preparing the general permit which is reasonably attributable to the permittee's application for the general permit, and the costs reasonably related to administering the general permit program. 
(b)  Permit suspension, revocation or modification. 
(1)  The City Manager may suspend or revoke any permit when it is determined that: 
a.  The permittee has violated any term, condition or requirement of the permit or any applicable provision of this article; or 
b.  The permittee's discharge or the circumstances under which the discharge occurs have changed so that it is no longer appropriate to except the discharge from the prohibitions on prohibited discharge contained within this article; or 
c.  The permittee fails to comply with any schedule for compliance issued pursuant to this article; or 
d.  Any regulatory agency, including EPA or a Regional Water Quality Control Board having jurisdiction over the discharge, notifies the City that the discharge should be terminated. 
(2)  The City Manager may modify any permit when it is determined that: 
a.  Federal or State law requirements have changed in a manner that necessitates a change in the permit; or 
b.  The permittee's discharge or the circumstances under which the discharge occurs have changed so that it is appropriate to modify the permit's terms, conditions or requirements; or 
c.  A change to the permit is necessary to ensure compliance with the objectives of this article or to protect the quality of receiving waters. 
The permittee shall be informed of any change in the permit terms and conditions at least 45 business days prior to the effective date of the modified permit. 
(3)  The determination that a permit shall be denied, suspended, revoked, or modified may be appealed by a permittee pursuant to the same procedures applicable to appeal of an administrative compliance order hereunder. In the absence of a judicial order to the contrary, the permittee may continue to discharge pending issuance of the final administrative decision by the hearing officer. 
(c)  Permit enforcement. Any violation of the terms, conditions, and requirements of any permit issued by the City Manager shall constitute a violation of this article and subject the violator to the administrative, civil and criminal remedies available under this article. 
(d)  Limited permittee rights. Permits issued under this article are for the person or entity identified therein as the "permittee" only, and authorize the specific operation at the specific location identified in the permit. The issuance of a permit does not vest the permittee with a continuing right to discharge. 
(e)  Transfer of permits. No permit may be transferred to allow: 
(1)  A discharge to the stormwater drainage system at a location other than the location stated in the original permit; or 
(2)  A discharge by a person or entity other than the permittee named in the permit, provided however, that the City may approve a transfer if written approval is obtained, in advance, from the City Manager. 
(Code 1975, § 25-78; Ord. No. 94-9)  
Sec. 34-227. - Interagency cooperation. 
(a)  The Federal Clean Water Act authorizes the NPDES permit for the Orange County area and provides for cooperative implementation of requirements and interagency allocations of program resources and burdens. The coordinated effort of the County and the co-permittees is reflected in the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit Implementation Agreement Santa Ana Region, the NPDES permit, the DAMP, this article, the Appendices to the DAMP, including, but not limited to, the Development Project Guidance, monitoring and data collection cooperation and regular emergency and spill response planning activities. 
(b)  The City may elect to contract for the services of any public agency or private enterprise to carry out the planning approvals, inspections, permits and enforcement authorized by this article. 
(Code 1975, § 25-79; Ord. No. 94-9)  
Sec. 34-228. - Compliance with article. 
Full compliance by any person or entity with the provisions of this article shall not preclude the need to comply with other local, State or federal statutory or regulatory requirements, which may be required for the control of the discharge of pollutants into stormwater and/or the protection of stormwater quality. 
(Code 1975, § 25-80; Ord. No. 94-9)  
Chapter 36 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of City over streets, sidewalks and other public places, Government Code § 40401, Streets and Highways Code § 1800 et seq.; Improvement Act of 1911, Streets and Highways Code § 5000 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 36-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Excavation means any operation in which earth, rock, or other material in the ground is moved, removed, or otherwise displaced by means of tools, equipment, or explosives in any of the following ways: boring, grading, trenching, digging, ditching, drilling, augering, tunneling, scraping, cable or pipe plowing and driving, or any other way. 
Public agency means the United States or any department or agency thereof, the State or any department or agency thereof, the County, municipal corporation, or public district. 
(Code 1975, § 22-1; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-2. - Depositing rubbish in streets. 
(a)  No person shall place, deposit or dump, or cause to be placed, deposited or dumped any paper, cans, bottles, ash tray accumulations, refuse, trash, or rubbish in, upon or along any public or private street, drainage ditch, parkway or public property within the City except in front of or adjacent to property owned or occupied by him or her, and then only when such things are contained in a substantial box, carton, or container for the purpose of having the same collected by rubbish collectors. 
(b)  No person shall sweep, push, propel, or deposit, or cause to be swept, pushed, propelled, or deposited in any gutter or street in the City the accumulation of paper, metal foil, trash, or rubbish that accumulates upon public or private sidewalks or parkways. 
(Code 1975, § 22-2; Ord. No. 88, § 1, 2)  
Sec. 36-3. - Allowing flow of irrigation of wastewater to run onto street. 
It shall be and is hereby declared unlawful for any person to run, or to allow irrigation or wastewater of any type to run or flow upon any public highway or right-of-way thereof within the City. 
(Code 1975, § 22-3; Ord. No. 38, § 1)  
Sec. 36-4. - Allowing flow of mud or water on highway. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, drain, wash, allow to run, or divert into or upon any public road, highway, street, or alley, drainage ditch, storm drain, or flood control channel owned or controlled by any public agency within the City, any water, mud, sand, oil, or petroleum. 
(Code 1975, § 22-4; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-5. - Areas defined within rights-of-way for residential streets. 
There are within the rights-of-way for all residential streets in the City the following defined areas: 
(1)  Traveled way: That portion of the right-of-way located between the curb faces. 
(2)  Sidewalk area: That portion of the right-of-way designed and improved for pedestrian use from the curb face to a distance of five feet away from the traveled way. 
(Code 1975, § 22-5; Ord. No. 135, § 1; Ord. No. 158, § 1)  
Sec. 36-6. - Traveled way. 
The traveled way shall be used only for vehicular and pedestrian use as authorized by law. 
(Code 1975, § 22-6; Ord. No. 87-02, § 7; Ord. No. 135, § 2)  
Sec. 36-7. - Sidewalk area. 
The sidewalk area shall be used only for pedestrian walkway, utility or other uses authorized by the City. 
(Code 1975, § 22-7; Ord. No. 135, § 3)  
Sec. 36-8. - Certain trees in certain areas prohibited. 
The owners of lots or portions of lots fronting upon any portion of a public sidewalk shall maintain the landscaping on their property in such a manner as will not obstruct, damage, or otherwise interfere with the public convenience and use of public sidewalks. Upon the request of the Community Services Director, the owners shall trim or prune their landscaping so as to eliminate any obstructions of the public sidewalk, and repair any damage to the public sidewalk which may have occurred as a result of landscaping improvements upon the owner's property. In the event the owner fails to undertake such trimming or pruning or repair, the Community Services Director shall initiate proceedings pursuant to the provisions of Streets and Highways Code § 5000 et seq. to cause the removal of the obstructions or repair of the sidewalk to be undertaken at the expense of the owner, or, in the alternative, the Community Services Director may initiate proceedings under chapter 26 of the La Palma City Code for the abatement of the condition existing on the owner's property and repair of the sidewalk as a public nuisance. 
(Code 1975, § 22-8; Ord. No. 135, § 6; Ord. No. 158, § 4; Ord. No. 85-20, § 1)  
Sec. 36-9. - Painting of house numbers on curbs. 
No person shall print, illuminate, or in any way affix the numbers of a property address to the curb in front of the property without first obtaining a permit from the Community Services Department. Permits shall be issued only to local nonprofit community groups and the Community Services Director shall determine if a permit applicant constitutes a local nonprofit community group. The permittee shall comply with all the requirements of the permit. 
(Code 1975, § 22-8.1; Ord. No. 88-01, § 3)  
Secs. 36-10—36-36. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Regional Notification Center System for protection of underground systems, Government Code § 4216 et seq. 
 
Sec. 36-37. - Permits required. 
A person who digs up, plows up, removes, or breaks the earth, soil, stone, pavement, or other surface of, or otherwise injures, any highway; or any person who makes or causes to be made any excavation or constructs, places upon, maintains, or leaves any material or any obstruction or impediment to travel in or upon a highway; or any person who installs or maintains or causes to be installed or maintained any tank, pipes, conduit, duct, tunnel, boring or any other installation of any nature across, upon, in, or under any highway shall be guilty of a misdemeanor unless such person has first obtained a permit to do so. 
(Code 1975, § 22-9; Ord. No. 19, § 1) 
State Law reference— Digging, taking, or carrying away any earth, soil, or stone from land in any City street, alley, avenue, or park, without the license of the City council is a misdemeanor trespass, Penal Code § 602.  
Sec. 36-38. - Applications—Content. 
Applications for permits required by this article shall be filed in writing with the City Engineer. The application shall be signed by the applicant and shall state: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The location, purpose, extent, and nature of the proposed excavation, fill, or obstruction; 
(3)  The time during which it is estimated that the excavation, fill, or obstruction will exist; 
(4)  That the applicant agrees to indemnify, defend, and save the City, its authorized agents, officers, representatives, and employees, harmless from and against any and all penalties, liabilities, or annoyances or loss resulting from claims or court action and arising out of any accident, loss, or damage to persons or property happening or occurring as a proximate result of any work undertaken under the permit granted pursuant to the application; 
(5)  That the applicant agrees that if any tank, pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, or other installation of any nature or kind placed in the excavation, fill, or obstruction for which the permit is issued shall at any time in the future interfere with the use, repair, improvement, widening, or change of grade of the highway, the applicant, or his or her successors or assigns, within ten days after the receipt of a written notice from the City Engineer to do so, will at his or her own expense either remove such tank, pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, or other installation, or, subject to the approval of the City Engineer, relocate them to a site which may be designated by the Engineer; 
(6)  Any additional information which the City Engineer may deem necessary for the proper disposition of the application. 
(Code 1975, § 22-10; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-39. - Same—Accompanying material. 
(a)  The application shall be accompanied by a plat showing the location, dimension, nature of the proposed excavation, obstruction, or fill, and any other detail which the City Engineer may require. 
(b)  Each applicant for permit shall submit to the City Engineer satisfactory proof of the applicant's right to use the highway for the purpose set forth in the application. 
(Code 1975, § 22-11; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-40. - Same—Changes required by engineer. 
The City Engineer may require such changes in the application respecting the location, dimensions, character, or number of the proposed excavations, fills or obstructions as in his or her opinion may be necessary for the protection of the highway, the prevention of undue interference with traffic, or to assure the safety of persons using the highway. 
(Code 1975, § 22-12; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-41. - Same—Fee. 
Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by an issuance fee to be established by resolution of the City Council, no part of which shall be returned to the applicant regardless of the action taken on the application. 
(Code 1975, § 22-13; Ord. No. 19, § 1; Ord. No. 78-16, § 1; Ord. No. 82-11, § 1)  
Sec. 36-42. - Same—Deadline for filing. 
Applications for permits hereunder shall be filed not less than two business days when the City offices are open before the work is proposed to be done. 
(Code 1975, § 22-14; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-43. - Permit—Issuance. 
If the applicant for a permit complies in all respects with this article and with all other applicable laws, rules, regulations or ordinances of the City and of any other public agency and pays the fees and deposits required by this article, the City Engineer shall approve the application and issue the permit. 
(Code 1975, § 22-15; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-44. - Same—Conditions. 
The permit shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The permit must be kept at the site of the work and be shown on demand to any authorized representative of the City or any law enforcement officer. 
(2)  The permit shall authorize work to be performed only as to such portion of the highway over which the City has jurisdiction. 
(3)  All work shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of this article and of all applicable laws, rules and regulations of the City and any other public agency and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. 
(4)  The permit shall be nontransferable. 
(5)  The City Engineer may cancel the permit unless the work authorized therein is commenced within 60 days of the issuance of the permit and thereafter, in the opinion of the City Engineer, is diligently prosecuted to completion. Cancellation may be effected by giving written notice thereof by sending such notice to the applicant by ordinary mail to the address shown on the application. 
(6)  The City Engineer may, either at the time of the issuance of the permit or at any time thereafter until the completion of the work, prescribe such additional conditions as he or she may deem reasonably necessary for the protection of the highway or for the prevention of undue interference with traffic or to ensure the safety of persons using the highway. 
(7)  No work shall be permitted until marking of current utility locations is completed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. 
(Code 1975, § 22-16; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-45. - Compliance with terms. 
A permittee shall not make or cause to be made any excavation; or construct, place upon, maintain, or leave any obstruction or impediment to travel; or pile or place any material in or upon the highway; or install or maintain, or cause to be installed or maintained, any tank, pipe, conduit, duct, or tunnel in, upon or under the surface of any highway, at any location, or in any manner other than that described in the application as approved by the City Engineer, or contrary to the terms of the permit or of any provision of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 22-17; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-46. - Election by Engineer to do resurfacing. 
The City Engineer may, either at the time of the issuance of the permit or at any time thereafter, elect to do the resurfacing or repair of any highway surface removed or damaged by the proposed excavation or obstruction pursuant to a permit hereunder. 
(Code 1975, § 22-18; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-47. - Deposit to cover resurfacing costs. 
Unless the City Engineer shall have authorized the applicant to perform the resurfacing or repair of the surface of a highway which may be removed in part or damaged by the proposed excavation, fill or obstruction, each applicant shall, in addition to the issuance fee, deposit with the City Engineer the estimated cost of resurfacing or repairing the surface of the highway which may be damaged or destroyed. The special deposit required hereunder shall be in no event less than the amount established by Council resolution. The estimated costs, as well as the costs of restoration or repair, shall recover actual expenses, but in no event less than the amount established by Council resolution. 
(Code 1975, § 22-19; Ord. No. 19, § 1; Ord. No. 78-16, § 2; Ord. No. 82-11, § 2)  
Sec. 36-48. - General deposit. 
In lieu of making the special deposit required by section 36-47, the applicant may make and maintain with the City Engineer a general deposit in an amount estimated by the City Engineer to be sufficient to pay for the cost of permit issuance fees and expected repairs occasioned by future excavations or obstructions. 
(Code 1975, § 22-20; Ord. No. 19, § 1; Ord. No. 82-11, § 3)  
Sec. 36-49. - Bond in lieu of deposits. 
In lieu of the special deposit required by section 36-47 or of making the general deposit as provided for in section 36-48, the applicant may, with the approval of the City Engineer, furnish a surety bond conforming in all respects to the requirements for surety bonds set forth in section 36-53, except that the condition of such bond shall be that the applicant will pay to the City upon demand all fees, costs or charges incurred by or due to the City under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 22-21; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-50. - Exemption of public agencies. 
If the United States, this State, this City, any County, any municipal corporation, school district or other public body files with the City Engineer a written guarantee of payment of all costs for which they may become liable to the City hereunder, then no deposit for costs shall be required from such persons. No permit issuance fee shall be required of any public agency entitled to exemption therefrom pursuant to Government Code § 6103. 
(Code 1975, § 22-22; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-51. - Deposit deductions and refunds. 
(a)  The City shall deduct from any deposit made or maintained by the permittee: 
(1)  The permit issuance fee if it has not otherwise been paid; 
(2)  The cost to the City of refilling any excavation or removing any obstruction; 
(3)  The cost to the City of resurfacing or repairing the highway, calculated pursuant to the provisions of section 36-47 or 36-48; 
(4)  The cost to the City of any additional repairs, as provided in section 36-60; 
(5)  The cost of any inspection by the City Engineer made necessary by the failure of the permittee to comply with any provisions of this article or the terms or conditions of the permit. 
(b)  After making the deductions specified in subsection (a) of this section, the City shall, unless the deductions are made from a general deposit, refund any balance to the applicant in the same manner as provided by law for the repayment of trust moneys. The balance remaining in the general deposit shall be retained by the City Engineer and applied to issuance fees and costs in connection with any future excavations, fills or obstructions pursuant to a permit issued hereunder unless a written demand for the balance is made by the depositor, in which event any balance therein shall be refunded in the same manner as provided by law for the repayment of trust moneys. 
(Code 1975, § 22-23; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-52. - Payment of deficiency. 
(a)  If any deposit is insufficient to pay all fees and costs herein provided, the permittee shall upon demand pay to the City Engineer an amount equal to the deficiency. 
(b)  If a permittee, upon demand, fails to pay any deficiency as provided in subsection (a) of this section or fails to pay any other costs due the City hereunder for which no deposit has been made, the City may recover the same by an action in any court of competent jurisdiction. Until such deficiency or cost is paid in full, a permit hereunder shall not thereafter be issued to such permittee. 
(Code 1975, § 22-24; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-53. - Surety bond. 
In cases where the applicant is granted authority to make the repairs required under this article, the City Engineer may, in order to ensure the completion of such repairs in a satisfactory manner, require the applicant to furnish a surety bond. Such bond shall be executed by a surety company authorized to transact business in the State and shall be in an amount equal to twice the estimated cost of performing the work authorized; provided, that the minimum amount of such bond shall not be less than $1,000.00 nor the minimum period less than one year. The condition of such bond shall be that the applicant will perform the work authorized by any permit issued pursuant to this article in a good and workmanlike manner and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. 
(Code 1975, § 22-25; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-54. - Traveled ways to remain open. 
Trenching for installation across any intersecting roadway open to traffic shall be progressive. Not more than one-half of the width of a traveled way shall be disturbed at one time and the remaining width shall be kept open to traffic by bridging or backfilling. 
(Code 1975, § 22-26; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-55. - Placement of pipes and conduits. 
All pipes and conduits laid parallel to the roadway shall be placed at least five feet from the edge of the pavement or graded traveled roadway, unless otherwise authorized in writing by the City Engineer. The shallowest portion of any pipeline or other facility shall be installed not less than 30 inches below the roadway surface. 
(Code 1975, § 22-27; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-56. - General work regulations. 
(a)  In backfilling, there shall be no flooding of the trench within the upper 24 inches. All loose backfill shall be dampened and well tamped with a pneumatic tamper or in any other workmanlike manner satisfactory to the City Engineer to reduce all settlement to a minimum. 
(b)  All excavated material shall be cast away from the improved portion of the highway. After the work has been completed all excess material, including excess excavation, shall be removed from the right-of-way and the roadway left in a neat and orderly condition. 
(c)  All roadside drainage ditches shall be restored to a true grade and the intake and outlet ends of all culverts shall be left free from all excess material and debris. 
(d)  All approaches to private driveways and intersecting roads and streets shall be kept open to traffic at all times. 
(e)  Clay and earth which adhere to the paved surface of the roadway shall be removed by hand scraping, washing, and sweeping, or by any other method which will leave a clean non-skid surface without impairing, injuring or loosening the surface. 
(f)  All muck or mud resulting from water or any leaky condition will be removed and the excavation backfilled with the compactable material which is the most effective. 
(Code 1975, § 22-28; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-57. - Safety precautions. 
The permittee shall take adequate precautions for the protection of the traveling public. Barricades, red lights, and warning signs, together with flagmen where necessary, shall be maintained until the excavation is refilled, the obstruction removed, and the roadway is safe for the use of the traveling public. The City Engineer may specify, as a condition of the issuance of the permit, the safety devices or measures to be used by the permittee; but the failure of the City Engineer to so specify the devices or measures to be used shall not relieve the permittee of his or her obligation hereunder. 
(Code 1975, § 22-29; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-58. - Restoration—Highway. 
(a)  Immediately upon completion of the work necessitating the excavation or obstruction authorized by any permit issued pursuant to this article, the permittee shall promptly and in a workmanlike manner refill the excavation or remove the obstruction to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. Upon completion of the refilling of the excavation and the removal of the obstruction, the permittee shall promptly resurface or repair any portion of the highway surface removed or damaged by the excavation or obstruction. 
(b)  All restoration work performed pursuant to the requirements of this section shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of this Article, the City's Standard Specifications for Excavation Restoration developed by and kept on file in the office of the City Engineer, and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. 
(c)  If any permittee fails or refuses to perform the restoration work required by this section, the City Engineer may do so and the applicant shall promptly reimburse the City for the cost thereof. 
(Code 1975, § 22-30; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-59. - Same—Pavement. 
(a)  Upon completion of the refilling of the excavation and the removal of the obstruction, the permittee shall promptly resurface or repair any portion of the highway surface removed or damaged by the excavation or obstruction, or the City Engineer may, at his or her option, elect to do the resurfacing or repairing himself or herself. 
(b)  Where the pavement or surface has been removed, the permittee shall replace it to a thickness one inch greater than that of the surrounding pavement or surface and in no event to a thickness less than two inches. Where a treated or modified subgrade or surface has been removed or destroyed, the permittee shall replace it to a thickness of not less than that of the surrounding or adjacent subgrade or surface, unless the City Engineer orders that the repair of such treated or modified subgrade or surface shall be made by an oil and rock mixture, in which case the thickness shall not be less than one-half the thickness of the treated or modified surface or subgrade. 
(Code 1975, § 22-31; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-60. - Cost of resurfacing. 
(a)  If after the refilling of an excavation the permittee fails or refuses to resurface or repair that portion of the surface of the highway damaged by him or her, or if the City Engineer has elected to do such resurfacing or repairing, the City Engineer shall do so, and the permittee shall be charged with the cost thereof computed by the City Engineer as provided in sections 36-47 and 36-48, whichever in the judgment of the City Engineer will most fairly compensate the City for the expenses incurred by it. 
(b)  If at any time subsequent to the first repair of a surface of a highway damaged or destroyed by any excavation or obstruction in such highway, it becomes necessary again to repair such surface due to settlement or any other cause directly attributable to such excavation or obstruction, the permittee shall pay to the City the cost of such additional repairs made by the City Engineer. The cost shall be computed by the City Engineer as provided in section 36-47 or 36-48, whichever in the judgment of the City Engineer will most fairly compensate the City for the expenses incurred by it. 
(Code 1975, § 22-32; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-61. - Emergencies. 
Nothing in this article prohibits any person from making such excavation as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property when such necessity arises during such hours as the offices of the City are closed, if the person making such excavation obtains a permit therefor within one day after the offices of the City Engineer are opened subsequent to the making of such excavation. 
(Code 1975, § 22-33; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Secs. 36-62—36-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR 
 
Sec. 36-81. - Repair and maintenance of driveways. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Driveway area means any approach to or from the street over and upon the gutter, curb, parking or sidewalk, to permit vehicular traffic into the abutting property. 
Lot means a parcel of real property or any portion of a parcel of real property located within the City. 
Maintain and repair includes, but is not limited to, maintenance and repair of surfaces including the grinding, removal and replacement of driveways or portions thereof, removal of weeds and/or debris, tree root pruning and installing root barriers, and the trimming of shrubs and/or ground cover. 
(b)  The owner of a lot adjacent to or fronting on any portion of a driveway area between the property line of the lot and the street line, and any person in possession of such a lot by virtue of any license, permit, agreement or right, shall maintain and repair the driveway area at his or her sole cost and expense. The driveway area shall be maintained in a safe condition that is not dangerous to property or to persons using the driveway area in a reasonable manner and that does not interfere with the public convenience in the use of any sidewalk area that crosses the driveway area. 
(c)  All maintenance and repair activities under this section shall conform to the requirements of this Code. Additionally, a person shall obtain all permits and/or approvals required by this Code or any other law or regulation prior to taking any action pursuant to this section for which a permit or other approval is required. 
(d)  Any person required to maintain and repair a driveway area pursuant to this section shall owe a duty to members of the public to keep and maintain such driveway area in a safe and non-dangerous condition. If, as a result of the failure to maintain and repair a driveway area in a non-dangerous condition as required by this section, any person suffers injury or damage to person or property, the property owner and/or possessor shall be liable to such person for the resulting damages or injury. 
(e)  When any portion of a driveway area is out of repair or pending reconstruction and in condition to endanger persons or property or in condition to interfere with the public convenience in the use any sidewalk that crosses the driveway area, the Community Services Director shall notify, in accordance with the provisions of Streets and Highways Code § 5600 et seq., the owner or person in possession of the property fronting on that driveway area to repair the driveway area. Failure to maintain and repair a driveway area in accordance with the requirements of this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated pursuant to Streets and Highways Code § 5600 et seq. This remedy is in addition to any other remedy provided by law, including the penalties applicable for violation of any provision of this Code.  
Sec. 36-82. - Applications-Content. 
(a)  An applicant for a permit shall state in his or her application: 
(1)  The location, nature, and extent of the work to be performed; 
(2)  The materials to be used; 
(3)  Such other information, including plans and specifications as the City Engineer may require. 
(b)  On each application, the applicant shall sign a statement that he or she agrees to preserve and save harmless the City and each officer and employee thereof from any liability or responsibility for any accident, loss or damage to persons or property happening or occurring as a proximate result of any work undertaken under any permit granted pursuant to the application. 
(Code 1975, § 22-35; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-83. - Same—Fee. 
Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by an issuance fee in an amount to be established by resolution of the City Council no part of which shall be returned to the applicant regardless of the action taken on the application. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this article, no permit and no fees shall be required for improvements constructed pursuant to subdivision improvement agreements. 
(Code 1975, § 22-36; Ord. No. 19, § 1; Ord. No. 78-16, § 3; Ord. No. 82-11, § 4)  
Sec. 36-84. - Same—Accompanying plans. 
If, in the opinion of the City Engineer, the work proposed to be done requires the making of plans or in the setting of stakes, or both, the City Engineer may require the application to be accompanied by the necessary plans, which plans shall be prepared by a competent engineer. 
(Code 1975, § 22-37; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-85. - Same—Changes by Engineer. 
The City Engineer may require such changes in the application respecting the location, dimensions, method, or manner of construction, installation or repair as may reasonably be necessary for the protection of the highway, the prevention of undue interference with traffic, or to ensure the safety of persons using the highway. 
(Code 1975, § 22-38; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-86. - Permit issuance. 
If the applicant complies with every provision of this chapter and with all applicable provisions of all other chapters and statutes, the City Engineer shall issue to the applicant a written permit to perform the work set forth in the application. 
(Code 1975, § 22-39; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-87. - Deposits. 
(a)  An applicant for a permit to construct any work shall, in addition to the issuance fee, pay for engineering and inspection services in the amounts established by resolution of the City Council. 
(b)  For all other work, an applicant for a permit to construct any work shall pay an amount estimated by the City Engineer to be equal to twice the actual cost of all necessary engineering and inspection costs. 
(Code 1975, § 22-40; Ord. No. 19, § 1; Ord. No. 78-16, § 4; Ord. No. 82-11, § 5)  
Sec. 36-88. - Public agencies exempt. 
If the United States, this State, any County, any municipal corporation, school district, or other public agency files with the City Engineer a written guarantee of payment of all costs for which it may become liable to the City hereunder, then no deposit for costs shall be required from such person. No permit issuance fee shall be required of any public agency entitled to exemption therefrom pursuant to Government Code § 6103. 
(Code 1975, § 22-41; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-89. - Deductions and refunds. 
The engineering and inspection costs provided for in section 36-87(a) shall be presumed to be the actual cost. A refund thereof shall not be made to any applicant unless: 
(1)  The inspection and/or engineering fee was erroneously collected, in which case the entire amount may be returned; or 
(2)  Unless the driveway approach, sidewalk or culvert is not constructed or installed, in which event the applicant may apply for a refund of the unused fees less a handling charge to be established by resolution of the City Council. This application shall be made in writing and not later than 90 days from the issuance date of the permit for the work. Where the deposit has been made under section 36-87(b), the City Engineer shall deduct from the deposit the actual cost to the City of the required engineering and inspection, plus the cost of overhead, not to exceed 20 percent of the total cost. If such cost, including overhead, is less than the deposit, the difference shall be refunded to the person making the deposit in the same manner as provided by law for the repayment of trust moneys. Nothing in this section shall be construed as authorizing the repayment of any issuance fees. 
(Code 1975, § 22-42; Ord. No. 19, § 1; Ord. No. 78-16, § 5; Ord. No. 82-11, § 6)  
Sec. 36-90. - Payment of deficiency. 
If the cost exceeds the deposit, the permittee shall, upon demand by the City Engineer, pay the excess to the City. If payment is not made within 15 days after such demand, the City may recover the amount in any court of competent jurisdiction. Until such amount is paid, further permits under this article shall not be issued to such permittee. 
(Code 1975, § 22-43; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-91. - Deadline for commencing work. 
(a)  Every permittee shall commence the proposed work within 60 days after the granting of the permit, and thereafter prosecute the work to completion in a diligent and workmanlike manner. 
(b)  The City Engineer may cancel the permit unless the work authorized therein is commenced within 60 days of the issuance of the permit and thereafter, in the opinion of the City Engineer, is diligently prosecuted to completion. Cancellation may be effected by giving written notice thereof by sending such notice to the applicant by ordinary mail to the address shown on the application. 
(c)  When a permit has been cancelled by the City Engineer, the permittee may obtain a refund of any unused fee paid or deposited. No part of any issuance fee may be refunded. 
(Code 1975, § 22-44; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-92. - Inspection of residential driveways. 
(a)  The City Engineer shall issue, without any inspection fee or deposit therefor, a permit to construct a residential driveway if the applicant for such permit pays the issuance fee and submits satisfactory evidence to the City Engineer that the driveway will be inspected by a competent governmental agency other than an agency of the City, and such governmental agency will furnish a certificate to the effect that that portion of the driveway installed in the public right-of-way was inspected and complies with minimum standards required by the City. 
(b)  If an applicant receives a permit pursuant to the provisions in subsection (a) of this section, and such governmental agency fails to make the inspection or fails to file the certificate therein provided for within four months of the issuance of the permit, the City Engineer may himself/herself inspect the driveway, in which case the applicant shall pay to the City Engineer the actual cost of such inspection. 
(Code 1975, § 22-45; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-93. - Application for inspection; waiver of inspection. 
(a)  Not less than 18 hours before the commencement of any work covered by this article, the permittee shall apply in writing to the City Engineer for an inspector therefor. In such application, he or she shall specify the day and hour when, and the location at which, the work will be commenced. 
(b)  The City Engineer may waive inspection if he or she believes such inspection is not necessary for the best interests of the City. 
(Code 1975, § 22-46; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-94. - Relocation of structures. 
If so required by the City Engineer, the permittee shall make proper arrangements for, and bear the cost of relocating any structure, public utility, tree or shrub where such relocation is made necessary by the proposed work for which a permit is issued. The City Engineer may elect to do the necessary relocation, in which event the permittee shall deposit with the City Engineer a sum of money estimated by the City Engineer to be sufficient to pay the cost thereof. After such relocation, a refund shall be paid to, or a deficiency shall be paid by, the permittee as provided in section 36-89. 
(Code 1975, § 22-47; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-95. - Lines and grades; specifications of culverts. 
Before a permittee performs any work covered by this article, he or she shall obtain from the City Engineer the lines and grades thereof. Where the work proposed to be done consists of or includes the laying or constructing of a culvert in or upon a highway, the City Engineer may specify in any permit issued therefor the size, type of material and the grade of the culvert. 
(Code 1975, § 22-48; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-96. - Performance of work in accordance with plans and City standards. 
The permittee shall perform all work in accordance with the plans, if plans are made, and specifications referred to in the permit, and to the satisfaction of and under the supervision of the City Engineer. In addition, all work to be performed in, upon or across highways shall be in accordance with and conform to the City standards. 
(Code 1975, § 22-49; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-97. - Setting of additional stakes. 
If any stakes set for any work covered by this article are disturbed or destroyed and it becomes necessary to set additional stakes, the permittee shall deposit a sum estimated by the City Engineer to be sufficient to pay the cost of setting such additional stakes. After such setting, a refund shall be paid to, or a deficiency shall be paid by the permittee as provided in section 36-89. 
(Code 1975, § 22-50; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-98. - Safety precautions. 
A permittee shall place and maintain adequate warning devices such as warning signs, lighted barricades, reflectorized delineators at each end of work and throughout the work area as directed by the City Engineer, not more than 25 feet apart along the side thereof, unless otherwise directed by the City Engineer, continuously until the work is entirely completed. The signs, barricades and delineators shall comply with the latest edition of the manual entitled, "Manual of Warning, Signs, Lights and Devices" for use in performance of work upon highways as prepared by the State Department of Transportation, and to the requirements of the City Engineer and the permittee take such other precautions as may be necessary for the protection of the traveling public. The City Engineer may, as a condition of the issuance of a permit, specify such additional safety devices or measures to be used by the permittee, but the failure of the City Engineer to so specify the devices or measures shall not relieve the permittee of his or her obligation hereunder. 
(Code 1975, § 22-51; Ord. No. 19, § 1; Ord. No. 78-16, § 6)  
Sec. 36-99. - Removal of debris and material. 
A permittee shall remove all material and debris: 
(1)  Where new work is covered with earth, in accordance with the terms of the specifications attached to the permit; 
(2)  In all other cases within three days. 
(Code 1975, § 22-52; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-100. - Performance of work in accordance with permit. 
Every person who performs any work covered by this article in an amount greater than, or in any way different from or contrary to, the terms of any permit issued therefor, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1975, § 22-53; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Sec. 36-101. - Completion of work and acceptance by City. 
(a)  Whenever any permittee has completed any work for which a permit has been granted, he or she shall so notify the City Engineer in writing. 
(b)  If the City Engineer by survey or by inspection, or by both, ascertains that the work has been completed according to the requirements of the permit issued therefor, and of all of the provisions of this article, he or she shall issue, if requested so to do by the permittee, a certificate of acceptance which shall contain a statement of the location, nature, and extent of the work performed under the permit. 
(Code 1975, § 22-54; Ord. No. 19, § 1)  
Secs. 36-102—36-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ABANDONED WELLS AND OTHER EXCAVATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of City to declare and abate abandoned excavations from property, Government Code § 50230 et seq.; requirements for and penalties for failing to cover, fill or fence abandoned excavations or wells on private land, Health and Safety Code § 115700 et seq. 
 
Sec. 36-131. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoning and ceasing to use any well or other excavation means any abandoned mining shaft, pit, well, septic tank, cesspool, or other abandoned excavation dangerous to persons legally on the premises where the abandoned excavation is located or to minors under the age of 12 years; and any facilities or equipment used in connection with drilling oil, mining or exploring for minerals or diatomaceous soil which have been abandoned and which constitute a hazard endangering the safety and welfare of the people. 
Other excavations means any opening in the surface of the ground which, in the opinion of the City Engineer or the Department of Public Works, may tend to cause contamination of the subsurface water. 
Wells means any type of pits or holes sunk in the ground for the purpose of reaching or attempting to reach or obtain a supply of water. 
(Code 1975, § 22-55; Ord. No. 136, § 1)  
Sec. 36-132. - Notification of impending work. 
Every person before proceeding to perform any work or activity described in this article shall inform the City Engineer, at least 24 hours in advance of commencing such work. All work performed under this article shall be inspected and approved by an inspector from the City Community Services Department. 
(Code 1975, § 22-56; Ord. No. 136, § 5)  
Sec. 36-133. - Decontamination. 
Every person upon abandoning and ceasing to use any well or other excavation shall immediately place a decontaminating agent consisting of dry calcium hypochlorite containing 70 percent available chlorine into the well or other excavation so abandoned. One pound of the aforementioned decontaminating agent shall be placed in the well or other excavation per inch of diameter of the casing of the well or other excavation or per inch of diameter of the hole as originally excavated if there is no casing or if the casing is removed. Failure to use any well or other excavation for a period of 12 months shall constitute a presumption that the owner of such well or other excavation intended to abandon such well or other excavation. 
(Code 1975, § 22-57; Ord. No. 136, § 2)  
Sec. 36-134. - Filling. 
(a)  After placing the aforementioned decontaminating agent in the well or other excavation being abandoned, every person shall thereupon fill such abandoned well or other excavation with the following mixture containing the following proportions of materials: 3,000 pounds of clean sand for each 376 pounds of cement as well as 40 gallons of water and four to six percent of entrained air. 
(b)  The City Engineer may designate alternative substances and materials to be used in particular situations of abandonment of any well or other excavation. In no case shall gravel be used to backfill any well or other excavation. Any abandoned well or other excavation shall be filled to a depth of 7½ feet below the future grade level as such level shall be determined by the City Engineer. If casing is to be removed from such well or other excavation, such casing shall be removed as the well or other excavation is filled with the aforementioned mixture or alternative substances. At no time shall the bottom of the casing being removed be at a distance greater than 20 feet above the level of the substance being used to fill the well or other excavation. 
(Code 1975, § 22-58; Ord. No. 136, § 3)  
Sec. 36-135. - Capping or sealing. 
(a)  Every person, upon abandoning and ceasing to use any well or other excavation, shall, after filling such well or other excavation as provided in section 36-133, cap or seal such well or other excavation in such a manner that the top of such cap or seal shall stand at a depth of 4½ feet below the future grade level as such level shall be determined by the City Engineer. Any existing surface base of the well or other excavation shall be removed in addition to any casing of such well or other excavation to a depth of 5½ feet. 
(b)  The aforementioned cap or seal shall consist of concrete as defined by the City Engineer. Such cap or seal shall be at least 18 inches in thickness and shall extend at least 18 inches in all directions from the circumference of the casing or from the circumference of the well or other excavation. In addition, such concrete shall be placed in the well or other excavation to a depth of at least 18 inches from the bottom of such cap or seal. If the casing of the well or other excavation lying below the top of the aforementioned cap or seal is not removed, such casing shall extend six inches upward from the bottom of such cap or seal. The top three inches of such casing shall be flared or bent outward. At least one steel rod not less than three-quarters of an inch in diameter shall be driven through the casing at a depth of 12 inches below the bottom of such cap or seal. Each end of such steel rod shall extend at least two inches beyond the outside diameter of the casing. 
(Code 1975, § 22-59; Ord. No. 136, § 4)  
Sec. 36-136. - Abatement of nuisance. 
In addition to the penalties provided in sections 2-350 through 2-352, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be summarily abated as such by the City and each day such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Code 1975, § 22-60; Ord. No. 136, § 6)  
Secs. 36-137—36-155. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— City authority to implement conversion of overhead utility lines to underground utility districts, Government Code § 38793; uniform procedures for special assessment proceedings regarding conversion of existing overhead electric and communication facilities to underground locations, Streets and Highways Code § 5896.1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 36-156. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commission means the Public Utilities Commission of the State. 
Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, cross arms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments, and appurtenances located above ground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service. 
Underground utility district or district means that area in the City within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of section 36-159. 
Utility means all persons or entities supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. 
(Code 1975, § 24-1; Ord. No. 180, § 1)  
Sec. 36-157. - Hearings by City Council. 
The City Council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety, or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the City and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service. The City Clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least ten days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing, all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the City Council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1975, § 24-2; Ord. No. 180, § 2)  
Sec. 36-158. - Report by City Engineer. 
Prior to holding such public hearing, the City Engineer shall consult with all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for submission at such hearing containing, among other information, the extent of such utilities' participation and the estimate of the total costs to the City and affected property owners. Such report shall also contain an estimate of the time required to complete such underground installation and removal of overhead facilities. 
(Code 1975, § 24-3; Ord. No. 180, § 3)  
Sec. 36-159. - Determination by City Council. 
If, after any such public hearing, the City Council finds that the public necessity, health, safety, or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the City Council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials, and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. 
(Code 1975, § 24-4; Ord. No. 180, § 4)  
Sec. 36-160. - Violations. 
Whenever the City Council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures therein as provided in section 36-159, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when such overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution; except as such overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in section 36-155, and for such reasonable time required to remove such facilities after such work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Code 1975, § 24-5; Ord. No. 180, § 5)  
Sec. 36-161. - Exceptions. 
This article and any resolution adopted pursuant to section 36-159 shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply to the following types of facilities: 
(1)  Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. 
(2)  Poles, or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting. 
(3)  Overhead wires, exclusive of supporting structures, crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been, or are connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited. 
(4)  Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts. 
(5)  Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street. 
(6)  Antennae associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services. 
(7)  Equipment appurtenant to underground such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts. 
(8)  Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. 
(Code 1975, § 24-6; Ord. No. 180, § 7)  
Sec. 36-162. - Exceptions for emergency services. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period not to exceed ten days without the authority of the City Council in order to provide emergency service. The City Engineer may grant special permission on such terms as the City Engineer may deem appropriate in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures. 
(Code 1975, § 24-7; Ord. No. 180, § 6)  
Sec. 36-163. - Notice to property owners and utility companies. 
(a)  Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to section 36-159, the City Clerk shall notify all utilities and all persons owning real property within the district affected by such resolution. The City Clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to the applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission. 
(b)  Notification by the City Clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to section 36-159, together with a copy of this article, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. 
(Code 1975, § 24-8; Ord. No. 180, § 8)  
Sec. 36-164. - Responsibility—Utility companies. 
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to section 36-159, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors, and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the Commission. 
(Code 1975, § 24-9; Ord. No. 180, § 9)  
Sec. 36-165. - Same—Property owners. 
(a)  Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying, or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his or her property between the facilities referred to in section 36-164 and the termination facility on or within such building or structure being served, all in accordance with the applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission. 
(b)  In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting such property does not comply with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section within the time provided for in the resolution adopted pursuant to section 36-159, the City Engineer shall post written notice on the property being served and 30 days thereafter shall have the authority to authorize the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to such property. 
(Code 1975, § 24-10; Ord. No. 180, § 10)  
Sec. 36-166. - Responsibility of City. 
The City shall remove at its own expense all City-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove such poles within the time specified in the resolution adopted pursuant to section 36-159. 
(Code 1975, § 24-11; Ord. No. 180, § 11)  
Sec. 36-167. - Extension of time. 
In the event that any act required by this article or by a resolution adopted pursuant to section 36-159 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. 
(Code 1975, § 24-12; Ord. No. 180, § 12)  
Chapter 38 - TREES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Tree Planting Act of 1931, Health and Safety Code § 22000 et seq. 
 
Sec. 38-1. - Value of urban trees. 
(a)  Trees are recognized as a valued asset, providing a healthier and more beautiful environment in which to live. They provide oxygen, shade, aesthetics, and a priceless psychological counterpoint to the manmade, urban setting. Trees aid in preventing erosion, air, noise, and visual pollution. 
(b)  Trees are economically beneficial in attracting new industry, residents, and visitors. Healthy trees of the right size and species, growing in the right places, enhance the value and marketability of property, and promote the stability of desirable neighborhoods, thus helping to prevent the emergence of blighted areas and slum conditions. 
(Code 1975, § 23A-2; Ord. No. 89-07, § 2)  
Sec. 38-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City means the City of La Palma in the County of Orange, in the State of California. 
Committee means the tree committee, otherwise known as the La Palma Community Activities and Beautification Committee. 
Community Services Department means the designated department of the City under whose jurisdiction park, street, and public trees fall. 
Park means and includes any public parks having an individual name. 
Park trees means trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation in public parks or in public places, having individual names. 
Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind, including public utility and City department. 
Public place means and includes any other ground owned by or under jurisdiction of the City. 
Public trees means and includes all trees now or hereafter growing on any street, park, or any other public places. 
Street means the entire width of every public way or right-of-way when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
Street trees means trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, or ways within the City. 
(Code 1975, § 23A-3; Ord. No. 89-07, § 3)  
Sec. 38-3. - Establishment of a Tree Committee. 
(a)  There is hereby created and established a Tree Committee for the City which shall consist of the members of the Community Activities and Beautification Committee, who are residents of this City, and appointed by the City Council. 
(b)  The duties of the Tree Committee shall be as follows: 
(1)  To study the problems and determine the needs of the City in connection with its tree program. 
(2)  To recommend to the City Council the type and kind of trees to be planted upon such City streets or parts of City streets, parks, or public places. 
(3)  To assist the properly constituted officials of the City, as well as the Council and citizens of the City, in the dissemination of news and information regarding the protection, maintenance, removal, and planting of trees on public lands, and to make such recommendations from time to time to the City Council as to desirable legislation concerning the tree program and activities for the City. 
(4)  To provide meetings as necessary at which the subject of trees may be discussed by members of the committee, officials, City personnel, and all persons interested in the tree program. 
(Code 1975, § 23A-4; Ord. No. 89-07, § 4; Ord. No. 92-03)  
Sec. 38-4. - Authority of the Community Services Director. 
Under the direction of the City Manager, the Community Services Director shall: 
(1)  Have the responsibility of formulating a master street tree plan with the recommendations of the Tree Committee. The master street tree plan shall include the inventory of existing trees, and shall specify the species of trees to be protected, maintained, removed, and/or planted on each of the streets, parks, and other public places of the City. From and after the effective date of the master street tree plan, or any amendment thereof, all tree work shall conform thereto. 
(2)  Advise the Tree Committee of any amendment or addition to the master street plan at any time that circumstances make those amendments or additions advisable. 
(3)  Consider all existing and future utility and environmental factors when recommending the planting of a tree species or other tree work for each of the streets, parks, and other public places of the City. 
(4)  Have the authority and jurisdiction of regulating the protection, maintenance, removal, and planting of trees on streets, parks, and public places. 
(5)  Have the authority and duty to plant, trim, spray, preserve, and remove trees on streets, in parks, or in public places to ensure safety or preserve the symmetry and beauty of such areas. 
(6)  Have the authority and duty to order the trimming, preservation, or removal of trees upon private property when he or she shall find such action necessary to public safety or to prevent the spread of disease or insects to public trees and places. 
(7)  Have the authority and duty to supervise and inspect all work done under a permit issued in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
(8)  Have the authority to affix reasonable conditions to the granting of a permit in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
(9)  Have the responsibility of inventorying (and classifying as to location, species, size, condition, and evaluation) the existing trees on streets, parks, and other public places, as an integral part of the master street tree plan. This inventory shall be updated annually. 
(Code 1975, § 23A-5; Ord. No. 89-07, § 5) 
State Law reference— Authority of the tree board to remove any tree which appears dead and is liable to fall, is dangerous, or is an obstructions to public travel, whether or not the tree is on private property and overhangs onto public streets or grounds, Streets and Highways Code § 22060.  
Sec. 38-5. - Duties of private owners. 
(a)  Obstruction; trees pruned. It shall be the duty of any person or persons owning or occupying real property bordering on any street, park, or public place upon which property there may be trees, to prune such trees in such manner that they will not obstruct or shade the street lights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks, obstruct vision of traffic signs, or obstruct the view of any street intersection. The minimum clearance of any overhanging portion therefor shall be ten feet over sidewalks, and 12 feet over all streets except truck thoroughfares, which shall have a clearance of 16 feet. 
(1)  Notice to prune. Should any person or persons owning real property bordering on any street, park, or public property fail to prune trees as provided in this subsection, the Community Services Director shall order such person or persons, within three days after receipt of written notice, to so prune such trees. 
(2)  Order required. The order required herein shall be served by first class mail to the last known address of the property owner as delineated on the assessor's parcel map book. 
(3)  Failure to comply. When a person to whom an order is directed shall fail to comply within the specified time, it shall be lawful for the City to prune such trees and the cost may be assessed to the tree owner. 
(b)  Insects and diseases. The Community Services Director shall have the authority to direct private property owners to treat or remove a tree suffering from a transmittable disease or insect infestation when such tree is on private property but may affect the health of trees on public property. The owner of said tree shall be notified of the condition and recommended treatment in writing and shall be given a period of one week to instigate the treatment or removal. If not treated or removed within a period of one additional week, the Director shall cause the treatment or removal to be carried out and the cost may be assessed to the tree owner. 
(Code 1975, § 23A-6; Ord. No. 89-07, § 6)  
Sec. 38-6. - Abuse or mutilation of trees. 
(a)  Any person who intentionally: 
(1)  Damages, cuts, carves, removes, or transplants any public tree; 
(2)  Attaches any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters, or other contrivance to any public tree; 
(3)  Allows any gaseous, liquid, chemical, or solid substance that is harmful to such public trees to come in contact with them; or 
(4)  Sets fire or permits any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any public tree; 
shall be liable to penalties as specified in section 38-8. 
(b)  No person shall deposit, place, store, or maintain any stone, brick, sand, fill dirt, concrete, or other materials that may impede the free passage of water, air, and fertilizer to the roots of any public tree growing on any street, park, or other public place. 
(Code 1975, § 23A-7; Ord. No. 89-07, § 7) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Penal Code § 622.  
Sec. 38-7. - Moving large objects. 
No person shall move any building or other large object that may injure public trees, or parts thereof, without first having obtained the approval of the Community Services Director. 
(Code 1975, § 23A-10; Ord. No. 89-07, § 10)  
Sec. 38-8. - Violation and penalty. 
(a)  In addition to the general penalty provided for in this Code, any person violating this chapter shall replace any damaged tree, at his or her own expense, with a size and species recommended by the Community Services Director. 
(b)  Each tree affected by noncompliance with this chapter shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1975, § 23A-12; Ord. No. 89-07, § 12)  
Chapter 40 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— State preemption of local ordinances on matters covered Vehicle Code, Vehicle Code § 21; Rules of the Road, Vehicle Code § 21000 et seq.; powers of local authorities, Vehicle Code § 21100 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 40-1. - Clinging to moving vehicles. 
No person shall attach himself or herself with his or her hands, or catch onto, or hold onto with his or her hands or by other means any moving vehicle or train for the purpose of receiving motive power therefrom. 
(Code 1975, § 16-1; Ord. No. 70-8, § 8) 
State Law reference— Hitching rides on vehicles by bicycles and motorized bikes prohibited, Vehicle Code § 21203.  
Sec. 40-2. - Crosswalks. 
(a)  The City Traffic Engineer shall establish, designate, and maintain crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks, or lines upon the surface of the roadway at all intersections within the central traffic district and at such intersections outside such district, and at other places within or outside such district where the City Traffic Engineer determines that there is particular hazard to pedestrians crossing the roadway subject to the limitation contained in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalk shall be established in any block which is less than 400 feet in length, and such crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable at mid-block. 
(c)  The City Traffic Engineer may place signs at or adjacent to an intersection in respect to any crosswalk directing that pedestrians shall not cross except in the crosswalk so indicated. 
(Code 1975, § 16-3; Ord. No. 70-8, § 9)  
Sec. 40-3. - Bus zones. 
(a)  The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to establish bus zones opposite curb space for the loading and unloading of buses or common carriers of passengers and to determine the location thereof. 
(b)  Bus zones shall normally be established on the far side of an intersection. 
(Code 1975, § 16-4; Ord. No. 70-8, § 12)  
Secs. 40-4—40-26. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 40-27. - Traffic division—Establishment. 
There is hereby established in the Police Department of this City a Traffic Division to be under the control of an officer of police appointed by and directly responsible to the Police Chief. 
(Code 1975, § 16-5; Ord. No. 70-8, § 2)  
Sec. 40-28. - Same—Duties. 
It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division, with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the Police Department, to enforce the street traffic regulations of this City and all of the State vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this City, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate traffic accidents, and to cooperate with the City Traffic Engineer and other officers of the City in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon such division by this chapter and the traffic ordinances of this City. 
(Code 1975, § 16-6; Ord. No. 70-8, § 2)  
Sec. 40-29. - Traffic engineer—Designation. 
The office of City Traffic Engineer is hereby established. The City Engineer shall be the City Traffic Engineer and he or she shall exercise the powers and duties as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 16-9; Ord. No. 70-8, § 2)  
Sec. 40-30. - Same—Powers and duties; delegation of powers and duties to deputies. 
(a)  It shall be the general duty of the City Traffic Engineer: 
(1)  To determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices and signals; 
(2)  To conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures; 
(3)  To conduct engineering and traffic investigations of traffic conditions and to cooperate with other City officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions; and 
(4)  To carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of this City. 
(b)  Whenever, by the provisions of this chapter, a power is granted to the City Traffic Engineer or a duty imposed upon him or her, the power may be exercised or the duty performed by his or her deputy or by a person authorized in writing by him or her. 
(Code 1975, § 16-10; Ord. No. 70-8, § 2)  
Sec. 40-31. - Citizen advisory committee. 
[The] City Council may appoint an advisory committee consisting of citizens-at-large to make recommendations to the City Council related to the provisions of this chapter. See Section 44-480. 
(Code 1975, § 16-11; Ord. No. 73-1; Ord. No. 2017-01, § 4, 3-7-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-01, § 4, adopted March 7, 2017, amended § 40-31, to read as set out herein. Previously § 40-31 was titled "Traffic Safety Committee."  
Secs. 40-32—40-54. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local authority to place and maintain traffic signs, signals and other traffic control devices on streets and highways, Vehicle Code §§ 21351—21351.5. 
 
Sec. 40-55. - Authority of Traffic Engineer to install. 
(a)  The City Traffic Engineer shall have the power and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic control devices when and as required to make effective the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Whenever the Vehicle Code requires for the effectiveness of any provision thereof that traffic control devices be installed to give notice to the public of the application of such law, the City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to install or cause to be installed the necessary devices subject to any limitations, or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto. 
(c)  The City Traffic Engineer may also place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained such additional traffic control devices as he or she may deem necessary or proper to regulate traffic or guide or warn traffic, but he or she shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations and rules as set forth in this article or as may be determined by ordinance or resolution of the Council. 
(Code 1975, § 16-12; Ord. No. 70-8, § 4)  
Sec. 40-56. - Placement necessary for enforcement. 
No provision of the Vehicle Code or of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate legible signs are in place giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws. 
(Code 1975, § 16-13; Ord. No. 70-8, § 4) 
State Law reference— Signs required for certain local traffic laws provisions, Vehicle Code § 21103.  
Sec. 40-57. - Installation of signals. 
(a)  The City Traffic Engineer is hereby directed to install and maintain with City Council approval official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard. 
(b)  The City Traffic Engineer shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required by field investigation, traffic counts and other traffic information as may be pertinent and his or her determination therefrom shall be made in accordance with appropriate traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions. 
(c)  Whenever the City Traffic Engineer installs and maintains an official traffic signal at any intersection, he or she shall likewise erect and maintain at such intersection street name signs clearly visible to traffic approaching from all directions unless such street name signs have previously been placed and are maintained at any such intersection. 
(Code 1975, § 16-14; Ord. No. 70-8, § 4)  
Sec. 40-58. - Centerlines and lane lines. 
The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to mark centerlines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles, and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the highway. 
(Code 1975, § 16-15; Ord. No. 70-8, § 4)  
Sec. 40-59. - Certain distinctive roadway markings. 
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to place and maintain distinctive roadway markings, as described in the Vehicle Code, on those streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such markings or signs and markings. Such markings or signs and markings shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the State Department of Transportation pursuant to provisions of the Vehicle Code. 
(Code 1975, § 16-16; Ord. No. 70-8, § 4)  
Sec. 40-60. - Authorization to remove, relocate or discontinue. 
The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to remove, relocate, or discontinue the operation of any traffic control device, other than traffic signals, not specifically required by the Vehicle Code or this chapter whenever he or she shall determine in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist. 
(Code 1975, § 16-17; Ord. No. 70-8, § 4)  
Sec. 40-61. - Determination of hours of operation or effect. 
The City Traffic Engineer shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 16-18; Ord. No. 70-8, § 4)  
Sec. 40-62. - Authority to place turning markers. 
(a)  The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to place official traffic control devices within or adjacent to intersections and indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections; and the City Traffic Engineer is authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right or left hand turns, and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. 
(b)  The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(Code 1975, § 16-19; Ord. No. 70-8, § 5)  
Sec. 40-63. - Designation of one-way streets and alleys. 
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this City designates any one-way street or alley, the City Traffic Engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1975, § 16-20; Ord. No. 70-8, § 6)  
Sec. 40-64. - Signs prohibiting right turns on stop signals. 
The City Traffic Engineer shall post appropriate signs where he or she determines that the making of right turns against a traffic signal "stop" indication would seriously interfere with the safe and orderly flow of traffic. 
(Code 1975, § 16-21; Ord. No. 70-8, § 5)  
Sec. 40-65. - Regulation of timing of traffic signals. 
The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections, and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1975, § 16-22; Ord. No. 70-8, § 15)  
Sec. 40-66. - Stop signs. 
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this City designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a through street, or any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop, the City Traffic Engineer shall erect and maintain stop signs in accordance with the appropriate traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions. 
(Code 1975, § 16-23; Ord. No. 70-8, § 7)  
Sec. 40-67. - Temporary directional signs. 
(a)  Upon request of any person and approval of the City Council, temporary directional signs not larger than four feet by four feet may be installed within the City and offsite of the subject property at intervals of no more than one sign per one-half mile, and with a total of not to exceed five signs per subject property. No authority is granted by this section to place such signs on public property. 
(b)  Subject property for the purpose of this section means the property for which or to which the directional signs are directing the viewer. 
(c)  A fee in an amount established by City Council resolution shall be charged per sign, one-half of which shall be refunded if the signs are removed when the period of authorization has expired. No authority is granted by this section to place such signs upon public property. 
(Code 1975, § 16-24; Ord. No. 112, §§ 1—3)  
Secs. 40-68—40-92. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 40-93. - Decrease of State speed limits in certain areas. 
It is hereby determined, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic study, that the speed permitted by State law outside of business and residence districts as applicable upon the following streets is greater than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist upon such streets, and it is hereby declared that the prima facie speed limit shall be as established by the City Council, from time to time. Appropriate signs shall be posted in accordance to State law. 
(Code 1975, § 16-25; Ord. No. 61; Ord. No. 132; Ord. No. 70-8, § 15; Ord. No. 70-13, § 1; Ord. No. 72-3, § 1; Ord. No. 85-06, § 1) 
State Law reference— Local authority to increase prima facie speed limit, Vehicle Code § 22357; local authority to decrease speed limits on any portion of any street other than a State highway, Vehicle Code § 22358.  
Sec. 40-94. - Funeral processions or parades. 
No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession or a parade, provided that vehicles comprising a funeral procession or parade are conspicuously so designated. The directing of all vehicles and traffic on any street over which such funeral procession or parade wishes to pass shall be subject to the orders of the Police Department. 
(Code 1975, § 16-26; Ord. No. 70-8, § 8)  
Sec. 40-95. - New pavement or markings where designated. 
No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any street when a barrier sign, cone marker, or other warning device is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when any such device is in place indicating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. 
(Code 1975, § 16-27; Ord. No. 79-8, § 8)  
Sec. 40-96. - Limited access entrances and exits. 
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited-access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are lawfully established. 
(Code 1975, § 16-28; Ord. No. 70-8, § 8)  
Sec. 40-97. - Truck routes. 
(a)  Whenever any resolution of this City designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street the use of which is permitted by any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons, the City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to designate such street or streets by appropriate signs as "truck routes" for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons. 
(b)  When any such truck routes are established and designated by appropriate signs the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons shall drive on such routes and none other; except, that nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of three tons coming from a truck route having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted streets; or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling, or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted streets for which a building permit has previously been obtained therefor. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission; or 
(2)  Any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation, or repair of any public utility. 
(d)  Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the Council are hereby declared to be truck routes for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight of three tons. 
(Code 1975, § 16-30; Ord. No. 70-8, § 13) 
State Law reference— Powers of local authorities relative to vehicle weight, Vehicle Code § 35700 et seq.  
Sec. 40-98. - Use of certain streets by commercial vehicles. 
(a)  Whenever any resolution of this City designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street the use of which is prohibited by any commercial vehicle, the City Traffic Engineer shall erect and maintain appropriate signs on those streets affected by such ordinances. 
(b)  Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the Council are hereby declared to be streets, the use of which is prohibited by any commercial vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not apply to passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission. 
(Code 1975, § 16-31; Ord. No. 70-8, § 13)  
Secs. 40-99—40-126. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Stopping, standing and parking of vehicles, Vehicle Code § 22500 et seq. 
 
Sec. 40-127. - Observance of curb markings and signs. 
When the appropriate curb markings or signs are in place, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park such vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign in violation of any of the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1975, § 16-32; Ord. No. 70-8, § 10)  
Sec. 40-128. - Maintenance of restricted stopping and parking zones. 
The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to maintain, by appropriate signs or by paint upon the curb surface, all no stopping zones, no parking areas, and restricted parking areas, as defined and described in this division. 
(Code 1975, § 16-33; Ord. No. 70-8, § 10)  
Sec. 40-129. - Application of division. 
(a)  The provisions of this division prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer, authorized officer, or official traffic control device. 
(b)  The provisions of this division imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or the ordinances of this City prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(c)  The provisions of this division prohibiting the stopping, standing, or parking of a vehicle may be waived on a temporary basis by the City Council. Application for waiver shall be in a form prescribed by the City Manager, and shall be accompanied by a fee to be established by resolution of the City Council. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City Manager, after consultation with the Community Services Director and the Police Chief, may allow temporary parking for a period not to exceed 24 hours in a no parking zone on non-arterial streets, as such non-arterial streets are shown on the City's master plan of arterial streets. Upon approval by the City Council or the City Manager, as the case may be, the City Engineer shall remove or cover with a suitable covering all signs which would otherwise be applicable. 
(Code 1975, § 16-34; Ord. No. 70-8, § 10; Ord. No. 82-4, § 1; Ord. No. 88-9, § 1)  
Sec. 40-130. - Parkways. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway. 
(Code 1975, § 16-35; Ord. No. 70-8, § 10)  
Sec. 40-131. - No parking zones. 
No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park, or leave standing such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or other authorized officer, or a traffic sign or signal: 
(1)  Within any divisional island unless authorized and clearly indicated with appropriate signs or markings. 
(2)  On either side of any street between the projected property lines of any public walk, public steps, street, or thoroughfare terminating at such street when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface. 
(3)  In any area where the City Traffic Engineer determines that the parking or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface. 
(4)  In any area established by resolution of the Council as a no-parking area, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface. 
(5)  Upon, along, or across any railway track in such a manner as to hinder, delay or obstruct the movement of any car traveling upon such track. 
(6)  In any area where the parking or stopping of any vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property. 
(7)  On any street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or the installation of underground utilities; where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic; where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicles would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice of such no parking are erected or placed at least 24 hours prior to the effective time of such no parking. 
(8)  At any place within 20 feet of a point on the curb immediately opposite the mid-block end of a safety zone when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface. 
(9)  At any place within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection in the central traffic district, or in any business district when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface, except that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop. 
(10)  Within 20 feet of the approach to any traffic signal, boulevard stop sign or official electric flashing device. 
(11)  Within 100 feet of any intersection, at any time, any vehicle which is seven feet or more in height, including any load thereon. 
(Code 1975, § 16-36; Ord. No. 70-8, § 10; Ord. No. 211, § 1; Ord. No. 212, § 1; Ord. No. 213, § 1; Ord. No. 221, § 1; Ord. No. 78-7, § 1; Ord. No. 82-4, § 2; Ord. No. 91-08; Ord. No. 92-07, § 1)  
Sec. 40-132. - Repair, construction of vehicles on public streets. 
No person shall construct or cause to be constructed, repair or cause to be repaired, grease or cause to be greased, dismantle or cause to be dismantled any vehicle or any part hereof upon any public street in this City. Temporary emergency repairs may be made upon a public street. 
(Code 1975, § 16-38; Ord. No. 70-8, § 10)  
Sec. 40-133. - Washing or polishing of vehicles on public streets. 
No person shall wash or cause to be washed, polish or cause to be polished any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this City when a charge is made for such service. 
(Code 1975, § 16-39; Ord. No. 70-8, § 10)  
Sec. 40-134. - Parking—Adjacent to schools. 
(a)  The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized, with City Council approval, to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his or her opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(b)  When official signs are erected prohibiting parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Code 1975, § 16-40; Ord. No. 70-8, § 10)  
Sec. 40-135. - Same—On narrow streets. 
(a)  The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet. 
(b)  When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking. 
(Code 1975, § 16-41; Ord. No. 70-8, § 10)  
Sec. 40-136. - Same—On grades. 
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway when upon any grade exceeding three percent within any business or residence district without blocking the wheels of such vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means. 
(Code 1975, § 16-42; Ord. No. 70-8, § 10)  
Sec. 40-137. - Vehicles on street in excess of 72 hours. 
No person who owns or has possession, custody, or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicles upon any street or alley for more than a consecutive period of 72 hours. 
(Code 1975, § 16-43; Ord. No. 87-02, § 1; Ord. No. 53, § 1; Ord. No. 70-8, § 10; Ord. No. 2005-02, § 8)  
Sec. 40-138. - Overweight parking prohibited. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, no person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any commercial vehicle having a gross weight of 10,000 pounds or more shall park said vehicle upon any residential street within the City for a period in excess of one hour unless directed to do so by a police officer or other authorized official. 
(Code 1975, § 16-43.1; Ord. No. 2005-02, § 9)  
Sec. 40-139. - Fifteen-minute parking. 
When authorized signs, parking meters, or curb markings have been determined by the City Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park such vehicle for a period of time longer than 15 minutes at any time in the following described area: 
Southside of Orangethorpe Avenue from 306 feet west of the centerline of Walker Street to 185 feet west of the centerline of Walker Street. 
(Code 1975, § 16-44; Ord. No. 70-8, § 11; Ord. No. 82-7, § 1)  
Sec. 40-140. - One-hour parking. 
When authorized signs, parking meters, or curb markings have been determined by the City Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park such vehicle between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day, except Sundays and holidays, for a period of time longer than one hour. 
(Code 1975, § 16-45; Ord. No. 70-8, § 11)  
Sec. 40-141. - Two-hour parking. 
When authorized signs, parking meters, or curb markings have been determined by the City Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle for a period of time longer than two hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, in the following described areas: 
North and south sides of La Luna Drive from 67 feet west of the centerline of Walker Street to 1300 feet west of the centerline of Walker Street. 
(Code 1975, § 16-46; Ord. No. 70-8, § 11; Ord. No. 78-7, § 2; Ord. No. 79-4, § 1; Ord. No. 82-7, § 2)  
Sec. 40-142. - Diagonal parking. 
(a)  On any of the streets or portions of streets established by resolution of the Council as diagonal parking zones, when signs or pavement markings are in place indicating such diagonal parking, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park such vehicle except at the angle to the curb indicated by signs or pavement markings allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within six inches of such curb. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply when vehicle is engaged in the process of loading or unloading passengers, freight or goods, in which event the provisions applicable in section 40-143 shall be complied with. 
(Code 1975, § 16-47; Ord. No. 70-8, § 11) 
State Law reference— Angle parking, Vehicle Code § 22503.  
Sec. 40-143. - Parallel parking on one-way streets. 
(a)  Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within 18 inches of the left-hand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing. 
(b)  In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking. 
(c)  The City Traffic Engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way street or when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two or more separate roadways, and he or she shall erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(d)  The requirement of parallel parking imposed by this section shall not apply in the event any commercial vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading freight or goods, in which case such vehicle may be backed up to the curb, provided that such vehicle does not extend beyond the centerline of the street and does not block traffic thereby. 
(Code 1975, § 16-48; Ord. No. 70-8, § 11) 
State Law reference— Parallel parking, Vehicle Code § 22502.  
Sec. 40-144. - Parking spaces for handicapped persons with disabilities. 
(a)  Upon resolution or ordinance designating off-street or on-street parking stalls or spaces for the exclusive use of vehicles displaying appropriate persons with disabilities identification, the City Traffic Engineer shall install and maintain appropriate markings and signage for such spaces pursuant to State law. 
(b)  After such parking stall or space markings and signage has been installed, the provisions of the State Vehicle Code relating to parking stalls or spaces designated for persons with disabilities shall apply.  
Sec. 40-145. - No stopping zones. 
(a)  The City Traffic Engineer shall designate established no stopping zones by placing and maintaining appropriate signs indicating that stopping of vehicles is prohibited and indicating the hours and days when stopping is prohibited. 
(b)  During the hours and on the days designated on the signs, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop such vehicle on any of the streets or parts of streets established by resolution of the Council as no stopping zones. 
(Code 1975, § 16-50; Ord. No. 70-8, § 11)  
Sec. 40-146. - Stop required when emerging from alley or driveway. 
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk area extending across any alley way or driveway. 
(Code 1975, § 16-51; Ord. No. 70-8, § 7)  
Sec. 40-147. - Loading zones. 
(a)  The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine and to mark loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows: 
(1)  At any place in the central traffic district or any business district. 
(2)  Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly. 
(b)  In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes. 
(c)  Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top of all curbs within such zones. 
(d)  Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white paint upon the top of all curbs in such zones. 
(Code 1975, § 16-52; Ord. No. 70-8, § 12)  
Sec. 40-148. - Curb markings indicating no stopping and parking zones. 
The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this chapter, to place, and when required herein shall place, the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations; and such curb markings shall have the meanings as herein set forth: 
(1)  Red shall mean no stopping, standing, or parking at any time except as permitted by the Vehicle Code; except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone. 
(2)  Yellow shall mean no stopping, standing, or parking at any time between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day, except Sundays or holidays, for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials; provided that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more than 20 minutes. 
(3)  White shall mean no stopping, standing, or parking for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox, which stopping shall not exceed three minutes and such restrictions shall apply between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays and except as follows: 
a.  When such zone is in front of a hotel or in front of a mailbox, the restrictions shall apply at all times. 
b.  When such zone is in front of a theater, the restrictions shall apply at all times, except when such theater is closed. 
(4)  When the City Traffic Engineer as authorized under this chapter has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking in violation of any of the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1975, § 16-53; Ord. No. 70-8, § 12)  
Sec. 40-149. - Permission to stop or stand vehicles. 
(a)  Permission herein granted to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than 20 minutes. 
(b)  The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial deliveries, also the delivery or pickup of express and parcel post packages and United States mail. 
(c)  Permission herein granted to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than three minutes. 
(d)  Within the total time limits above specified, the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of the privileges hereby granted. 
(Code 1975, § 16-54; Ord. No. 70-8, § 12)  
Sec. 40-150. - Standing—For purpose of loading or unloading. 
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or material for such time as is permitted in section 40-149. 
(Code 1975, § 16-55; Ord. No. 70-8, § 12)  
Sec. 40-151. - Same—In passenger loading zones. 
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any passenger loading zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for such time as is specified in section 40-149. 
(Code 1975, § 16-56; Ord. No. 70-8, § 12)  
Sec. 40-152. - Same—In alleys. 
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any alley for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of persons or materials. 
(Code 1975, § 16-57; Ord. No. 70-8, § 12)  
Sec. 40-153. - Oversized and nonmotorized vehicle parking. 
No person, firm, company, or corporation shall park, store, or permit to be parked or stored any oversized vehicle or nonmotorized vehicle, whether attached or unattached, as defined in section 44-10, on any public street, any privately owned street, or any driveway lying within any residential zoning district, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., except as follows or otherwise allowed in this Code: 
(1)  General exemption. Any resident or nonresident may obtain an exemption to this restriction by following the procedure adopted by City Council resolution describing the limits and process for securing a confirmation number for overnight parking. The procedure for securing confirmation numbers and the attendant restrictions shall be posted on the City's website either in whole or in relevant part. 
(2)  Exemption for public and private utility vehicles. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the parking of vehicles of public or private utility companies, including cable television companies, on any public or private street or driveway in a residential zoning district for a period of time required in the locating, relocating, installation, servicing, testing, or repair of equipment of such companies, nor shall the provisions of this section be construed to prohibit the parking of any vehicles used in the construction, repair, or maintenance of any road, street, or alley in such zoning districts. 
(3)  Construction exemption. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the parking of vehicles in the act of making a pickup or delivery or being used in conjunction with the performance of a bona fide service or construction activity on a residential property in the vicinity. 
(4)  Applicability of other Code sections relating to parking. Unless expressly provided herein, this section does not otherwise negate or alter any parking regulation found in the California Vehicle Code or this Code, including: all time and weight restrictions found in sections 40-137 and 40-138. 
(5)  Removal of vehicles. Nothing in this section shall be read as to limit the City's right to remove a vehicle or object from City or private streets or driveways for noncompliance with this Code and any applicable State law. 
(6)  Sleeping in vehicle prohibited; exemption. No person shall reside or sleep overnight in any motorized or nonmotorized vehicle parked on a City street unless the resident obtains an exemption under this subsection. In connection with the issuance of a general exemption under subsection (1) of this section, the City may, for a period not to exceed five continuous days or more than 30 days each year, grant an exemption for the prohibition in this subsection against residing or overnight sleeping in a motorized or nonmotorized vehicle while parked on a City street. 
(Code 1975, § 16-57.1; Ord. No. 2005-02, § 6; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 1)  
Secs. 40-154—40-178. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - MOBILE VENDING VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of City to adopt requirements in addition to State law regulating the type of vending and the time, place, and manner of vending from vehicles upon any street, Vehicle Code § 22455, Health and Safety Code §§ 113709, 114315. 
 
Sec. 40-179. - Defined. 
As used in this division, the term "mobile vending vehicle" means any vehicle from which goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables, food stuffs, or prepared meals or food is sold, displayed, solicited, or offered for sale, exchange, or barter. 
(Code 1975, § 16-58; Ord. No. 70-10, § 1)  
Sec. 40-180. - Simultaneously flashing signals—Required. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, no person operating a mobile vending vehicle shall sell, display, solicit, or offer for sale, barter, or exchange goods, wares, merchandise, vegetables, fruits, food stuffs, or prepared meals upon the streets of the City unless such mobile vending vehicle is equipped with a device which will enable both rear turn signal indicators and both front turn signal indicators to flash simultaneously. 
(Code 1975, § 16-59; Ord. No. 70-10, § 1)  
Sec. 40-181. - Same—Use while parked or standing. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, no person shall park or stand any mobile vending vehicle on any street in this City without placing in operation the lighting device required by section 40-180. 
(Code 1975, § 16-60; Ord. No. 70-10, § 1)  
Sec. 40-182. - Parking restrictions and exceptions. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by this article, no person shall stand or park any mobile vending vehicle on any portion of any street in this City; except that such mobile vending vehicle may stand or park at the request of a bona fide purchaser for a period of time not to exceed ten minutes. 
(b)  A mobile vending vehicle may park or stand for periods in excess of that prescribed above upon obtaining a written permit to do so from the City Traffic Engineer which shall designate the specific location in which the mobile vending vehicle shall park or stand. 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to any persons delivering articles from a store or other fixed place of business or distribution upon order of or by agreement with a customer. 
(Code 1975, § 16-61; Ord. No. 70-10, § 1)  
Secs. 40-183—40-202. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - VEHICLES PARKED ON LANDSCAPED AREAS 
 
Sec. 40-203. - Residential, commercial and industrial zones. 
No person who owns or is in possession of any parcel in a residential zone nor the operator of any vehicle shall permit the parking or standing of any vehicle as defined in Vehicle Code § 670, whether operable or not, in any yard area visible from a public street, except upon a paved driveway or paved ancillary parking as defined in section 44-10, unless the parked or stored vehicle is screened from each public street abutting the parcel by opaque fencing, six feet in height, in accordance with applicable zoning standards, nor shall any person permit the parking, standing or storing of any vehicle on any landscaped area within any commercial or industrial zone. 
(Code 1975, § 16-62; Ord. No. 84-18, § 1; Ord. No. 86-04, § 1; Ord. No. 2003-01, § 1)  
Sec. 40-204. - Entry on public or private property. 
In the enforcement of this division, members of the Police Department may enter upon public or private property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identification of a vehicle, or owner or agent of the property. 
(Code 1975, § 16-63; Ord. No. 84-18, § 1)  
Sec. 40-205. - Other regulations. 
The provisions of this division are not the exclusive regulations applicable to the parking, standing, or storing of vehicles, whether operable or not, within the City. They shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the City, State, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Code 1975, § 16-64; Ord. No. 84-18, § 1)  
Secs. 40-206—40-233. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PENALTY SCHEDULE 
 
Sec. 40-234. - Penalty schedule adopted. 
The City Council of the City of La Palma hereby adopts a penalty schedule which shall be kept on file in a particular location. 
(Code 1975, § 16-65; Ord. No. 88-10; Ord. No. 91-06; Ord. No. 91-08; Ord. No. 92-09, § 1; Ord. No. 97-07, § 1; Ord. No. 2005-02, § 7; Ord. No. 2008-01, § 2; Ord. No. 2009-02, §1(16-65(exh. A)), 4-21-2009; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 3-1-2011)  
Secs. 40-235—40-261. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING 
 
Sec. 40-262. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Residential permit parking area means any area designated by resolution of the City Council in accordance with this article where on-street parking is restricted, at all times or at specified times as set forth in the resolution, to residents of the designated area holding permits issued by the City. 
Residence means each single-family dwelling unit, condominium dwelling unit, townhome dwelling unit, apartment dwelling unit, or other multifamily dwelling unit with access to a street within a residential permit parking area. 
Nonresident vehicles means those vehicles owned or operated by persons who reside in dwelling units outside the proposed or designated residential permit parking area. 
(Code 1975, § 16-66; Ord. No. 2008-01, § 1)  
Sec. 40-263. - Designation of residential permit parking areas. 
(a)  Initiation and investigation. Upon receipt and verification of a petition signed by residents living in at least two-thirds of the dwelling units of the area proposed for designation, or upon adoption of a motion by the City Council, the City Manager shall undertake surveys or investigations as deemed appropriate to determine whether to recommend that an area be designated a residential permit parking area. 
(b)  Required findings. The City Council may designate an area as a residential permit parking area only if all of the following findings of fact are made: 
(1)  That nonresident vehicles do or likely may substantially and regularly interfere with the use of the majority of the available public on-street parking spaces by persons residing in the proposed residential permit parking area; 
(2)  That the interference by the nonresident vehicles occurs regularly on a daily or weekly basis; 
(3)  That restrictions upon or the prohibition against on-street parking by nonresident vehicles within the proposed residential permit parking area will not result in overcrowded or unsafe on-street parking within residential areas adjacent to the proposed residential permit parking area; and 
(4)  That alternative solutions are not feasible or practical. 
(c)  Resolution for designation of parking area. Residential permit parking areas may be designated by resolution of the City Council after the conduct of a public hearing in accordance with this section. Notice of the public hearing shall be published and posted, and mailed to the owners of the dwelling units within the proposed residential permit parking area, in accordance with section 44-518, at least ten days prior to the hearing. If the City Council makes the findings required by subsection (b) of this section and determines in its discretion that the proposed residential permit parking area shall be designated, it may designate by resolution a residential permit parking area with appropriate boundaries, and with such prohibitions or restrictions on on-street parking as the City Council determines are in the best interests of the City. 
(Code 1975, § 16-67; Ord. No. 2008-01, § 1)  
Sec. 40-264. - Modifications to residential permit parking areas. 
(a)  A street or portion of a street not currently within a residential permit parking area may be added to an existing residential permit parking area by following the same procedures set forth in section 40-263. Notices shall be mailed to all owners of property within the existing and proposed residential permit parking area. 
(b)  The City Council may, by adopting a resolution following the same procedures set forth in section 40-263, terminate an existing residential permit parking area. 
(Code 1975, § 16-68; Ord. No. 2008-01, § 1)  
Sec. 40-265. - Residential permit parking area requirements. 
(a)  Posting. 
(1)  The City Manager shall cause appropriate signs to be erected and maintained on each street within each residential permit parking area. 
(2)  The signs that the City Manager causes to be erected pursuant to this section shall provide clear notice of the days and times of the parking prohibition or restriction applicable to the street upon which the sign is erected. 
(3)  The parking prohibition or restriction authorized by this article shall not be effective and enforceable on any street within a residential permit parking area until the signs required by this section have been erected. 
(b)  Display of permits. 
(1)  Parking permits shall be placed in the left corner of the dashboard of the permitted vehicle. 
(2)  Any person holding a valid residential parking permit properly displayed in his or her vehicle shall be entitled to park on any street within the applicable residential permit parking area regardless of posted parking restrictions or prohibitions applicable to nonresident vehicles. 
(3)  A person holding a valid residential parking permit properly displayed in his or her vehicle shall be entitled to park on any street only within the residential permit parking area for which the permit was issued. 
(4)  Each vehicle displaying a parking permit shall be parked in a manner that conforms to all other parking and vehicle regulations and laws established by this Code and by the California Vehicle Code. 
(5)  A valid parking permit issued under this article shall not guarantee or reserve to the holder an on-street parking space on any street or portion of any street within the residential permit parking area for which the permit was issued. 
(c)  Prohibition. Except as otherwise specified in this article, no person shall park a vehicle on any street or any portion of any street within a residential permit parking area on the days and during the times posted unless such vehicle has a properly displayed and valid parking permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1975, § 16-69; Ord. No. 2008-01, § 1)  
Sec. 40-266. - Exceptions to residential permit parking requirements. 
The following types of vehicles may park at any time within a residential permit parking area without a parking permit: 
(1)  Any commercial vehicle while making a pickup or delivery of goods, wares or merchandise from or to any building or structure located within a residential permit parking area; 
(2)  Any commercial vehicle while under the control of a person involved in, or while delivering materials to be used in the maintenance, repair, alteration, remodeling, or construction of any property that is located within a residential permit parking area; 
(3)  Any vehicle owned by a public utility or a licensed contractor while in use in the construction, installation, or repair of any public utility located within a residential permit parking area; 
(4)  Any vehicle owned and operated by a government agency while engaged in government business; 
(5)  Any emergency vehicle, including, but not limited to, an ambulance, fire engine, or police vehicle, while being operated on official business; or 
(6)  Any vehicle that displays the identifying disabled person's license plate or the disabled person's placard issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles. 
(Code 1975, § 16-70; Ord. No. 2008-01, § 1)  
Sec. 40-267. - Residential parking permits. 
(a)  Application; proof of residency. A resident may obtain a residential parking permit upon submitting to the City a proper application and presenting proof of residency in the residential permit area. Each qualified applicant is entitled to one permit for each vehicle registered at his or her residence within the residential permit parking area. The address of vehicle registration and driver's license must be the same as the applicant's residence address, as documented in his or her proof of residency. 
(b)  Duration. A parking permit issued by the City for a residential permit parking area shall remain in effect for as long as the permit holder continues to reside in the dwelling unit for which the parking permit was issued, or until the City Council adopts a resolution terminating the applicable residential permit parking area, whichever occurs first. 
(c)  Visitor permits. Upon application by a resident within a residential permit parking area, the City Manager will issue up to two visitor parking permits for the use by visitors to that resident's dwelling unit. 
(Code 1975, § 16-71; Ord. No. 2008-01, § 1)  
Sec. 40-268. - Prohibition on sale or transfer. 
(a)  No person shall sell, transfer or allow another person to use a residential parking permit issued pursuant to this article unless authorized to do so by this article. Upon the sale or transfer of any vehicle owned by the holder of a valid parking permit, the permit holder shall remove the permit from the transferred or sold vehicle and present the same to the City, and the City shall reissue a parking permit for any replacement vehicle acquired by that person. 
(b)  No person shall purchase, transfer, acquire or obtain a residential parking permit described in this article unless otherwise authorized to purchase, transfer, acquire or obtain such parking permit by this article. 
(Code 1975, § 16-72; Ord. No. 2008-01, § 1)  
Sec. 40-269. - Denial or revocation of residential parking permits. 
The City Manager may deny an application for issuance or renewal of a residential parking permit described under this article, or revoke a residential parking permit issued under this article, upon determining that the applicant or permittee has: 
(1)  Provided the City Manager with incorrect, inaccurate, incomplete or misleading information relevant to the issuance of the parking permit; 
(2)  Violated any condition placed upon the residential parking permit; or 
(3)  Otherwise failed to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 16-73; Ord. No. 2008-01, § 1)  
Secs. 40-270—40-286. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - BICYCLES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Operation of bicycles generally, Vehicle Code § 21200 et seq.; power of the City to regulate the registration of bicycles, Vehicle Code § 21206. 
 
Sec. 40-287. - Defined. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the term "bicycle" means any device upon which a person may ride, which is propelled by human power through a system of belts, chains or gears and which has wheels at least 20 inches in diameter and a frame size of at least 14 inches. 
(Code of 1975, § 6-1; Ord. No. 74-12, § 1)  
Sec. 40-288. - Registration—Required. 
No person shall operate or permit to be operated on any public street in the City any bicycle unless such bicycle shall first have been registered with the Police Department as provided in this article. 
(Code of 1975, § 6-2; Ord. No. 74-12, § 1)  
Sec. 40-289. - Same—Date required. 
(a)  Any person owning or having charge or control of a bicycle, excepting dealers thereof, shall within 90 days after January 1, 1975, register such bicycle with the Police Department. 
(b)  All bicycles registered with the Police Department prior to December 31, 1974, pursuant to City Ordinance Number 169, shall remain valid for a period not exceeding five years from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Code of 1975, § 6-3; Ord. No. 74-12, § 2) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 74-12, from which this article was derived, was passed December 16, 1974.  
Sec. 40-290. - Same—Application; fee; number generally. 
(a)  The application for registration shall be made in writing to the Police Department upon forms provided by that department, stating the name of the applicant, his address, a description of the bicycle, including the factory number thereof, the name of the person from whom the bicycle was purchased, color thereof and any other information relative thereto as may, in the judgment of the Police Department, be necessary and proper for the identification. 
(b)  Upon receipt of such application and a $2:00 registration fee from the applicant, the Police Department shall register such bicycle in a permanent register maintained by the department and such bicycle shall be given an identifying license number. The registration shall be valid for three years. 
(c)  The license numbers will be obtained from the State Department of Motor Vehicles per Vehicle Code § 39001 and Assembly Bill No. 3329. 
(Code of 1975, § 6-4; Ord. No. 74-12, § 3; Ord. No. 78-19, § 1)  
Sec. 40-291. - Same—Certificate; number sticker; renewal. 
(a)  The Police Department shall issue to such applicant a registration certificate and license number sticker, which must also be entered in the department's permanent register and shall affix the license number sticker upon the vertical riser immediately below the seat on the forward side. 
(b)  In the event of theft, loss or mutilation of the registration or license sticker provided for in this article, the person owning such bicycle shall make application to the Police Department. Upon proper identification of the owner and bicycle and upon the payment to the Police Department of a fee of $0.50, a new registration certificate or license number sticker or both shall be issued. 
(Code of 1975, § 6-5; Ord. No. 74-12, §§ 4, 5)  
Sec. 40-292. - Same—Renewal generally 
Bicycle licenses shall be renewed uniformly throughout the City, at periods not to exceed five years, to be designated by the director of the department of motor vehicles. Renewal of a bicycle license shall be indicated by a supplementary adhesive device affixed on or near the license. 
(Code of 1975, § 6-6; Ord. No. 74-12, § 4)  
Sec. 40-293. - Same—Term. 
The registration of bicycles as provided in this article shall begin with January 1, 1975, and such license and registration shall be subject to renewal at periods not to exceed five years. 
(Code of 1975, § 6-7; Ord. No. 74-12, § 7)  
Sec. 40-294. - Same—Upon sale or transfer. 
(a)  Any person residing within the City who sells or transfers ownership of any bicycle, shall, within ten days of the date of such sale or transfer, report such sale or transfer by returning to the Police Department the registration certificate issued to such person as licensee thereof, together with the name and address of the person to whom such bicycle was sold or transferred. 
(b)  Any person who purchases or otherwise acquires possession of a bicycle shall within ten days of taking possession apply for the transfer of license to his name. 
(c)  Any person engaged in the business of selling new or used bicycles shall make a weekly report to the Police Department, giving a list of all sales made by such person, which list shall include the name and address of each person to whom sold, the make and kind of the bicycle sold, together with a description and serial number thereof and the number of the license attached thereto, if any. 
(d)  Any person engaged in the business of buying used bicycles shall make a weekly report to the Police Department, giving the name and address of the person from whom each bicycle is purchased, a description of each bicycle purchased, the serial number thereof and the number of the license number sticker found thereon, if any. 
(Code of 1975, § 6-8; Ord. No. 74-12, § 6)  
Secs. 40-295—40-303. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLER SKATES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Local authority to prohibit or restrict riding of skateboards on sidewalks or roadways, Vehicle Code § 21967. 
 
Sec. 40-304. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial center means a group of stores or a combination of stores and other commercial establishments, planned, developed, owned, and managed as a unit, including any parking areas and pedestrian walkways on the premises. 
Pedestrian walkway means an area which is closed to vehicular traffic and which is designed for pedestrian travels, including but not limited to a sidewalk, walkway, or courtyard. 
Roller skate means any footwear, or device which may be attached to footwear, to the bottom of which wheels are attached in any configuration and which may be used by the wearer in moving. 
Skateboard means a board of any substance which has wheels attached to it and which is designed to be propelled by pushing, pulling, or gravitational or mechanical forces. 
(Code 1975, § 18-24.1; Ord. No. 91-05, § 1)  
Sec. 40-305. - Prohibited uses. 
(a)  No person shall use a skateboard or roller skates in a manner which: 
(1)  Threatens injury to persons or property; 
(2)  Creates an obstruction or presents a hazard to the free use of public or private property by pedestrians or motorists. 
(b)  No person shall operate or use any skateboard or roller skates within a commercial center or upon any public sidewalk adjacent to a commercial center if the owner of the commercial center has caused signs to be posted prohibiting such operation or use. 
(Code 1975, § 18-24.2; Ord. No. 91-05, § 2)  
Chapter 42 - WATER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— As to Orange County Flood Control Act, see Uncodified Acts, Water, Act 5682. As to Orange County Water District Act, see Uncodified Acts, Water, Act 5683. 
State Law reference— Authority of City to acquire water rights, Government Code § 38730; general authority of legislative body of City regarding supplying of water for the use of the City or its inhabitants, Government Code § 38742; pure and safe drinking water regulations, Health and Safety Code § 116270 et seq.; municipally owned utilities providing water service, Public Utilities Code § 10001 et seq.; Municipal Water District Law of 1911, Water Code § 71000 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 42-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means an individual or agency of record applying for water services. 
Customer means an individual or agency of record receiving water service from the Water Division of the City. 
Date of presentation means the date upon which a bill or notice is mailed or delivered personally to the customer. 
Employee means and includes any person designated by the City Manager or the City Water Superintendent to perform work and labor for the Water Division and in and about the business of the City Water Division. 
Mains means distribution pipelines located in streets, public ways or private rights-of-way which are used to serve the general public. 
Premises means that integral parcel of property or area, including the improvements thereon, to which water service is or will be provided. 
Service connection means piping, valves, meters, boxes, and other division-owned materials and equipment used for delivering water from the main to the customer. 
Temporary service means a service for circuses, fairs, construction work, irrigation, or vacant property and similar uses which, because of their nature will not be used steadily or permanently. 
Water division means that certain division, branch, or function of the City which cares for, maintains, and operates pumps, plants, mains, and all necessary facilities for the acquiring, distributing, and selling of water within the City. 
Water Superintendent means the Community Services Director. 
(Code 1975, § 25-1; Ord. No. 142, § 100)  
Sec. 42-2. - Established; management; conducting activities generally. 
(a)  The Water Division is hereby established for the purpose of furnishing to the residents, businesses, and industries within the City a supply of water at a flow rate and pressure and of such quality as to satisfy their normal requirements. 
(b)  The Water Division shall have a Water Superintendent who shall be responsible for the management and direction of the Water Division. The Superintendent shall be the Community Services Director of the City. 
(c)  The Water Division shall conduct its activities in accordance with the various sections of this article and any subsequent ordinances and resolutions of the City Council. 
(Code 1975, § 25-7; Ord. No. 142, § 101)  
Sec. 42-3. - Service area. 
(a)  The area in which service is or will be furnished by the Water Division is that area which is within the City boundaries as the boundaries now prevail or may from time to time exist. 
(b)  The area does not exclude those areas outside the City boundaries which may be served upon approval of the City Council. 
(Code 1975, § 25-8; Ord. No. 142, § 102)  
Sec. 42-4. - Personnel—Identification. 
(a)  An official identification card shall be carried or worn by inspectors, foremen, meter readers, and all employees of the Water Division who in line of duty may be required to enter upon private premises. 
(b)  Every officer or employee, upon resignation or dismissal from the Water Division, shall forthwith surrender and deliver to the proper officials all identification cards, badges, and credentials of the Water Division. 
(c)  No unauthorized person shall possess, carry, wear, or exhibit any badge or other official identification of the Water Division nor shall any person, whether or not possession is authorized, display, exhibit, or cause to be exhibited any badge or other official identification of the Water Division at any time, place, or in any manner or for any purpose which is not authorized by the Water Superintendent. 
(Code 1975, § 25-9; Ord. No. 142, § 160)  
Sec. 42-5. - Same—Entry on premises. 
(a)  Upon presentation of official identification, any officer, inspector, foreman, meter reader, or authorized employee of the City on official business shall be allowed free access at all reasonable hours to any premises supplied with City water. 
(b)  Any person who, as owner or occupant of any premises, refuses admittance to or hinders or prevents inspection by an authorized employee of the Water Division, may, after service of 24 hours' notice of intention, have all the water cut off. 
(Code 1975, § 25-10; Ord. No. 142, § 160)  
Sec. 42-6. - Consumer's responsibility. 
The City shall in no way whatsoever be responsible for any damage to person or property because of a leakage, breakage, or seepage from, or accident or damage to any meter or pipe situated within any private premises, and City shall not be responsible for any leakage, breakage, or seepage for any pipe situated between any meter installed properly at the curb and the private premises served thereby nor shall the City be responsible for or on account of any damage, injury, or loss occasioned directly or indirectly by the existence of any meter or pipe situated upon private property.  
Secs. 42-7—42-28. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BILLING AND COLLECTION 
 
Sec. 42-29. - Applications for service. 
Applications for water service shall be made on forms provided by the City, by telephone or in person, as required by the City. 
(Code 1975, § 25-11; Ord. No. 82-24, § 2; Ord. No. 97-03, § 2)  
Sec. 42-30. - Deposit for service. 
The amount of deposit required to reestablish credit for any customer whose service is discontinued pursuant to section 42-36(e) shall be the average or estimated two-month consumption for the service connection. New customers that lack creditworthiness, as determined by the City, may also be required to pay a deposit to establish credit. The deposit shall not be returned to the applicant unless the water service is discontinued, and then only in the event that all water bills, fines, and penalties of the customer or applicant have been paid in full. However, the City may elect to apply the deposit to the final bill of the customer and refund any remaining portion of the deposit. 
(Code 1975, § 25-11.1; Ord. No. 82-24, § 2)  
Sec. 42-31. - Inside City limits. 
The monthly rates to be charged and collected by the Water Division for water furnished by the City shall be: 
(1)  Metered service rates. 
a.  Generally. Metered service rates shall be established from time to time by resolution of the City Council. 
b.  Multifamily residential service on master meters. All apartment units and similar multiunit housing developments where two or more units are served by a single meter shall be charged the applicable minimum rate for the meter size plus an additional charge to be established by the City Council. All service will be billed at the adopted rates. 
(2)  Temporary service rates. 
a.  Application shall be made to the Water Division for any temporary service desired by contractors, builders, or other applicants for temporary water. Upon the deposit of the amount specified by resolution of the City Council, a meter may be furnished for such service. 
b.  The charge for such service will be at the rate established by resolution of the City Council. 
c.  If, in the determination of the Water Superintendent, the setting of a meter is impractical or uneconomical for the supply of construction water, the quantity of such unmetered water shall be determined by the Superintendent and charged at the rate to be established by resolution of the City Council. Such charge shall be paid in advance. 
d.  The City shall cause to be installed and read a water meter for each unit immediately after the final clearance and approval for occupancy by the City Building Division. 
e.  From the time of approval of occupancy, the developer (builder) shall be billed for any and all water registered by each water meter until such time that such meter is transferred to a different individual account. A minimum monthly charge per unit as established by resolution of the City Council shall apply during such period. 
(3)  Private fire service rates. The monthly rates for private fire service protection shall be at the rate established by resolution of the City Council. 
(Code 1975, § 25-11.2; Ord. No. 142, § 110; Ord. No. 73-13, § 2; Ord. No. 75-14; Ord. No. 78-14, § 1; Ord. No. 80-1, § 1; Ord. No. 81-5, § 1; Ord. No. 82-8, § 1; Ord. No. 82-24, § 3; Ord. No. 97-03, § 2)  
Sec. 42-32. - Outside City limits. 
The adopted rates to be charged and collected by the Water Division for services to consumers outside the City limits from City-owned and maintained water lines shall be the same as established by resolution of the City Council for water service within the City. 
(Code 1975, § 25-12; Ord. No. 142, § 110; Ord. No. 82-8, § 2)  
Sec. 42-33. - Meter failure. 
If a meter fails to register during any period or is known to register inaccurately, the consumer shall be charged for an average daily consumption according to the same season as shown by the meter when in use and registering accurately. 
(Code 1975, § 25-14; Ord. No. 142, § 110)  
Sec. 42-34. - Adjustment of billing. 
The Community Services Director or his or her delegate may authorize a one-time credit to an account in the event of any dispute as to a charge to a customer. 
(Code 1975, § 25-15; Ord. No. 142, § 110; Ord. No. 82-24, § 4)  
Sec. 42-35. - Billing cycle. 
Customers shall be billed on a monthly or bi-monthly basis. 
(Code 1975, § 25-17; Ord. No. 142, § 110; Ord. No. 82-8, § 3; Ord. No. 97-03, § 2)  
Sec. 42-36. - Payment of bills; penalties for delinquent and nonpayment. 
(a)  All water bills shall be due and payable upon presentation and shall become delinquent if no payment is received by 5:00 p.m. on the due date shown on the statement. 
(b)  A delinquent fee in an amount established by resolution shall be charged for each notice of delinquency, discontinuance of service notice, and regular bill with a balance forward. 
(c)  When a bill for utility service is delinquent for 12 days and a discontinuance of service notice has been issued, service may be discontinued if bill and related charges are not paid within the time required by such notice. 
(d)  A fee established by resolution will be charged any customer who requests that a water service be established or service restored by the department at times other than regular working hours. 
(e)  In case water is turned off, as provided in this section, it shall not be turned on again until payment in full of the following charges has been made, except as provided in subsection (f) of this section: 
(1)  The amount due; 
(2)  The charge for making a service call to turn the water on or off, as established by resolution of the City Council; and 
(3)  All related charges, fees and deposit, as provided in this section. 
In addition, the City may sue in a court of competent jurisdiction for any amount due and payable, together with charges and fees as herein provided, attorney's fees, costs of such suit, and for such other and further relief as to the court appears appropriate in the circumstances. 
(f)  The City Manager or his or her delegate may authorize the continuance or reestablishment of service when the customer agrees to a reasonable debt payment schedule which includes interest established by the City Manager. 
(Code 1975, § 25-18; Ord. No. 142, § 110; Ord. No. 82-24, § 6; Ord. No. 83-6, §§ 3, 4; Ord. No. 84-22, §§ 3, 4)  
Sec. 42-37. - Property owner responsible. 
All charges for utility service, as well as all other related charges and fees, shall constitute a valid and subsisting claim in favor of the City and against the owner of the property. 
(Code 1975, § 25-18.1; Ord. No. 82-24, § 7)  
Sec. 42-38. - Performance of water billing functions. 
The City shall have the authority to perform meter reading, billing and/or collection functions for the water service either by City employees or by private contractors, as determined by the City Council. In the event that the City contracts with one or more private contractors to perform any or all of the water meter reading, billing and collection functions, each such private contractor shall be an agent of the City for the sole purpose of performing such function or functions. 
(Code 1975, § 25-18.2; Ord. No. 97-03, § 3)  
Sec. 42-39. - Change of address. 
Water service shall not be given any customer upon change of address until all delinquent charges owing thereon at a former place of residence or business within the City shall be paid. 
(Code 1975, § 25-24; Ord. No. 142, § 120)  
Secs. 42-40—42-66. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SERVICE 
 
Sec. 42-67. - Unauthorized turning on water service. 
No person shall tap, open, or connect to or cause, permit, or allow to be turned on, in any way, any water after the same has been turned off by the City. 
(Code 1975, § 25-6; Ord. No. 142, § 170)  
Sec. 42-68. - Classes and types. 
(a)  Classes of service. All services installed by the Water Division shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Domestic, commercial, industrial, and irrigation. 
(2)  Municipal and public use. 
(3)  Fire protection. 
(b)  Types of service. The types of service available from the Water Division are: 
(1)  Metered service. 
(2)  Temporary service. 
(3)  Private fire service. 
(Code 1975, § 25-19; Ord. No. 142, § 103)  
Sec. 42-69. - Connection and meter charges. 
Before water may be supplied to a location: 
(1)  An applicant (property owner, developer) shall make application to the Water Division for water service. 
(2)  An applicant shall pay all fees that may be applicable, which may include the front-foot fee, meter, and meter-box installation costs. 
(3)  Install or cause to be installed a water service connection. This water service connection may include a corporation at the water main, a copper service line or approved equal, curb stop, hot tap, and paving. All work shall be done by a properly licensed contractor licensed by the State of California, and a contractor with a valid City business license. A permit shall be obtained from the Community Services Department by this contractor. 
(4)  Specifications, fees and costs shall be as approved by the City Council by resolution. 
(5)  The City shall install only meters and meter boxes for services requiring up to and including the maximum water meter size of two inches. All service lines up to and including the two-inch size shall be installed by the applicant or the applicant's representative. Over the two-inch size, the applicant shall install the service line, the meter and the meter box or vault, and do all work and supply parts necessary to complete the installation. 
(6)  These costs and procedures shall apply to all users of the City water system, including service installations for domestic, commercial and industrial. 
(7)  All service lines from the main to the meter location shall be installed by the applicant in accordance with applicable City requirements. 
(Code 1975, § 25-21; Ord. No. 142, §§ 120, 180; Ord. No. 78-18, § 1; Ord. No. 82-31, § 15)  
Sec. 42-70. - Temporary service charges. 
(a)  When a temporary service is requested, the Water Division shall require the applicant to deposit that sum of money estimated as being required to compensate the City for all water furnished to such applicant during such period of temporary service. In addition to estimated charges for water, the applicant shall also reimburse the City for all costs required in furnishing such service, together with all damages that my occur to the facilities. 
(b)  The deposit for customers outside the City limits shall be the same as for customers inside the City limits. 
(Code 1975, § 25-22; Ord. No. 142, § 120)  
Sec. 42-71. - Private fire protection. 
Whenever a service is installed by an applicant or by the City for private fire protection, all charges for all labor, fire-detector check or other approved devices, together with all appurtenant materials and engineering, plus administrative overhead costs, shall be paid by the applicant. Such service shall be used only in case of fire or other purposes expressly provided in this section. Use of such private fire protection service for any other purpose expressly authorized by the Water Superintendent shall be a misdemeanor. However, should it be necessary to use water through a fire line meter for the purpose of testing or maintaining a private fire prevention system or fire department, the Water Division shall authorize such use upon the receipt of a written request stating: 
(1)  Date and time of use. 
(2)  Purpose. 
(3)  Estimated quantity of water to be used. 
(4)  Estimated maximum flow. 
Provided, however, that the Water Superintendent may restrict such non-emergency flows which may be detrimental to or tend to dewater the system. 
(Code 1975, § 25-25; Ord. No. 142, § 120)  
Sec. 42-72. - Service outside City limits. 
Sales may be made to consumers outside the City limits in accordance with all rules, regulations and rates only on the report of the Community Services Supervisor or the Superintendent as his or her delegate, and with the approval of the City Council. 
(Code 1975, § 25-26; Ord. No. 142, § 130)  
Sec. 42-73. - Shutting off water for repairs. 
The Water Division reserves the right to shut off the water in their mains for the purpose of making repairs or for any other purpose found necessary. The City shall not be responsible for any damages which may occur due to water shutoffs. The owner or customer shall be conclusively presumed to have taken all necessary precautions in compliance with the building codes and regulations of the plumbing code in anticipation of emergency shutoffs. 
(Code 1975, § 25-27; Ord. No. 142, § 130)  
Sec. 42-74. - Water pressures. 
In the event any consumer deems that pressures are inadequate, the consumer shall furnish at his or her own expense whatever devices are necessary to boost the pressure for his or her own premises. In the event water pressures are in excess of any consumer's normal requirements, it shall be the responsibility of such water consumer to install such devices on his or her premises to protect his or her plumbing or to reduce the pressure for his or her particular needs. 
(Code 1975, § 25-28; Ord. No. 142, § 130)  
Sec. 42-75. - Multiple occupancies. 
(a)  Where more than one occupancy is placed on the same parcel of property and each is conducting a separately established residence or business, a water meter shall be required and installed for each occupancy unless otherwise approved by the Water Superintendent. 
(b)  Whenever one service pipe and meter has been serving more than one occupancy on the same parcel of property owned by one owner and the property ownership is severed, the Water Superintendent may, in his or her discretion, require separate service and meters for each occupancy. 
(Code 1975, § 25-29; Ord. No. 142, § 130)  
Secs. 42-76—42-93. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SYSTEM CONNECTION AND EXTENSION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 42-94—42-114. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - EQUIPMENT 
 
Sec. 42-115. - Ownership and maintenance. 
All water services and water meters installed or caused to be installed by the Water Division shall remain at all times the property of the City and shall be maintained, repaired and renewed by the Water Division when rendered unserviceable by normal wear and tear. 
(Code 1975, § 25-30; Ord. No. 142, § 140)  
Sec. 42-116. - Relocation. 
(a)  The Water Superintendent shall be given a written notice a minimum of ten days prior to any street improvements which are to be performed which will cause the relocation of existing water mains, fittings, meters, or other water equipment. Any changes which are required or any damages which may occur to such mains, fittings, meters, or other water equipment without fault or negligence of the City shall be chargeable to the person or agency requiring such work to be done. 
(b)  Any person desiring to change the location of a service that has already been installed shall make application to the Water Division and, upon payment in advance of the cost of time and materials including excavating and repaving and overhead as estimated by the Superintendent's office, the Water Division shall cause or permit such change to be made. 
(Code 1975, § 25-31; Ord. No. 142, §§ 120, 140)  
Sec. 42-117. - Water stands. 
The Water Division is empowered to install or cause or permit to be installed such water stands as may be deemed necessary so that water may be drawn therefrom for spraying and for other legitimate purposes. No person shall draw water from any such stands without first obtaining a permit as provided in this section. Permits shall only be issued to applicants holding a valid business license in the City. A charge to be established by resolution of the City Council shall be made for such permit, which shall specify the approximate amount of water and the purposes for which it is to be used. Such applicant shall make such additional deposit and furnish such equipment and fittings for taking water from such stands as the Water Division may require. 
(Code 1975, § 25-32; Ord. No. 142, § 120; Ord. No. 82-8, § 5)  
Sec. 42-118. - Installation of fire hydrants. 
Fire hydrants shall be installed in the location specified by the superintendent. If a property owner or other party desires a change in the size, type or location of such hydrants, he or she shall bear all costs of such changes without a refund. Any change in the location of a fire hydrant must be approved by the Community Services Director or the Water Superintendent as his or her delegate. 
(Code 1975, § 25-33; Ord. No. 142, § 120)  
Sec. 42-119. - Testing meters. 
Any customer may demand that the meter through which water is being furnished be examined and tested by the Water Division for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not it is registering accurately the amount of water which is being delivered through it. Such demand shall be made in writing to the Water Division and shall be accompanied by a deposit in an amount established by resolution of the City Council. Upon receipt of such demand, it shall be the duty of the Water Superintendent to cause the meter to be examined and tested. If on such an examination and test the meter shall be found to register over three percent more water than actually passes through it, another meter will be substituted therefor, and the fee deposit shall be returned to the person making the application and the water bill for the current period adjusted in such a manner as the Superintendent may deem fair and just. If the meter is found to register not over three percent fast, the deposit shall then be forfeited to the City and the water bill paid as rendered. A customer or his or her authorized representative shall be present to witness the test. 
(Code 1975, § 25-34; Ord. No. 142, § 120; Ord. No. 80-1, § 2; Ord. No. 81-5, § 2; Ord. No. 82-8, § 6)  
Sec. 42-120. - Tampering with meters. 
(a)  No person shall tamper with, remove or cause, permit or allow to be tampered with or removed, any meter which has been attached to any service, without first having made application to the Water Division and receiving a permit therefor. 
(b)  Where replacements, repairs, or adjustments of any meter are rendered necessary by any act resulting from malice, carelessness, or neglect of the customer or any member of his or her family or anyone employed by him or her and any damages thereto result from hot water or steam from water heater, boiler or otherwise, they shall be charged to and paid for by such customer to the Water Division on presentation of a bill therefor and in case such bill is not paid, the water shall be shut off from such premises and shall not be turned on again until all charges are paid. No person shall interfere with or remove or cause to be interfered with or removed from any service any water meter where it has been attached. No person shall place dirt, trash, leaves, or lawn cuttings or other obstructions on or over the meter boxes and no person shall place garbage or rubbish boxes, cans, or barrels on them. 
(Code 1975, § 25-35; Ord. No. 142, §§ 140, 170)  
Sec. 42-121. - Tapping mains. 
No person shall tap, open or connect to or cause, permit or allow to be tapped, opened or connected to any water main or pipe without first having made application to the Water Division and received a permit therefor. 
(Code 1975, § 25-36; Ord. No. 142, § 170)  
Sec. 42-122. - Bypass connections. 
Any bypass connection around the meter between the service and the main shall be prohibited. All water used, except as provided in case of private fire service, shall pass through the meter. 
(Code 1975, § 25-38; Ord. No. 142, § 140)  
Sec. 42-123. - Connections to private sources. 
Any and all connections shall be prohibited between any private water source and the water supply of the City; provided, that subject to the approval of the State Board of Health, the City may maintain emergency connections with other public utilities supplying water. 
(Code 1975, § 25-39; Ord. No. 142, § 140)  
Sec. 42-124. - Shut-off valves. 
All shut-off valves and service cocks which are installed or caused to be installed by the Water Division are for the use of the City. Such shut-off valves and service cocks shall not be used or molested in any way or manipulated by the customer, except in extreme emergency. For ordinary usage, all customers shall provide their own valves and shut-off cocks between the water meter and the first outlet placed by the customer. There shall be no liability on the part of the City for damage, loss or inconvenience resulting from sand, gravel, rust, sediment, foreign matter, air, excessive pressure or hydraulic water hammer in the water system. 
(Code 1975, § 25-40; Ord. No. 142, § 140)  
Secs. 42-125—42-146. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - WATER MAIN AND SERVICE EXTENSIONS 
 
Sec. 42-147. - Application. 
(a)  Any person who, as owner or subdivider of a single lot, parcel, subdivision or tract of land, desires water service or requires the extension of water mains or services to such lot, parcel, subdivision, or tract of land, shall file a written application with the Water Division. 
(b)  Several persons may join in an application for extension of water facilities. Any extension of water mains and services estimated to cost $2,500.00 or over shall require the approval of the City Council. Extensions estimated to cost less than $2,500.00 may be made on the approval of the Community Services Director. 
(Code 1975, § 25-41; Ord. No. 142, § 150)  
Sec. 42-148. - Bond or deposit for extension of water facilities. 
In the event an application for extension of water facilities is approved in the manner provided in section 42-147, such person shall post a bond or deposit cash for the total estimated cost as determined by the Community Services Director of the City for such water facilities, including all materials, labor, inspection, equipment, transportation, power, and all appurtenances as may be necessary for a complete and operable water system, with the exception of water meters, plus all engineering, overhead, administrative charges, and possible contingencies. Meters will only be installed upon proper application in accordance with section 42-69. 
(Code 1975, § 25-42; Ord. No. 142, § 150; Ord. No. 82-24, § 10)  
Sec. 42-149. - Installation. 
If and when any person has complied with all the requirements of the Water Division and such other provisions of the Community Services Department dealing with lots, parcels, subdivisions or tracts of land as may be applicable, the Community Services Director may direct the person to have a qualified licensed water main contractor furnish and install such water facilities exclusive of meters. All costs of such installation are to be borne by such person, and such installation shall become and remain the property of the City upon completion of installation and acceptance by the Water Division in accordance with the Water Division standards. 
(Code 1975, § 25-43; Ord. No. 142, § 150)  
Sec. 42-150. - Location and standards of facilities. 
The Community Services Director shall determine the location of mains in streets, alleys and easements and determine the size, type, specifications and standard requirements of all water facilities and all other appurtenances deemed necessary in the supplying of water to property served. 
(Code 1975, § 25-44; Ord. No. 142, § 150)  
Sec. 42-151. - Developments not contiguous to existing water system. 
All of the requirements for water mains and water service extensions set forth in this article shall be applicable to developments not contiguous to existing water systems; however, in addition to such requirements, where the lot, parcel, subdivision, or tract of land requires the extension of a transmission main or mains and the addition of other pertinent facilities from the existing water system to the development involved, such transmission main or mains and other necessary facilities shall be completely paid for by the applicant. All rights-of-way and necessary easements will be obtained by the applicant and such mains, pertinent facilities and rights-of-way and necessary easements shall be deeded to the City. 
(Code 1975, § 25-45; Ord. No. 142, § 150)  
Sec. 42-152. - Payment for existing water mains. 
(a)  When a person owning land to which transmission mains owned by the City are adjacent in streets, rights-of-way or easements makes application for water service to a lot, parcel, subdivision, or tract of land, they shall reimburse the City by paying a service charge established by resolution of the City Council. This charge is in addition to other charges which have been set forth or may be set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  If, in the opinion of the Water Superintendent, the size of the existing main is inadequate for the future development of the area with proper fire protection or for the required capacity involved, he or she may require the extension of additional water mains. Payment for such additions shall be in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 25-46; Ord. No. 142, §§ 150, 180; Ord. No. 82-8, § 7)  
Sec. 42-153. - Transmission mains. 
Minimum-size mains shall be six inches in diameter with some exceptions where short cul-de-sac streets occur and fire hydrants are not required. Transmission mains which are needed within the area of development, in addition to those required for the immediate area, shall be installed at the discretion of the Community Services Director, or the Water Superintendent as his or her delegate, either prior to paving or at some future date. Should the requirements of the development be such as to use the full capacity of the transmission main, the entire cost of the transmission main shall be borne by the development. 
(Code 1975, § 25-47; Ord. No. 142, § 150)  
Sec. 42-154. - Deeding wells, mains to City. 
Whenever land is to be subdivided, any water wells, mains, and easements needed therefor, which may be appurtenant thereto or which may be used exclusively thereon, shall be deeded to the City in consideration of the City approving the record map of such tract or subdivision. However, where water wells and equipment are used to supply water to additional land not subdivided, the City may allow such wells and equipment to continue to supply such unsubdivided portion until such time as such parcel is subdivided into four or more parcels of land containing five acres or less. 
(Code 1975, § 25-48; Ord. No. 142, § 150)  
Secs. 42-156—42-178. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - INSTALLATIONS 
 
Sec. 42-179. - Permits required. 
(a)  A person who installs water mains and appurtenances, including fire services, fire hydrants, and water service connections, shall comply with applicable City standards for the construction of these facilities, shall be licensed by the State of California to do this type of construction work, and possess a current City business license. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to lay or construct any water mains, fire services, fire hydrants, service connections, or appurtenances, in, over, along, across or through any public right-of-way, or attach to the water system of the City, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the City Engineer as provided herein. 
(Code 1975, § 25-51; Ord. No. 78-17, § 1)  
Sec. 42-180. - Applications—Fee. 
Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by an issuance fee as established by resolution of the City Council; no part of which shall be returned to the applicant regardless of the action taken on the application. This application fee shall be in addition to an application fee for excavations in the public right-of-way and other required permits. 
(Code 1975, § 25-52; Ord. No. 78-17, § 1; Ord. No. 82-8, § 8)  
Sec. 42-181. - Same—Content. 
Applications for permits required by this article shall be filed in writing with the City Engineer. The application shall be signed by the applicant and shall state: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The location, purpose, extent and nature of the proposed excavation, fill, or obstruction. 
(3)  The time during which it is estimated that the excavation, fill, or obstruction will exist. 
(4)  That the applicant agrees to indemnify, defend, and save the City, its authorized agents, officers, representatives, and employees, harmless from and against any and all penalties, liabilities, or annoyances or loss resulting from claims or court action and arising out of any accident, loss, or damage to persons or property happening or occurring as a proximate result of any work undertaken under the permit granted pursuant to the application. 
(5)  That the applicant agrees that if any tank, pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, or other installation of any nature or kind placed in the excavation, fill, or obstruction for which the permit is issued, shall at any time in the future interfere with the use, repair, improvement, widening, or change of grade of the highway, the applicant or his successors or assigns, within ten days after the receipt of a written notice from the City Engineer to do so, will at his or her own expense either remove such tank, pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, or other installation, or, subject to the approval of the City Engineer, relocate them to a site which may be designated by the Engineer. 
(6)  Any additional information which the City Engineer may deem necessary for the proper disposition of the application. 
(Code 1975, § 25-53; Ord. No. 78-17, § 1)  
Sec. 42-182. - Same—Accompanying material. 
(a)  The application shall be accompanied by a plat showing the location, dimension, nature of the proposed excavation, obstruction, or fill, and other detail which the City Engineer may require. 
(b)  Each applicant for permit shall submit to the City Engineer satisfactory proof of the applicant's right to use the highway for the purpose set forth in the application. 
(Code 1975, § 25-54; Ord. No. 78-17, § 1)  
Sec. 42-183. - Same—Changes required by engineer. 
The City Engineer may require such changes in the application respecting the location, dimensions, character or number of the proposed excavations, fills, or obstructions as in his or her opinion may be necessary for the protections of the highway, the prevention of undue interference with traffic, or to assure the safety of persons using the highway. 
(Code 1975, § 25-55; Ord. No. 78-17, § 1)  
Sec. 42-184. - Same—Deadline for filing. 
Applications for permits hereunder shall be filed not less than 48 hours, two regular working days, before the work is proposed to be done. 
(Code 1975, § 25-56; Ord. No. 78-17, § 1)  
Sec. 42-185. - Permit—Issuance. 
If the applicant for a permit complies in all respects with this article and with all other applicable laws, rules, regulations, or ordinances of the City or of any other public agency and pays the fees and deposits required by this article, the City Engineer shall approve the application and issue the permit. 
(Code 1975, § 25-57; Ord. No. 78-17, § 1)  
Sec. 42-186. - Same—Conditions. 
The permit shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The permit must be kept at the site of the work and be shown on demand to any authorized representative of the City or any law enforcement officer. 
(2)  The permit shall authorize work to be performed only as to such portion of the highway over which the City has jurisdiction. 
(3)  All work shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of this article and all applicable laws, rules, and regulations of the City and any other public agency and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. 
(4)  The permit shall be nontransferable. 
(5)  The City Engineer may cancel the permit unless the work authorized therein is commenced within 60 days of the issuance of the permit and thereafter, in the opinion of the City Engineer, is diligently prosecuted to completion. Cancellation may be effected by giving written notice thereof by sending such notice to the applicant by ordinary mail to the address shown on the application. 
(6)  The City Engineer may, either at the time of the issuance of the permit or at any time thereafter until the completion of the work, prescribe such additional conditions as he or she may deem reasonably necessary for the protection of the highway or for the prevention of undue interference with traffic or to ensure the safety of persons using the highway. 
(Code 1975, § 25-58; Ord. No. 78-17, § 1)  
Sec. 42-187. - Same—Issuance fee. 
(a)  A separate permit and issuance fee shall be required for installing a water main and other appurtenances not specifically outlined below. 
(b)  A separate permit and issuance fee shall be required for fire hydrant or private fire service. 
(c)  A separate permit and issuance shall be required for installing water service connections. 
(d)  These permits and issuance fees are in addition to permits and fees required for excavating in the public right-of-way and the payment breakage deposit required therein. 
(e)  In the event the requested service line and meter is less than three inches, no permit is required if the City installs the service line and meter as outlined in section 42-69. If the contractor desires to do the work, then applicable requirements as outlined herein shall apply. If the meter size and service line is three inches or greater, then the permit and issuance fee is required and the work shall be done in accordance with applicable sections herein. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, no permit or fee shall be required for work done pursuant to subdivision improvement agreements. 
(Code 1975, § 25-59; Ord. No. 78-17, § 1)  
Secs. 42-188—42-212. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - WATER WELLS 
 
Sec. 42-213. - Drilling for water. 
No person shall drill for water within the corporate limits of the City without first obtaining a permit therefor from the City Council. 
(Code 1975, § 25-2; Ord. No. 142, § 130)  
Sec. 42-214. - Adopted. 
The City Council does hereby adopt Ordinance Number 2607 of the County of Orange, entitled, "An Ordinance Adding Article 2 to Division 5, Title 4 of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange, California," and dated July 18, 1972. The City Council intends by this section to adopt said Ordinance Number 2607. No amendment to said ordinance by the Board of Supervisors of the County of Orange shall be deemed adopted by the City Council unless specifically so adopted by further sections. 
(Code 1975, § 25-50; Ord. No. 75-23) 
Editor's note— A copy of the ordinance adopted by this section is on file in the office of the City Clerk.  
Secs. 42-215—42-236. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL 
 
Sec. 42-237. - Cross connections required. 
To comply with the regulations of the State Department of Public Health and the drinking water standards of the United States Public Health Service, the Water Division shall require the installation of approved double check valves or other approved backflow protection devices by and at the expense of the customer before service shall be granted whenever necessary. It shall be unlawful for any person to draw water from any City pipes directly into any stationary steam boiler, hydraulic elevator, power pump or similar apparatus. The service of water to any premises may be immediately discontinued by the Water Division if any defect is found in the check valve installations or other protective devices or if it is found that dangerous unprotected cross connections exist. Service will not be restored until such defects are corrected. 
(Code 1975, § 25-37; Ord. No. 142, § 140)  
Sec. 42-238. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Air-gap separation means a physical break between a supply pipe and a receiving vessel. The air-gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel, in no case less than one inch. 
Approved backflow prevention device means devices which have passed laboratory and field evaluation tests performed by a recognized testing organization which has demonstrated their competency to perform such tests to the California Department of Health Services. 
Approved water supply means any water supply whose potability is regulated by a State or local health agency. 
Auxiliary supply means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the approved water supply. 
AWWA Standard means an official standard developed and approved by the American Water Works Association (AWWA). 
Backflow means a flow condition, caused by a differential in pressure, that causes the flow of water or other liquids, gases, mixtures or substances into the distributing pipes of a potable supply of water from any source or sources other than an approved water supply source. Back-siphonage is one cause of backflow. Back pressure is the other cause. 
Contamination means a degradation of the quality of the potable water by any foreign substance which creates a hazard to the public health or which may impair the usefulness or quality of the water. 
Cross connection , as used in this article, means any unprotected actual or potential connection between a potable water system used to supply water for drinking purposes and any source or system containing unapproved water or a substance that is not or cannot be approved as safe, wholesome, and potable. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices, or other devices through which backflow could occur, shall be considered to be cross connections. 
Double check valve assembly means an assembly of at least two independently acting check valves including tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the check valve assembly and test cocks available for testing the watertightness of each check valve. 
Health agency means the California Department of Health Services, or the local agency with respect to a small water system. 
Local health agency means the County or City health authority. 
Person means an individual, corporation, company, association, partnership, municipality, public utility, or other public body or institution. 
Premises means any and all areas on a customer's property which is served or has the potential to be served by the public water system. 
Public water system means a system for the provision of piped water to the public for human consumption through pipes or other constructed conveyances which has 15 or more service connections or regularly serves an average of 25 individuals daily at least 60 days out of the year. 
Reclaimed water means a wastewater which as a result of treatment is suitable for uses other than potable use. 
Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device means a device incorporating two or more check valves and an automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two checks, a tightly closing shut-off valve on each side of the check valve assembly, and equipped with necessary test cocks for testing. 
Service connection refers to the point of connection of a water user's piping to the water supplier's facilities. 
Water supplier means the person who owns or operates the approved water supply system. 
Water user means any person obtaining water from an approved water supply system. 
(Code 1975, § 25-60; Ord. No. 89-04)  
Sec. 42-239. - Cross connection protection requirements. 
(a)  General provisions. 
(1)  Unprotected cross connections with the public water supply are prohibited. 
(2)  Whenever backflow protection has been found necessary, the City will require the water user to install an approved backflow prevention device by and at the owner's expense for continued services or before a new service will be granted. 
(3)  Wherever backflow protection has been found necessary on a water supply line entering a water user's premises, then any and all water supply lines from the City's mains entering such premises, buildings, or structures shall be protected by an approved backflow prevention device. The type of device to be installed will be in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Where protection is required. 
(1)  Each service connection from the City water system for supplying water to premises having an auxiliary water supply shall be protected against backflow of water from the premises into the public water system unless the auxiliary water supply is accepted as an additional source by the City, and is approved by the public health agency having jurisdiction. 
(2)  Each service connection from the City water system for supplying water to any premises on which any substance is handled in such fashion as may allow its entry into the water system shall be protected against backflow of the water from the premises into the public system. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the City water system which have been subjected to deterioration in sanitary quality. 
(3)  Backflow prevention devices shall be installed on the service connection to any premises having: 
a.  Internal cross connections that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled to the satisfaction of the State or local health department and the City; or 
b.  Intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impractical or impossible to ascertain whether or not cross connections exist. 
(c)  Type of protection required. 
(1)  The type of protection that shall be provided to prevent backflow into the approved water supply shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard that exists on the consumer's premises. The type of protective device that may be required (listing in an increasing level of protection) includes: double check valve assembly (DC), reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device (RP), and an air-gap separation (AG). The water user may choose a higher level of protection than required by the City. The minimum types of backflow protection required to protect the approved water supply at the user's water connection to premises with varying degrees of hazard are given in Table 1 of this section. Situations which are not covered in Table 1 of this section shall be evaluated on a case by case basis and the appropriate backflow protection shall be determined by the City or health agency. 
TABLE 1. TYPE OF BACKFLOW PROTECTION REQUIRED 
Degree Of Hazard 	Minimum Type of Backflow Prevention 
Hazardous Substances 
Premises where hazardous substances are handled in any manner in which the substances may enter a potable water system. This does not include a single family residence that has a sewage lift pump. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the City. 	AG 
Premises where there are irrigation systems into which fertilizers, herbicides, or pesticides are, or can be, injected. 	RP 
Auxiliary Water Supplies 
Premises where there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply which is inter-connected with the public water system. An RP or DC may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the City. 	AG 
Premises where there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply and there are no interconnections with the public water system. A DC may be provided in lieu of an RP if approved by the health agency and the City. 	RP 
Fire Protection Systems 
Premises where the fire system is directly supplied from the public water system and there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply on or to the premises (not interconnected). 	DC 
Premises where the fire system is supplied from the public water system and interconnected with an unapproved auxiliary water supply. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the City. 	AG 
Premises where the fire system is supplied from the public water system and where either elevated storage tanks or fire pumps which take suction from the private reservoirs or tanks are used. 	DC 
Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for cross connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at sufficiently short notice to assure that cross connections do not exist. 	RP 
Premises where there is a repeated history of cross connections being established or reestablished. 	RP 
 
(2)  Two or more services supplying water from different street mains to the same building, structure, or premises through which an interstreet main flow may occur, shall have at least a standard check valve on each water service to be located adjacent to and on the property side of the respective meters. Such check valve shall not be considered adequate if backflow protection is deemed necessary to protect the City's mains from pollution or contamination; in such cases, the installation of approved backflow devices at such service connections shall be required. 
(Code 1975, § 25-61; Ord. No. 89-04)  
Sec. 42-240. - Backflow prevention devices. 
(a)  Approved backflow prevention devices. 
(1)  Only backflow prevention devices which have been approved by the City shall be acceptable for installation by a water user connected to the City's potable water system. 
(2)  The City will provide, upon request, to any affected customer a list of approved backflow prevention devices. 
(b)  Backflow prevention device installation. Backflow prevention devices shall be installed in a manner prescribed in Section 7603, Title 17 of the California Administrative Code (17 CCR § 7603). Location of the devices should be as close as practical to the user's service connection. The City shall have the final authority in determining the required location of a backflow prevention device. 
(1)  Air-gap separation (AG). The air-gap separation shall be located on the user's side of and as close to the service connection as is practical. All piping from the service connection to the receiving tank shall be above grade and be entirely visible. No water use shall be provided from any point between the service connection and the air-gap separation. The water inlet piping shall terminate a distance of at least two pipe diameters of the supply inlet, but in no case less than one inch above the overflow rim of the receiving tank. 
(2)  Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device (RP). The approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed on the user's side of and as close to the service connection as is practical. The device shall be installed a minimum of 12 inches above grade and not more than 36 inches above grade measured from the bottom of the device and with a minimum of 12 inches side clearance. The device shall be installed so that it is readily accessible for maintenance and testing. Water supplied from any point between the service connection and the RP device shall be protected in a manner approved by the City. 
(3)  Double check valve assembly (DC). The approved double check valve assembly shall be located as close as practical to the user's connection and shall be installed above grade, if possible, and in a manner where it is readily accessible for testing and maintenance. If a double check valve assembly is put below grade, it must be installed in a vault such that there is a minimum of six inches between the bottom of the vault and the bottom of the device, so that the top of the device is no more than a maximum of eight inches below grade, so there is a minimum of six inches of clearance between the side of the device with the test cocks and the side of the vault, and so there is a minimum of three inches clearance between the other side of the device and the side of the vault. Special consideration must be given to double check valve assemblies of the "Y" type. These devices must be installed on their "side" with the test cocks in a vertical position so that either check valve may be removed for service without removing the device. Vaults which do not have an integrated bottom must be placed on a three-inch layer of gravel. 
(c)  Backflow prevention device testing and maintenance. 
(1)  The owners of any premises on which, or on account of which, backflow prevention devices are installed, shall have the devices tested by a person who has demonstrated their competency in testing of these devices to the City. Backflow prevention devices must be tested at least annually and immediately after installation, relocation or repair. The City may require a more frequent testing schedule if it is determined to be necessary. No device shall be placed back in service unless it is functioning as required. A report in a form acceptable to the City shall be filed with the City each time a device is tested, relocated, or repaired. These devices shall be serviced, overhauled, or replaced whenever they are found to be defective and all costs of testing, repair, and maintenance shall be borne by the water user. 
(2)  The City will supply affected water users with a list of persons acceptable to the City to test backflow prevention devices. The City will notify affected customers by mail when annual testing of a device is needed and also supply users with the necessary forms which must be filled out each time a device is tested or repaired. 
(d)  Backflow prevention device removal. Approval must be obtained from the City before a backflow prevention device is removed, relocated, or replaced. 
(1)  Removal. The use of a device may be discontinued and the device removed from service upon presentation of sufficient evidence to the City to verify that a hazard no longer exists or is not likely to be created in the future; 
(2)  Relocation. A device may be relocated following confirmation by the City that the relocation will continue to provide the required protection and satisfy installation requirements. A retest will be required following the relocation of the device; 
(3)  Repair. A device may be removed for repair, provided the water use is either discontinued until the repair is completed and the device is returned to service, or the service connection is equipped with other backflow protection approved by the City. A retest will be required following the repair of the device; 
(4)  Replacement. A device may be removed and replaced provided the water use is discontinued until the replacement device is installed. All replacement devices must be approved by the City and must be commensurate with the degree of hazard involved. 
(Code 1975, § 25-62; Ord. No. 89-04)  
Sec. 42-241. - User supervisor. 
At each premises where it is necessary, in the opinion of the City, a user supervisor shall be designated by and at the expense of the water user. This user supervisor shall be responsible for the monitoring of the backflow prevention devices and for avoidance of cross connections. In the event of contamination or pollution of the drinking water system due to a cross connection on the premises, the City shall be promptly notified by the user supervisor so that appropriate measures may be taken to overcome the contamination. The water user shall inform the City of the user supervisor's identity on, as a minimum, an annual basis and whenever a change occurs. 
(Code 1975, § 25-63; Ord. No. 89-04)  
Sec. 42-242. - Administrative procedures. 
(a)  Water system survey. 
(1)  The City shall review all requests for new services to determine if backflow protection is needed. Plans and specifications must be submitted to the City upon request for a review of possible cross connection hazards as a condition of service for new service connections. If it is determined that a backflow prevention device is necessary to protect the public water system, the required device must be installed before service will be granted. 
(2)  The City may require an on-premises inspection to evaluate cross connection hazards. The City will transmit a written notice requesting an inspection appointment to each affected water user. Any customer which cannot or will not allow an on-premises inspection of their piping system shall be required to install the backflow prevention device the City considers necessary. 
(3)  The City may, at its discretion, require a reinspection for cross connection hazards of any premises to which it serves water. The City will transmit a written notice requesting an inspection appointment to each affected water user. Any customer which cannot or will not allow an on-premises inspection of their piping system shall be required to install the backflow prevention device the City considers necessary. 
(b)  Customer notification; device installation. 
(1)  The City will notify the water user of the survey findings, listing corrective action to be taken if required. A period of 60 days will be given to complete all corrective action required including installation of backflow prevention devices. 
(2)  A second notice will be sent to each water user which does not take the required corrective action prescribed in the first notice within the 60 days period allowed. The second notice will give the water user a two-week period to take the required corrective action. If no action is taken within the two-week period, the City may terminate water service to the affected water user until the required corrective actions are taken. 
(c)  Customer notification; testing and maintenance. 
(1)  The City will notify each affected water user when it is time for the backflow prevention device installed on their service connection to be tested. This written notice shall give the water user 30 days to have the device tested and supply the water user with the necessary form to be completed and resubmitted to the City. 
(2)  A second notice shall be sent to each water user which does not have the backflow prevention device tested as prescribed in the first notice within the 30-day period allowed. The second notice will give the water user a two-week period to have the backflow prevention device tested. If no action is taken within the two-week period, the City may terminate water service to the affected water user until the subject device is tested. 
(Code 1975, § 25-64; Ord. No. 89-04)  
Sec. 42-243. - Water service termination. 
(a)  Generally. When the City encounters water uses that represent a clear and immediate hazard to the potable water supply that cannot be immediately abated, the City shall institute the procedure for discontinuing the City water service. 
(b)  Basis for termination. Conditions or water uses that create a basis for water service termination shall include, but are not limited to, the following items: 
(1)  Refusal to install a required backflow prevention device; 
(2)  Refusal to test a backflow prevention device; 
(3)  Refusal to repair a faulty backflow prevention device; 
(4)  Refusal to replace a faulty backflow prevention device; 
(5)  Direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a sewer line; 
(6)  Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a system or equipment containing contaminants; 
(7)  Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and an auxiliary water system; 
(8)  A situation which presents an immediate health hazard to the public water system. 
(c)  Water service termination procedures. 
(1)  For conditions set forth in subsection (b)(1), (2), (3), or (4) of this section, the City will terminate service to a customer's premises after two written notices have been sent specifying the corrective action needed and the time period in which it must be done. If no action is taken within the allowed time period, water service may be terminated. 
(2)  For conditions set forth in subsection (b)(4), (5), (6), (7), or (8) of this section, the City will take the following steps: 
a.  Make reasonable effort to advise water user of intent to terminate water service; 
b.  Terminate water supply and lock service value. The water service will remain inactive until correction of violations have been approved by the City. 
(Code 1975, § 25-65; Ord. No. 89-04)  
Secs. 42-244—42-266. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - CONSERVATION AND WATER MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, adopted September 1, 2015, amended art. VII, §§ 42-267—42-275, in its entirety, to read as set out herein. Former art. VII pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Code 1975, §§ 25-3—25-5, 25-67—25-72; Ord. No. 90-05; Ord. No. 142, §§ 130, 170 and Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, adopted September 2, 2014. 
State Law reference— Water shortage emergencies, Water Code § 350 et seq. 
 
Sec. 42-267. - Permanent water conservation requirements—Prohibition against wasting water. 
The following water conservation requirements are effective at all times and shall be permanent. Violations of this section shall be considered waste and an unreasonable use of water. 
(1)  Watering hours. Watering or irrigating of any lawn, landscape, or other vegetated area with potable water is prohibited between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. Pacific Standard Time, except by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, or a hand-held hose equipped with an automatic closing water shut-off nozzle or device, or if watering or irrigating for very short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing a landscape irrigation system. 
(2)  Watering duration. Watering or irrigating of any lawn, landscape, or other vegetated area with potable water using a landscape irrigation system or a watering device that is not continuously attended is limited to no more than 15 minutes of watering per day, per station. This subsection does not apply to low flow drip type irrigation systems and weather based controllers or stream rotor and other high efficiency sprinklers as identified by the regional water supplier. 
(3)  No excessive water flow or runoff. Watering or irrigating of any lawn, landscape, or other vegetated area in a manner that causes or allows excessive water flow such as runoff onto an adjoining sidewalk, driveway, street, alley, gutter, or ditch is prohibited. 
(4)  No washing down hard or paved surfaces. Washing down hard or paved surfaces, including but not limited to sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios, or alleys, is prohibited except when necessary to alleviate safety or sanitary hazards, and then only by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device or a low-volume, high-pressure cleaning machine equipped to recycle any water used. 
(5)  Obligation to fix leaks, breaks or malfunctions. Any person who, as owner or occupant of any premises, fails, refuses, or neglects to maintain such premises with plumbing of such character and quality as to prevent the excessive use, loss or escape of water through breaks, leaks, or other malfunctions shall, ten days after being served by the Water Superintendent by written notice of such intention, have all water service discontinued pending such repairs. 
(6)  Re-circulating water required for water fountains and decorative water features. No person shall waste or cause, permit, or allow to be wasted, any water in any ornamental fountain, or other decorative water feature of any kind whatsoever nor shall such person fail, refuse, or neglect to recirculate such water through such ornamental fountain or other decorative water feature and no person shall cause, permit, or allow any water furnished through the facilities of the water system to be wasted in any manner whatsoever. 
(7)  Washing vehicles. Using potable water to wash or clean a vehicle, including but not limited to any automobile, truck, van, bus, motorcycle, boat, or trailer, whether motorized or not is prohibited, except by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container or a hand-held hose equipped with an automatic closing water shut-off nozzle or device. This subsection does not apply to any commercial car washing facility. 
(8)  Drinking water served upon request only. Eating or drinking establishments, including but not limited to restaurants, hotels, cafes, cafeterias, bars, clubs, or other public places where food or drinks are sold, served, or offered for sale, are prohibited from providing drinking water to any person unless it is expressly requested by the person. 
(9)  Laundering in commercial lodging establishments. Hotels, motels, and all other commercial lodging establishments must provide customers the option of not having towels and linen laundered daily. A notice of this option must be prominently displayed in each bathroom using clear and easily understood language. 
(10)  No installation of single pass cooling systems. Installation of a single pass cooling system is prohibited in any building requesting new water service. 
(11)  Re-circulating water systems required in commercial car wash and laundry systems. New commercial conveyor car washes and new commercial launderers are prohibited from installing non-recirculating water systems. 
(12)  Restaurants required to use water conserving dish wash spray valves. Food preparation establishments, such as restaurants, cafes, cafeterias, or bars must use water conserving low-flow, high-efficiency dish wash spray valves. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, 9-1-2015)  
Sec. 42-268. - Irrigation, sprinkling. 
The use of water for irrigation, sprinkling, wetting, construction, or industrial purposes may be restricted if and when such use is contrary to the public safety or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, 9-1-2015)  
Sec. 42-269. - Filling pools. 
(a)  Filling or refilling of more than two feet of water for any residential swimming pool or outdoor spa (excluding community pools and spas) requires prior notification and permission from the Community Services Department. 
(b)  Permission to take water in large quantities shall be given only if it can be safely delivered through the City's facilities and if other consumers are not inconvenienced. 
(c)  Swimming pools or spas. New residential swimming pools and outdoor spas are required to be fitted with an appropriate cover designed to minimize evaporation loss when not in use. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, 9-1-2015)  
Sec. 42-270. - Application. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all persons, residents, customers, water users, and property served by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, 9-1-2015)  
Sec. 42-271. - Designated irrigation day defined. 
A "designated irrigation day" is determined by the last digit in the street address. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, 9-1-2015)  
Sec. 42-272. - Authorization. 
The City Manager, or his or her designated representative, is hereby authorized and directed to implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, 9-1-2015)  
Sec. 42-273. - Water conservation stages. 
No customer of the City shall knowingly make, cause, use, or permit the use of water supplied by the City for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, governmental, or any other purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of this chapter, in an amount in excess of the amounts authorized by this article, or during any period of time other than the periods of time specified in this article. At no time shall water be wasted or used unreasonably. The following stages shall take effect upon adoption of a resolution by the City Council declaring an emergency: 
(1)  Stage 1 water watch. Stage 1 shall apply, upon declaration of the City Council, during periods when the possibility exists that the City will not be able to meet all of the reasonably beneficial demands of its customers, or when the State or the regional water supplier requests water conservation measures throughout its service boundaries. 
a.  Lawn watering and landscape irrigation, including construction meter irrigation, shall be limited to three days per week on a schedule to be established and posted by the City except by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, or a hand-held hose equipped with an automatic closing water shut-off nozzle or device, or if watering or irrigating for very short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing a landscape irrigation system. All sprinkler irrigation is prohibited between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
b.  Commercial nurseries shall be required to curtail all nonessential water use. 
c.  [Reserved.] 
d.  All residential swimming pools and spas, when not in use, should be covered with an appropriate cover designed to minimize evaporation losses. 
e.  Watering of parks, school grounds, and recreational fields is prohibited between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
f.  The use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited to firefighting and related activities, for construction activities, or other activities necessary to maintain the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
g.  All leaks, breaks, or other malfunctions in a plumbing or water distribution system shall be repaired promptly upon discovery or within three days of notification by the City, unless other arrangements are made with the City. 
h.  Upon notice to the City's water users, the City may implement other reasonable water use prohibitions in furtherance of this article. 
(2)  Stage 2 water alert. Stage 2 shall apply, upon declaration of the City Council, during periods when the probability exists that the City will not be able to meet all of the reasonably beneficial water demands of its customers, or when the regional water supplier requests additional water conservation measures throughout its service boundaries. During stage 2, the following water conservation measures shall apply: 
a.  Lawn watering and landscape irrigation, including construction meter irrigation shall be limited to two days per week on a schedule to be established and posted by the City except by use of a handheld bucket or similar container, or a hand-held hose equipped with an automatic closing water shut-off nozzle or device or if watering or irrigating for very short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing a landscape irrigation system. All sprinkler irrigation is prohibited between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
b.  Commercial nurseries irrigation shall be prohibited between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. and shall be required to curtail all nonessential water use. 
c.  [Reserved.] 
d.  All residential swimming pools and spas, when not in use, should be covered with an appropriate cover designed to minimize evaporation losses in order to be entitled to fill or refill under this article. 
e.  Watering of parks, school grounds, and recreational fields is prohibited between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
f.  The use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited to firefighting and related activities, for construction activities, or other activities necessary to maintain the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
g.  All leaks, breaks, or other malfunctions in a plumbing or water distribution system shall be repaired promptly upon discovery or within two days of notification by the City, unless other arrangements are made with the City. 
h.  Upon notice to the City's water users, the City may implement other reasonable water use prohibitions in furtherance of this article. 
(3)  Stage 3 water alert. Stage 3 shall apply, upon declaration of the City Council in accordance with Water Code § 350 et seq., during periods when the City will not be able to meet all of the water demands of its customers. During stage 3, the following water conservation measures shall apply: 
a.  All watering or irrigating of any lawn, landscape, or other vegetated area by residents, businesses, and City with potable water shall be prohibited, except as approved by the City. 
b.  Washing of autos, trucks, trailers, boats, and other types of mobile equipment is prohibited. Washing is permitted at any time on the immediate premises of a commercial car wash which uses partially reclaimed or recycled water. Further, the City Manager or his or her designated representative may exempt from this subsection any vehicle washing upon determining that the health, safety, and welfare of the public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleaning of the vehicles such as garbage trucks and vehicles used to transport food and perishables. The use of water by all types of commercial car washes shall be reduced in volume by 25 percent. 
c.  Initial filling and refilling of over two feet of water in swimming pools and outdoor space is prohibited. Initial filling or refilling of any outdoor water feature or pond is prohibited, except as necessary to sustain aquatic life, provided that such life has been actively managed within the water feature prior to the declaration of a stage 3 water alert. All residential swimming pools and spas, when not in use, shall be covered with an appropriate cover designed to minimize evaporation losses. 
d.  The use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited to firefighting and activities necessary to maintain the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
e.  New construction meters or permits for unmetered service will not be issued. Construction water shall not be used for earth work or road construction purposes except when recycled water is used. 
f.  Upon declaration of a stage 3 water warning, no new potable water service shall be provided, no new temporary or permanent water meters shall be provided, and no statements of immediate ability to serve or provide potable water service shall be issued, except under the following circumstances: 
1.  A valid, unexpired building permit has been issued for the project; or 
2.  The project is necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare; or 
3.  The applicant provides substantial evidence of an enforceable commitment that water demands for the project will be offset prior to the provision of a new water meter(s) to the satisfaction of the City. 
g.  New construction meters or permits for unmetered service will not be issued. Construction water shall not be used for earth work or road construction purposes except when recycled water is used. 
h.  All leaks, breaks, or other malfunctions in a plumbing or water distribution system shall be repaired promptly upon discovery or within one day of notification by the City, unless other arrangements are made with the City. 
i.  Upon notice to the City's water users, the City may implement other reasonable water use prohibitions in furtherance of this article. 
(4)  Stage 4 water emergency. Stage 4 shall apply, upon declaration of the City Council in accordance with Water Code § 350 et seq., when a major failure of any supply or distribution facility, whether temporary or permanent, occurs in the water distribution system of the State Water Project, Metropolitan Water District or City water supply, distribution, or production facilities. During stage 4, the following water conservation measures shall apply: 
a.  All watering or irrigating of any lawn, landscape, or other vegetated area by residents and businesses with potable water shall be prohibited, except as approved by the City. 
b.  Washing of autos, trucks, trailers, boats, and other types of mobile equipment is prohibited. Washing is permitted at any time upon the immediate premises of a commercial car wash which uses partially reclaimed or recycled water. Further, the City Manager or his or her designated representative may exempt from this subsection any vehicle washing upon determining that the health, safety, and welfare of the public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleaning of the vehicles such as garbage trucks and vehicles used to transport food and perishables. The use of water by all types of commercial car washes shall be reduced in volume by 50 percent. 
c.  Filling, refilling, or adding of water to swimming pools, spas, water features, and ponds is prohibited, except as necessary to sustain aquatic life, provided that such life has been actively managed within the water feature prior to the declaration of a stage 3 water alert. All residential swimming pools and outdoor spas, when not in use, shall be covered with an appropriate cover designed to minimize evaporation losses. 
d.  Watering of parks, school grounds, and recreation fields is prohibited with the exception of plant materials classified to be rare, exceptionally valuable, or essential to the well-being of rare animals. 
e.  The use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited to firefighting or related activities necessary to maintain the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
f.  New construction meters or permits for unmetered service will not be issued. Construction water shall not be used for earth work or road construction purposes except when recycled water is used. 
g.  The use of water for commercial, manufacturing, or processing purposes shall be reduced in volume by 50 percent. 
h.  The City may shut off all non-essential water uses. 
i.  Upon notice to the City's water users, the City may implement other reasonable water use prohibitions in furtherance of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, 9-1-2015) 
State Law reference— Declaration of water shortage emergency shall be made only after a public hearing at which consumers of such water supply shall have an opportunity to be heard to protest against the declaration and to present their respective needs to said governing board, Water Code § 351.  
Sec. 42-274. - Mandatory conservation phase implementation. 
The City shall monitor the projected supply and demand for water by its customers on a daily basis. The City Council shall determine the extent of the conservation required through the implementation and/or termination of particular conservation stages in order for the City to prudently plan for and supply water to its customers. Thereafter, the City Manager or his or her designated representative may order that the appropriate stage of water conservation be implemented or terminated in accordance with the applicable provision of this article. The declaration shall be made by public announcement and notice shall be published a minimum of three consecutive times in a newspaper of general circulation. The stage designated shall become effective immediately upon announcement. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, 9-1-2015)  
Sec. 42-275. - Penalty. 
(a)  As provided in Water Code § 377, any violation of this article is a misdemeanor. Upon conviction thereof, such person shall be punished by imprisonment in the County jail for not more than 30 days, or by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, or by both. In addition to any other remedies which the City may have for the enforcement of this article, service of water shall be discontinued or appropriately limited to any customer who willfully uses water in violation of any provision thereof. 
(b)  Civil penalties. Civil penalties for failure to comply with any provision of this article are as follows: 
(1)  First violation. The City shall issue a written warning and deliver a copy of this article by mail. 
(2)  Second violation. A second violation will be issued following a first violation notice within the preceding 12 calendar months and is punishable by an administrative penalty pursuant to Section 2-378, et seq., not to exceed $100.00, which will be added to the violator's water bill. 
(3)  Third violation. A third violation will be issued following a second violation notices within the preceding 12 calendar months and is punishable by an administrative penalty pursuant to Section 2-378, et seq., not to exceed $250.00, which will be added to the violator's water bill. 
(4)  Fourth and subsequent violations. A fourth and any subsequent violation will be issued following a third violation notice within the preceding 12 calendar months and is punishable by an administrative penalty pursuant to Section 2-378, et seq., not to exceed $500.00 per violation, which will be added to the violator's water bill. In addition to any fines, a fourth or subsequent violation may result in the disconnection and/or termination of a customer's water service by the City. 
(c)  Cost of disconnecting service. A person or entity that violates this article is responsible for payment of the City's charges for disconnecting and/or reconnecting water service per the City's schedule of charges then in effect. Nonpayment of such disconnection or reconnection fees shall be subject to the same remedies as the nonpayment of basic water rates. 
(d)  Separate offenses. Each day that a violation of a provision of this article occurs is a separate offense. 
(e)  All administrative penalties shall be paid within 21 days from the mailing, posting, or personal service of the Violation notice. 
(f)  Notice and hearing. Fines shall be administered per Chapter Two, Article XI, Division 3 (commencing with Section 2-378). 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2, 9-1-2015)  
Chapter 44 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, adopted May 5, 2015, repealed ch. 44, arts. I—VII, §§ 44-1—44-10, 44-39—44-43, 44-75—44-80, 44-102—44-111, 44-136—44-140, 44-164—44-170, 44-194—44-201, 44-226—44-233, 44-260—44-277, 44-303—44-305, 44-335, 44-336, 44-361—44-366, 44-391—44-402, 44-423—44-427, 44-475—44-489, 44-517—44-522, 44-553—44-557, 44-578—44-580, 44-609—44-614, 44-632—44-638, 44-665—44-673, 44-705—44-707, 44-730—44-736, 44-756, 44-757, 44-783—44-792, 44-823—44-827, 44-848—44-855, 44-874—44-878, 44-905—44-909, 44-937—44-951, 44-976—44-981, 44-1006—44-1012, 44-1038—44-1043, 44-1070—44-1073, 44-1100—44-1106, 44-1136—44-1146, 44-1157—44-1163, 44-1171, 44-1191, 44-1192, 44-1218—44-1222, 44-1248—44-1256, 44-1286—44-1291, in its entirety; and enacted a new ch. 44 to read as set out herein. Former ch. 44 pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Code 1975, §§ 7-46, ch. 26, art. VI, div. 1, 26-9, 26-14, 26-54, 26-56, 26-57, 26-65, 26-68, 26-69, 26-85, 26-86, 26-146, 26-192; Ord. No. 79-11, § 1; Ord. No. 96-1, § 1; Ord. No. 98-07, §§ 3—10; Ord. No. 02-02, §§ 5—7; Ord. No. 94-05, § 1; Ord. No. 2003-07, § 3(exh. A); Ord. No. 2004-03, §§ 7—20, 23—25; Ord. No. 2004-04; Ord. No. 2004-09, §§ 5, 6, 8, 9; Ord. No. 2005-02, §§ 1—5; Ord. No. 2005-04, §§ 2, 3; Ord. No. 2005-05, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 2006-01, § 2; Ord. No. 2008-04, §§ 1, 4; Ord. No. 2008-05, §§ 2, 3(26-34), 4(26-152(b)), 5(26-165(b)), 6(26-188(b)), 7(26-191(d)(2)), 8(26-192(b)(2)), 9, 10(26-193(b)(1)(b), (b)(2)(b)), 11(26-194(c)(3), 12(26-204(a)), adopted December 2, 2008; Ord. No. 2009-04, §§ 3(26-10), 5(26-95), 6(26-240)—(26-246), adopted July 7, 2009; Ord. No. 2009-05, §§ 1(26-10), 2(26-34(c)), 3(26-41(a)), 4(26-65), adopted September 15, 2009; Ord. No. 2010-01, §§ 2(26A-2)—(26A-7), adopted April 6, 2010; Ord. No. 2010-02, §§ 3, 4, 6—9, 11, adopted October 5, 2010; Ord. No. 2010-03, §§ 2—4, 6, 7(26-247)—7(26-257), adopted October 19, 2010; Ord. No. 2011-02, §§ 3, 4, adopted March 15, 2011; Ord. No. 2011-03, § 3, adopted May 17, 2011; Ord. No. 2012-03, §§ 3—5, adopted April 3, 2012; Ord. No. 2013-01, §§ 3, 4, 5(26-217.10)—(26-217.70), adopted April 2, 2013; Ord. No. 2013-02, §§ 1—3, adopted April 2, 2013; Ord. No. 2013-03, §§ 1—5, adopted July 2, 2013 and Ord. No. 2014-03, §§ 2, 5, adopted October 21, 2014. 
State Law reference— Planning and Zoning Law, Government Code § 65000 et seq.; zoning generally, Government Code § 65800 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 44-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and cited as the City of La Palma Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-2. - Purpose. 
(a)  Purpose. The purposes of this chapter are to: 
(1)  Implement the goals, objectives, policies, and programs of the La Palma General Plan by classifying and regulating the uses of land and structures within the City. 
(2)  Designate the City into land use districts to guide the use of land and the implementation of development standards. 
(3)  Provide standards that result in high quality planning and design of development which enhance the visual character of the City, preserve the quality of development, and avoid conflicts between land uses. 
(4)  Manage growth in the limited undeveloped land within the City and guide actions to preserve or enhance development. 
(5)  Provide regulations for the subdivision of land in compliance with the Subdivision Map Act, Title 7, Section 4, Division 2 of the California Government Code (Government Code § 66425 et seq.). 
(6)  Provide clear and easily understood definitions for the terms used in this chapter. The meaning of words and phrases defined in this article applies throughout this chapter, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(b)  Reasons for regulations. Regulations are necessary in order to encourage the most appropriate use of land. The following are reasons for regulations: 
(1)  To enact the policies and goals of the general plan. 
(2)  To maintain or improve the value of property. 
(3)  To promote high quality homes and desirable neighborhoods. 
(4)  To provide high quality of life within the community. 
(5)  To lessen congestion of streets. 
(6)  To facilitate adequate provisions for community needs such as transportation, parks, and other public requirements. 
(7)  To protect and promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the City. 
(c)  Organization. This chapter is comprised of seven articles. The content of the articles is as follows: 
(1)  In general (Article I). This article is an introduction to the chapter and includes definitions. 
(2)  Zoning districts and allowable land uses (Article II). This article includes allowable uses and development standards for specific uses and specific zoning districts. Requirements for specialized uses such as adult oriented uses, automobile service stations, massage facilities, self-storage, community events, and tutorial facilities are included in this article. 
(3)  Standards applicable in all zoning districts (Article III). This article includes standards that are applicable to specific elements of development such as parking, signs, and landscaping. These standards are not zone specific and pertain to all areas of the City. 
(4)  Administrative procedures (Article IV). This article designates approval authority for discretionary and ministerial approvals and includes procedures for public hearings, appeals, amendments, enforcement actions, revocations, and modifications. 
(5)  Permits, plans, and certificates (Article V). This article includes the processes for various approvals and findings discussed in previous sections. 
(6)  Subdivisions (Article VI). This article outlines the processes for approving/disapproving certificates of compliance, lot line adjustments, parcel mergers, parcel maps, and tract maps. Requirements for dedication or fees in lieu are included in this article. 
(7)  Water efficient landscaping (Article VII). 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-3. - Applicability. 
All land and structures shall be used and constructed in compliance with regulations and requirements of this chapter, including obtaining all permits prior to construction/use inauguration, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-4. - Interpretation and application of chapter. 
This section provides rules for resolving questions about the meaning or applicability of any part of this chapter, in order to ensure the consistent interpretation and application of its provisions. 
(1)  Authority to interpret. The Community Development Director is assigned the responsibility and authority to interpret the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  Minimum requirements. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare. 
(3)  Greater restrictions control. When provisions of this chapter are more restrictive than are required by other provisions of this Code, other City regulations, or by private agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(4)  Provisions substantially the same. When the provisions of this chapter are substantially the same as existing ordinances relating to the same subject matter, they shall be construed as restatements and continuations, and not as new enactments. 
(5)  Agreement between private parties. It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any easement, covenant, or other agreement between private parties. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-5. - Interpretations of land uses. 
If a proposed use of land is not specifically listed in sections 44-78 and 44-139, the use shall not be allowed, except as follows: 
(1)  Use substantially the same. The Community Development Director or his/her designee may determine that a proposed use that is not listed in sections 44-78 and 44-139 is allowed if the proposed use is substantially the same in character and intensity as those listed in sections 44-78 and 44-139. Such a use is subject to the permit process that governs the category-in which it falls. 
(2)  Treating in the same manner. When the Community Development Director or his/her designee determines that a proposed, but unlisted, use is similar to a listed use, the proposed use will be treated in the same manner as the listed use in determining where it is allowed, what permits are required, and what other standards and requirements of this Development Code apply. 
(3)  Forward questions. The Community Development Director or his/her designee may forward questions about similar uses directly to the City Council for a determination. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 6, 5-3-2016)  
Sec. 44-6. - Word interpretations. 
(a)  Meaning of words. When used in this chapter, the terms "includes" and "including" shall mean including, but not limited to. 
(b)  Number of days. Whenever a number of days is specified in this chapter, or in any permit, condition of approval, or notice issued or given as provided for in this chapter, the number of days shall be construed as calendar days. Time limits will extend to the following working day when the last of the specified number of days falls on a weekend, holiday, or any other day that City hall is not open. 
(c)  References as amended. Where this chapter references applicable provisions of State law (e.g., the California Government Code, Subdivision Map Act, Public Resources Code, etc.), the reference shall be construed to be to the applicable State law provisions as they may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-7. - Division of zoning map. 
For convenience, portions of the zoning map may be employed in amending the zoning map or in making official reference to the zoning map, in place of using the entire zoning map document. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-02, adopted 10-5-2010, changed the designation of certain properties on the Land Use Zoning Map to "Planned Neighborhood Development." The zoning map was adopted by reference and incorporated into this Development Code by section 44-39 (Establishment of zoning districts), but has not been reprinted herein. The zoning map is on file and available for public examination in the offices of the Community Development Department.  
Sec. 44-8. - Consistency with county hazardous waste management plan. 
All applicable zoning, conditional use permit, and variance decisions and determinations by the City shall be consistent with the applicable provisions of the County hazardous waste management plan, or other applicable County plans, which identify general areas or siting criteria for hazardous waste facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-9. - Partial invalidity. 
If any, section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, the decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted this chapter and each article, section, sentence, clause, or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more parts of this chapter might be declared invalid. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-10. - Definitions. 
The purpose of this section is to provide clear and easily understood definitions for the terms used in this chapter. The meaning of words and phrases defined in this section applies throughout this chapter, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Terms not clearly defined in this section, other chapters of this Code, or in Webster's Dictionary shall be subject to the interpretation of the Community Development Director. 
Abandoned means to cease from developing, using, or maintaining a structure (including signs) or use for a stated period of time. Exceptions are temporary closures for repairs, alterations, or other similar situations. 
Abut or abutting. See adjoining. 
Access means usable ingress or egress to a property or use, from a public right-of-way. 
Accessory structure/building means a permanent or temporary structure detached from a principal structure on the same parcel, incidental to the principal building, and not designed for human habitation. 
  
Accessory use means a use naturally and normally incidental to, subordinate to, and devoted exclusively to the main use of the premises. 
Addition (expansion) means: 
(1)  The physical alteration of a structure that results in an increase in its floor area, volume, or height; also 
(2)  A structure added to the original structure after completion of the original structure. 
Adjacent means: 
(1)  Two or more parcels of land separated only by an alley, street, highway, or recorded easement; or 
(2)  Two or more objects that lie near or close to each other. 
Adjoining (abutting) means two or more parcels of land sharing a common boundary line or two or more objects that lie near or close to each other. 
Adult means a person 18 years of age or more. 
Adult oriented businesses. See Section 44-195 for definitions of terms. 
Alley means a public or private way, at the rear or side of property, permanently reserved as an ancillary means of vehicular or pedestrian access to adjoining property. 
Alteration means the physical change or rearrangement of the supporting members of an existing structure (e.g., bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, or interior partitions) as well as any change in doors, windows, means of ingress or egress, or any addition to or diminution of a structure, whether horizontally or vertically, or the moving of a structure from one location to another. 
Amusement arcade means an establishment that consists primarily of amusement devices. 
Amusement device means any device, machine, apparatus, computer, or other instrument (including electronic games, model games, and pinball games) operated electronically, mechanically, or manually for amusement purposes which requires the deposit of or payment of money, coin, token, or other thing of value, whether directly to the device or to the business establishment for the use or operation of the device, but which does not contain a payoff device for the return of slugs, money, coins, checks, or tokens. Amusement devices may include redemption games, devices or machines that dispense tickets that may be redeemed for non-cash prizes. 
Antenna means the outdoor portion of the receiving and transmitting equipment used for receiving or transmitting television, Internet, or radio waves or signals and includes any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs, or similar devices for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves external to or attached to the exterior of any building. 
Antenna, dish, means a curved, "dish-like" antenna. 
Antenna, pole, means a single pole for transmitting and/or receiving television, radio, or other similar waves. 
Antenna, tower, means a structure with two or more supports that touch the base or ground on which the tower is mounted. 
Apartment means a separate suite, not owner occupied, that includes kitchen facilities and is designed for and rented as the home, residence, or sleeping place of one or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit. 
Applicant means an owner or lessee of property, or his or her authorized agents, or persons who have contracted to purchase property contingent upon his or her ability to acquire the necessary permits under this chapter, or the agents of such person. 
Approved massage school means any school or institution of learning approved by the Massage Therapy Council that meets the minimum standards for training, that meets any of the requirements specified in California Business and Code § 4601(a), and that has not been otherwise unapproved by the Massage Therapy Council. 
Area means net area, unless otherwise specified. 
Area, net, means the area of a lot or parcel of land, less the area of existing or proposed public alleys, highways, streets or other necessary public easements, when included within a proposed development project. The term "net area" includes "net acreage." 
  
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
Artificial turf. See turf, artificial. 
Assisted living facility means a facility that provides a combination of housing, meals, supportive services, personalized assistance, and/or health care that responds to the individual requirements of those who need assistance with the activities of daily living but do not need 24-hour skilled medical care. An assisted living facility may provide other services, including recreational activities, financial services, and transportation. 
Attached means any structure that has a wall or roof in common with another structure. 
Auto repair, major, means a facility that provides reconstruction, rehabilitation, and refurbishment services for motorized vehicles, including body repair, engine and transmission overhauls, painting services, and other heavy vehicle maintenance activities. 
Auto repair, minor or routine maintenance, means and includes oil changes, the repair or replacement of tires, brake pads, hoses, fluids, and similar activities, but does not include maintenance or repair that involves the removal of the engine, transmission, or other major component or any significant body repair work that involves sanding, priming, or painting of a vehicle, motorized recreational vehicle, or recreational object. 
Awning means any permanent or removable projection designed for shade, attached to the building by brackets or other means, with no direct connection or support on the ground. 
Base flood means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood"). 
Block means a contiguous area or parcels of land surrounded by public streets, highways, freeways, railroad rights-of-way, greenbelts, flood control channels, creeks, washes, rivers, or unsubdivided acreage, or any combination thereof. 
Block party means a residential neighborhood social event that requires the temporary closure of a public right-of-way. 
Buildable area means the net portion of the parcel remaining after deducting all required setbacks and open space requirements from the gross area of the parcel. 
  
Building means any walled and roofed structure built and maintained principally above ground for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home. The term "building" shall include the term "structure." 
Building envelope means an area delineated on a plan in which all clearing and land disturbance for building construction shall be confined. If not delineated, it is the area of a parcel excluding any required front, side, or rear yard setback area, any recorded easement, or offer of dedication. 
Building façade means that portion of any exterior elevation of a building extending from grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves and the entire width of the building elevation. 
Building height means the vertical distance from the lowest point of the finished grade adjacent to the structure to the highest point of the structure, excluding chimneys, vents, and other incidental projections. 
  
Cannabis shall mean all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from marijuana. "Cannabis" also means "marijuana" as defined by California Health and Safety Code § 11018 as enacted by Chapter 1407 of the Statutes of 1972. The term "Cannabis" shall also have the same meaning as set forth in California Business and Professions Code § 19300.5(f), as may be amended from time to time. "Cannabis" does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. For the purpose of this chapter, "cannabis" does not mean "industrial hemp" as defined by California Food and Agricultural Code § 81000 or California Health and Safety Code § 11018.5. 
Cannabis cooperative shall mean two or more persons collectively or cooperatively cultivating, using, transporting, possessing, administering, delivering, or making available cannabis, with or without cultivation. 
Cannabis cultivation or cultivate shall have the same meaning as "cultivation" or "cultivate" set forth in California Business and Professions Code § 19300.5(l), as may be amended from time to time. 
Cannabis delivery shall have the same meaning as "delivery" set forth in California Business and Professions Code § 19300.5(m), as may be amended from time to time. 
Cannabis dispensary shall have the same meaning as "dispensary" set forth in California Business and Professions Code § 19300.5(n), as may be amended from time to time. For purposes of this chapter, dispensary shall also include a cooperative. Dispensary shall not include the following uses: 
(1)  A clinic licensed pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Div. 2, Ch. 1; 
(2)  A health care facility licensed pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Div. 2, Ch. 2; 
(3)  A residential care facility for persons with chronic life threatening illnesses licensed pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Div. 2, Ch. 3.01; 
(4)  A residential care facility for the elderly licensed pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Div. 2, Ch. 3.2; 
(5)  A residential hospice or home health agency licensed pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Div. 2, Ch. 8. 
Canopy means a portable, lightweight structure commonly constructed with cloth or nylon fabric over metal or plastic frames. Canopies may have open sides or be enclosed; they include tarps, exhibition tents, and other similar types of structures and exclude awnings, patios, porches, and carports. 
Caregiver or Primary Caregiver shall have the same meaning as set forth in California Health and Safety Code § 11362.7, as may be amended from time to time. 
Carport means a permanent roofed structure not completely enclosed to be used for vehicle parking for the occupants of the premises. The term "carport" includes the term "Porte-Cachere." 
Certified massage practitioner means a person who is certified by the Massage Therapy Council, under subdivision California Business and Professions Code § 4604.2 and who administers massage. 
Certified massage therapist means a person who is certified by the Massage Therapy Council, under California Business and Professions Code § 4604 and who administers massage. 
Change of use means the replacement of an existing use by a new use, or a change in the nature of an existing use, but not including a change of ownership, tenancy, name, or management where the previous nature of the use, line of business, or other function is substantially unchanged. 
Civic dance means any dance held or sponsored by any bona fide memorial, fraternal, or civic organization or by the City, any school, public recreation, or community service organization. 
Client intake area means the area inside a building or facility designated to be used for the gathering or processing of information from clients for the specified use or operation of the business or facility. 
Commercial cannabis activity shall have the same meaning as set forth in California Business and Professions Code § 19300.5(k), as may be amended from time to time. 
Commercial coach has the same meaning as "commercial modular" as that term is defined in this section. 
Commercial mixed-use means a project with planned integration of more than one type of significant sales tax revenue-producing uses in a building or set of buildings, specifically a combination of commercial, office, or institutional land uses. It maximizes space usage, has amenities and architectural expression and shall, to the greatest extent possible, be pedestrian-oriented and mitigate traffic and sprawl. All commercial mixed-use developments shall have not less than 65 percent of total square footage devoted to uses that generate retail sales tax on the first floor. 
Commercial modular, means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, designed and equipped for human occupancy for industrial, professional or commercial purposes, which is required to be moved under permit, and shall include a trailer coach as defined in California Vehicle Code § 635. 
Commercial modular, new. See manufactured home, new. 
Commercial modular, used. See manufactured home, used. 
Commercial vehicle means a vehicle customarily used as part of a business for the transportation of goods or people, including any vehicle that has been registered as a commercial vehicle with the California Department of Motor Vehicles. 
Communication facilities means a public or private structure that supports antennas, microwave dishes, and other related equipment (e.g., ground cabinets and structures) that sends and/or receives radio frequency signals. (Also see antenna. ) 
Community benefits means physical improvements provided in conjunction with a development project that are provided to improve the community, help achieve the City's vision for a quality environment, and address any burdens such development imposes. 
Community Development Director means the City Community Development Director and/or his or her designee. 
Community event. 
(1)  The term "community event" means any of the following: 
a.  Any activity that may result in the closure of any public street and which may temporarily require the installation or construction of material or devices using building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, flammable, or similar materials. 
b.  Any outdoor event, gathering, celebration, or activity held on public or private property where the public at-large is invited. 
c.  Any indoor or outdoor private event, gathering, celebration, or activity exceeding 150 people held on public property. 
(2)  The term "community event" shall not include temporary uses, as defined herein. 
Community Services Director means the City Community Services Director and/or his or her designee. 
Conditional use permit means a discretionary entitlement granted by the City Council under the provisions of this Development Code, which when granted, authorizes a specific use to be made of specific premises, subject to compliance with all terms and conditions imposed on the entitlement. 
Condominium means a development consisting of an undivided interest in common for a portion of a parcel coupled with a separate interest in space in a residential or commercial building on the parcel. 
Congregate care facility means a structure providing residence for more than 24 hours for a group of senior citizens or disabled persons, as defined by the State of California Health and Safety Code as a congregate living health care facility, with central or private kitchen, dining, recreational, etc., facilities with separate bedrooms and/or living quarters. 
Convalescent home means a licensed facility which provides 24-hour bed and ambulatory care for patients with post-operative convalescent, or chronic illness, or persons unable to care for themselves, but not including alcoholics, drug addicts, or persons with mental or contagious diseases or afflictions. The term "convalescent home" includes the terms "nursing home" and "rest home." 
Dancing club means any club or association of persons which conducts dances, other than public dances, for its members or bona fide guests at least once per month for which fees are charged, any collection or donation of money is given or received, or for which the amount of dues paid by each member is dependent upon, or related to, the attendance at such dances. 
Dangerous animal means any animal, reptile, fowl, or fish which is not naturally tame or which is known to be dangerous by the owner or which must be kept in confinement to be brought within the immediate power of the owner. 
Day care facilities means facilities that provide non-medical care and supervision of persons for periods of less than 24 hours. These facilities include the following, all of which are required to be licensed by the California State Department of Social Services: 
(1)  Adult day care, residential, means a facility, as defined in California Health and Safety Code § 1502, located in a single-family residence where an occupant of the residence provides care and supervision for six or fewer adults. 
(2)  Adult day care, business, as defined in California Health and Safety Code § 1502, means commercial or nonprofit adult day care facilities designed and approved to accommodate seven or more adults and includes senior centers. These may be operated in conjunction with a school or church facility, or as an independent land use. 
(3)  Child day care center means commercial or nonprofit child day care facilities designed and approved to accommodate 15 or more children and includes infant centers, preschools, sick-child centers, and school-age day care facilities. These may be operated in conjunction with a school or church facility, or as an independent land use. 
(4)  Large family day care home means a day care facility located in a single-family residence where an occupant of the residence provides care and supervision for nine to 14 children served by the day care facility. Children under the age of ten years who reside in the home shall count as children served by the day care facility. 
(5)  Small family day care home means a day care facility located in a single-family residence where an occupant of the residence provides care and supervision for eight or fewer children. Children under the age of ten years who reside in the home shall count as children served by the day care facility. 
Day spa means a personal service use providing a variety of health and beauty services, including hairdressing, manicure, and similar services. Facilities providing massage services are also considered massage parlors and are covered by regulations for that use. 
Density means the number of dwelling units per net acre, unless otherwise stated, for residential uses. 
Density bonus shall have the meaning as defined by State law (California Government Code § 65915(f)). 
Detached means the condition of not having a wall or roof in common with any other structure. 
Development. 
(1)  The term "development" means: 
a.  The placement or erection of any solid material or structure; 
b.  Discharge or disposal of any gaseous liquid, solid or thermal waste; 
c.  Grading, removing or extraction of any soil or materials; 
d.  Change in the density or intensity of use of land, including, but not limited to, subdivision in compliance with the Subdivision Map Act (Government Code § 66410 et seq.), and any other division of land, including lot splits, except where the land division is brought about in connection with the purchase of the land by a public agency for public recreational use; 
e.  Construction, reconstruction, demolition, or alteration of the size of any structure, including any facility of any private, public, or municipal utility; and 
f.  The removal of any major vegetation. 
(2)  As used in this chapter, the term "structure" includes any building, road, pipe, conduit, siphon, telephone line, and electrical power transmission and distribution line. 
(3)  The term "project," as defined in State law (California Government Code § 65931), is included within this definition. 
Disability shall have the meaning as set forth in Government Code § 12926. 
Driveway means an improved area designated on a parcel that is unencumbered to a height of not less than eight feet, is clear of structures, and in all other ways is suitable to provide vehicular access to a garage, carport, or other required off-street parking space or loading facility. A driveway serving a residential use shall be further defined as a paved way over the shortest distance between a garage, carport, or other approved parking area and the point of access thereto from a street or alley. 
Drought-tolerant plant means a native or non-native plant species that can survive extended periods of time without rain or supplemental irrigation, while remaining healthy and retaining acceptable appearance. 
Duplex means a unit within a separate and detached building within a residential zoned area, which building consists of two self-contained units within the confines of the building, each of which provides housing accommodation for a single family within the confines of the unit. Duplexes that are able to undergo the subdivision process and are sold to differing entities do not qualify as second unit residences. 
Dwelling means a room or group of rooms (including sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation facilities, but not more than one kitchen) that constitutes an independent housekeeping unit, occupied or intended for occupancy by one household on a long-term basis. 
Dwelling, multifamily, means a residential structure containing three or more dwelling units or a combination of three or more separate single-family dwelling units on a single parcel of land. 
Dwelling, single-family, means a residential structure containing not more than one dwelling unit entirely surrounded by open area on a single parcel. 
Dwelling, two-family. See residence, second unit. 
Easement means an area reserved for access, drainage, maintenance, open space, recreation, or the installation and servicing of utilities (e.g., cable, electrical, sewers, telephone, water, etc.). 
Emergency shelter means housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of inability to pay. 
Employee means any person engaged in the operation of conduct of any business, whether as owner, any member of the owner's family, partner, agent, manager, or solicitor and all other persons employed or working in the business. 
Family. The term "family" means: 
(1)  Two or more persons related by birth, marriage, or adoption (U.S. Bureau of the Census). 
(2)  An individual or a group of persons living together who constitute a bona fide single-family housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit, not including a fraternity, sorority, club, or other group of persons occupying a hotel, lodging house or institution of any kind. 
Fence means any device forming a physical barrier between two areas. This shall include wire mesh, steel mesh, chain link, louver, stake, masonry, lumber, and other similar materials. 
Flood or flooding means: 
(1)  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; or mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined herein and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current. 
(2)  The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in this definition. 
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See flooding. 
Floodplain Administrator means the individual appointed to administer and enforce the City's floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
Floodplain management regulations means the zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and all other applications of the police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state and local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
Floor area means the sum of the horizontal areas of the several floors of a building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls, or from the centerline of a wall separating two buildings, but not including any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six feet. 
Floor area ratio means the gross floor area permitted on a site divided by the total net area of the site, expressed in decimals to one or two places. For example, on a site with 10,000 net square feet of land area, a floor area ratio of one will allow a maximum of 10,000 gross square feet of building floor area to be built. On the same site, an FAR of one and one-half would allow 15,000 square feet of floor area; an FAR of two would allow 20,000 square feet; and an FAR of one-half would allow only 5,000 square feet. FARs are applied on a parcel-by-parcel basis as opposed to an average FAR for an entire land use or zoning district. 
Formal dining area means an area that intensifies a dining use in a considerable manner and is not incidental in nature. 
Fortune-telling means the telling of fortunes, forecasting of future events or furnishing of any information not otherwise obtainable by the ordinary process of knowledge, by means of any occult or psychic power, faculty, or force, including, but not limited to clairvoyance, clairaudience, cartomancy, psychometry, phrenology, spirits, tea leaves, or other such reading, mediumship, seership, prophecy, augury, astrology, palmistry, necromancy, mindreading, telepathy, or other craft, art, science, cards, talisman, charm, potion, magnetism, magnetized article, or substance, crystal gazing, oriental mysteries or magic, of any kind or nature. 
Frontage means the portion of a parcel or structure abutting a street (at the front lot line), except the side of a corner parcel. 
Garage, private, means a detached accessory building or a portion of a main building on the same lot as a dwelling used for the housing of vehicles of the occupants of the dwelling, having a roof and enclosed on not less than four sides. Any such structure enclosed on three or less sides shall be considered a carport. 
Garage, public, means any premises used exclusively for the storage of vehicles. 
Garage sale means a sale of tangible personal property, conducted in a zone of the City zoned as not to permit a regular established business engaged in the sale of merchandise, to which the public is invited by an advertisement or otherwise. Includes lawn or yard sales, attic sales, estate sales, and similar sales. 
General plan means the adopted comprehensive, long range plan for the physical development of the City. The La Palma General Plan contains the community's vision for its future. Goals and policies throughout the plan are aimed at implementing the vision. The general plan contains a land use map which identifies the appropriate use of land and which is the basis for the City's zoning map. 
General plan amendment means an amendment to the City's general plan. 
Governing body means the La Palma City Council. 
Grade means the lowest horizontal elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving, or sidewalk or the degree of rise or descent of a sloping surface. 
Granny unit. See residence, second unit. 
Gross acreage means the total area within the lot lines of a lot or parcel of land before public streets, easements, or other areas to be dedicated or reserved for public uses are deducted from the lot or parcel. 
Gross floor area means the area included within the surrounding exterior finish wall surface of a structure or portion thereof, exclusive of courtyards. 
Guest house. See residence, second unit. 
Habitable area means sleeping quarters in a residence that include at least one door, closet, and window, or as further defined in the California Building Code. 
Hardscape or hardscaping consists of the part of a building's grounds consisting of inanimate nonliving structures, such as patios, retaining walls, and walkways, made with hard materials, but excluding artificial turf. 
Hedge means a plant or series of plants, shrubs, or other landscape material, arranged so as to form a physical barrier or enclosure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the United States Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on the State inventory of historic places; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states with approved programs. 
Home occupation means an activity conducted in compliance with Chapter 22, Article III, carried out by an occupant of the dwelling unit, and conducted as an accessory use to the dwelling unit. The term "home occupation" includes the terms "home-based business" and "home business." 
Hospital means a licensed institution designed within an integrated campus setting for the diagnosis, care, and treatment of human illness, including surgery and primary treatment. 
Hotel means guest rooms or suites occupied on a transient basis (e.g., daily or weekly, but not monthly) for compensation, which may include ancillary facilities (e.g., restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreation facilities). 
Incidental outdoor seating area means any minor, easily removable extension of an established retail or small food shop, consisting of movable tables and chairs that are arranged directly upon the sidewalk paving as an adjunct and directly adjacent to a retail business or restaurant for the purpose of displaying, exhibiting, or offering for sale the merchandise sold inside the retail shop. 
Kennel means any parcel where four or more dogs, cats, or other small animals over the age of four months are kept, whether the keeping is for pleasure, profit, breeding, or exhibition, including places where the animals are boarded or kept for sale or hire. 
Kitchen means any room, all or part of which is designed and/or used for the storage, refrigeration, cooking, and preparation of food. 
Landscape coverage means the percentage of the net lot area, excluding the area of the buildings and any accessory structures and driveways, which is covered by landscaping as seen from a plan view. 
Landscaping means the planting and maintaining of an area with predominantly plant materials, including live turf, artificial turf, groundcover, trees, shrubs, and other plant materials; and also including small amounts of accessory decorative outdoor landscape elements such as ponds, fountains, and paved or decorated surfaces (excluding driveways, parking, loading, or storage areas), natural materials, and sculptural elements, all of which are suitably designed, selected, installed, and maintained to enhance a property. 
Landscaping, full, means 100 percent of the required landscaping and irrigation system as required by Section 44-335 is installed and functional. 
Landscaping, minimal, means 70 percent of the required landscaping and irrigation system, as required by Section 44-335, is installed and functional. 
Landscaping plan means a plan which indicates the type, size, and location of vegetation and accent material proposed for the covering of all areas of a property not covered by a building, driveway, parking lot, or accessory structures that includes all irrigation and other devices necessary to maintain the landscaping. 
Lattice means an open framework of overlapping strips of pressure-treated wood or synthetic material, with openings in a woven 3D diagonal pattern, used as a height extension to a block wall for screening purposes. 
Lot means a parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be used, developed, or built upon. The classifications of lots are: 
(1)  Corner. A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets at an angle of not more than 135 degrees. If the angle is greater than 135 degrees, the lot shall be considered an "interior lot." 
(2)  Flag. A lot having access or an easement to a public or private street by a narrow, private right-of-way referred to as a panhandle. 
(3)  Interior. A lot abutting only one street. 
(4)  Key. A lot with a sideline that abuts the rear line of any one or more adjoining lots. 
(5)  Reverse corner. A corner lot, the rear of which abuts the side of another lot. 
(6)  Through. A lot having frontage on two generally parallel streets, with only one primary access. 
  
Lot area means the total horizontal area included within the lot lines of a parcel. 
Lot coverage means the percent of a parcel that is covered by structures, including main and accessory buildings. On parcels zoned exclusively for residential use, lot coverage excludes patios open on two or more sides and gazebos 300 square feet or less in area and garages and carports. In all other zones, lot coverage includes parking structures. 
Lot depth means the average distance between the front and rear lot lines or between the front line and the intersection of the two side lines, if there is no rear line. 
Lot frontage means the portion of the parcel contiguous to the street. 
Lot line means any boundary of a parcel. The classifications of lot lines are: 
(1)  Front. 
a.  On an interior lot, the line separating the parcel from the street. 
b.  On a corner lot, the shorter lot line abutting a street. (If the lot lines on a corner lot are equal in length, the front lot line shall be determined by the Community Development Director.) 
c.  On a through lot, the lot line abutting the street providing the primary access to the lot. 
(2)  Interior. Any lot line not abutting a street. 
(3)  Rear. A lot line not abutting a street that is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of an irregular-shaped parcel, including a triangular parcel, a line within the parcel, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line, having a length of not less than ten feet. 
(4)  Side. Any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line. 
Lot width means the horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured at the front setback line. 
Manufactured home. 
(1)  The term "manufactured home" means a structure that: 
a.  Was constructed on or after June 15, 1976; 
b.  Is transportable in one or more sections; 
c.  Is eight body feet or more in width, or 40 body feet or more in length, in the traveling mode, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet; 
d.  Is built on a permanent chassis; and 
e.  Is designed to be used as a single-family dwelling with or without a foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. 
(2)  The term "manufactured home" includes any structure that meets all the requirements of subsection (1) of this definition except the size requirements, and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act (42 USC 5401). 
(3)  If a provision of this chapter uses the term "manufactured home," and it clearly appears from the context that the term should apply only to manufactured homes, as defined in this definition, the provision shall apply only to those manufactured homes. If any provision of this chapter, by its context, requires that the term applies to manufactured homes or mobile homes without regard to the date of construction, such provision shall apply to both manufactured homes, as defined above, and mobile homes, as defined in this section. 
Manufactured home, new, means a manufactured home, mobile home, or commercial coach which is not defined as a "manufactured home, used," "mobile home, used" or "commercial modular, used," which is delivered for sale or lease in this State, and which has not been delivered to a first purchaser or lessor for purposes other than resale or reletting. 
Manufactured home, used, means a manufactured home, mobile home, or commercial modular that was previously sold and registered or titled with the City, or with an appropriate agency or authority, or any other State, District of Columbia, territory or possession of the United States, or a foreign State, province, or country. 
Marijuana related business shall mean any commercial cannabis activity, or combination thereof, and any cannabis related uses, or combination thereof, including but not be limited to cannabis cooperatives, cultivation, deliveries, dispensaries, and any other business that engages in the production, packaging, concentrate processing, edibles, glass merchandise, courier/delivery, trimming, seed harvesting, farming, transportation, and/or sale of cannabis. 
Massage means the scientific manipulation of the soft tissues of person's body. 
Massage certificate means a valid certificate issued by the Massage Therapy Council pursuant to California Business and Professions Code § 4600 et seq. 
Massage facility or massage establishment means a fixed place of business where massage is performed for money or any other consideration. 
Massage facility operator means any person or business entity that owns, in whole or in part, a massage facility. 
Massage technician means any person who administers to another person, for any form of consideration, a massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, bath, electric or magnetic massage procedure, manipulation of the body, or other similar procedure. 
Massage Therapy Council means the organization created pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Div. 2, Ch. 10.5 (Business and Professions Code § 4600 et seq.) to provide State certification of massage practitioners and massage therapists. 
Materials, natural, means organic and inorganic materials such as rock, decomposed granite, gravel, bamboo, wood chips, etc., that are used to cover areas where landscaping and hardscaping is not present. 
Medical cannabis or medical cannabis product shall have the same meaning as set forth in California Business and Professions Code § 19300.5(ag), as may be amended from time to time. 
Medical center/clinic means a place for group medical services not involving overnight housing of patients. 
Medical Marijuana Regulation and Safety Act or MMRSA shall mean and refer to the following three bills signed into law on October 9, 2015, as the same may be amended from time to time: 
AB 243, 
AB 266, 
SB 643. 
Mixed-use project means the development of a parcel or structure with two or more different land uses (e.g., a combination of residential, office, commercial retail, public, or entertainment) in a single or physically integrated structure or group of structures. 
Mobile home. 
(1)  The term "mobile home" means a structure that: 
a.  Was constructed prior to June 15, 1976; 
b.  Is transportable in one or more sections; 
c.  Is eight body feet or more in width, or 40 body feet or more in length, in the traveling mode, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet; 
d.  Is built on a permanent chassis; and 
e.  Is designed to be used as a single-family dwelling with or without a foundation system when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. 
(2)  The term "mobile home" includes any structure that meets all the requirements of subsection (1) of this definition and complies with the State standards for mobile homes in effect at the time of construction. 
(3)  The term "mobile home" does not include a commercial modular, as defined in Health and Safety Code § 18001.8; factory-built housing, as defined in Health and Safety Code § 19971; a manufactured home, as defined in Health and Safety Code § 18007; a multifamily manufactured home, as defined in Health and Safety Code § 18008.7; or a recreational vehicle, as defined in Health and Safety Code § 18010. 
(4)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if a provision of this chapter uses the term "mobile home," and it clearly appears from the context that the term "mobile home" should apply only to mobile homes, the provision shall apply only to those mobile homes. If any provision of this chapter, by its context, requires that the term applies to mobile homes or manufactured homes without regard to the date of construction, the provision shall apply to both mobile homes, as defined above, and manufactured homes, as defined in this section. 
Mobile home, new. See manufactured home, new. 
Mobile home, used. See manufactured home, used. 
Mobile home park means any area or tract of land where two or more lots are rented or leased, held out for rent or lease, or were formerly held out for rent or lease and later converted to a subdivision, cooperative, condominium, or other form of resident ownership to accommodate manufactured homes, mobile homes, or recreational vehicles used for human habitation. Notwithstanding this definition, employee housing that has obtained a permit to operate pursuant to the Employee Housing Act (Health and Safety Code § 17000 et seq.) and that both meets the criteria of Health and Safety Code § 17021.6, and is comprised of two or more lots or units held out for lease or rent or provided as a term or condition of employment, shall not be deemed a mobile home park for the purposes of the requirement to obtain an initial or annual permit to operate or pay any related fees required by this chapter. Notwithstanding this definition, an area or tract of land shall not be deemed a mobile home park if the structures on it consist of residential structures that are rented or leased, or held out for rent or lease, if those residential structures meet both of the following requirements. First, the residential structures are manufactured homes constructed pursuant to the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 USC 5401 et seq.), or mobile homes containing two or more dwelling units for human habitation. Second, those manufactured homes or mobile homes have been approved by a City, County, or City and County pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 17951(e) as an alternate which is at least the equivalent to the requirements prescribed in the California Building Standards Code or Part 1.5 of the Health and Safety Code (Health and Safety Code § 17910 et seq.) in performance, safety and for the protection of life and health. 
Motel. See hotel. 
Multifamily manufactured home. 
(1)  The term "multifamily manufactured home" means a structure, transportable under permit in one or more sections, designed and equipped to contain not more than two dwelling units, a dormitory, or efficiency unit, to be used either with a support system pursuant to Healthy and Safety Code § 18613 or a foundation system pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 18551(a). 
(2)  The term "multifamily manufactured home" includes a structure, transportable under permit in one or more sections, designed to be used with a foundation system for three or more dwelling units, as defined by Health and Safety Code § 18003.3. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, all provisions of law that apply to manufactured homes shall apply equally to multifamily manufactured homes, except as provided in this definition. For purposes of this definition, the term "dormitory" means a room or rooms inhabited for the purposes of temporary residence by two or more persons; the term "efficiency unit" has the same meaning as defined in Health and Safety Code § 17958.1; and the term "multiunit manufactured housing" has the same meaning as "multifamily manufactured home," as that term is defined in this definition. 
New Construction refers to site preparation for, and construction of, entirely new structures and/or additions greater than 51 percent of the floor area to existing buildings or buildings receiving rehabilitation costing more than 51 percent of the replacement cost and which are required to comply with all the provisions of the California Building Standards Code for new buildings. For floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the City, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
Noise means any sound that is undesirable because it interferes with speech and hearing, or is intense enough to damage hearing, or is otherwise annoying. Noise, simply, is unwanted sound. Certain noise levels are detrimental to the health and safety of individuals and are considered a public nuisance. 
Nonconforming lot means any parcel of land that was lawfully established and in compliance with all applicable ordinances and laws at the time the property was granted a building permit, but which, due to any subsequently enacted ordinance or law, or other change in circumstances, no longer complies with all of the applicable regulations and standards of the zoning district in which the property is located. 
Nonconforming structure means any structure or improvement upon land, including any sign, other than the land itself, that was lawfully established and in compliance with all applicable ordinances and laws at the time the structure or improvement was established, but which, due to any subsequently enacted ordinance or law, or other change in circumstances, no longer complies with all of the applicable regulations and standards of the zoning district in which the structure or improvement is located. 
Nonconforming use means any use of land that was lawfully established and in compliance with all applicable ordinances and laws at the time the use was established, but which, due to any subsequently enacted ordinance or law or other change in circumstances, no longer complies with all of the applicable regulations and standards of the zoning district in which the use is located. 
Nonmotorized vehicle means a vehicle or object that is not self-propelled and must be drawn by a motorized vehicle. The term "nonmotorized vehicle" includes trailer, camp trailer, semi-trailer, and trailer coach. 
Nonresident means any person who does not qualify as a "resident" as that term is defined by this section. 
One-hundred-year flood or 100-year flood. See base flood. 
Onsite waiting area means the designated area outside of a building used to contain patrons or clients prior to the patrons or clients entering the building for the gathering or processing of information. 
Open space means land areas which are not occupied by buildings, structures, parking, streets, or alleys. 
Out-call massage service means any massage business that engages in or carries on massage at a location other than at a massage establishment. 
Outdoor area or incidental outdoor area means any ancillary outdoor area of an established retail business or food shop, consisting of outdoor furniture arranged directly along the sidewalk paving of the subject business. 
Outdoor display area or display area means an easily removable extension of an established retail shop, consisting of movable display tables, standing sign, shelves, and/or racks that are arranged directly upon the sidewalk paving as an adjunct and directly adjacent to a retail business for the purpose of displaying, exhibiting, or offering for sale the merchandise sold inside the retail shop. 
Outdoor sale means the temporary display of goods and merchandise for sale, outside a building, on private or publicly owned land in a nonresidential zone. 
Oversized vehicle means a motorized or nonmotorized vehicle or any combination thereof, which exceeds 23 feet in length, and/or 97 inches in width, and/or 90 inches in height, exclusive of such projecting lights or devices as are expressly allowed pursuant to the California Vehicle Code as it now exists or hereafter may be amended. 
Parcel means a portion of land under one ownership that has been legally subdivided or combined and is shown as a single lot or property on the latest equalized assessment roll. 
Patio cover means a roof-like structure either with open trellis work or solid material, placed over a surfaced area that is open on at least two sides. 
Patio home means a detached single-family residence within a complex with common area and yards maintained by a common association. 
Paved ancillary parking area means the area between the driveway of a residence and the closest adjacent property line that may be paved and used for the purposes of parking or storing of vehicles. 
  
Permitted use means any use allowed in a zoning district and subject to the provisions/regulations applicable to that district. 
Person means an individual or a firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, the federal or State government, City, County, special district, any other governmental entity, or any other group or combination of groups acting as an entity. 
Planned unit development (PUD) means the development of a parcel or of a combination of related parcels, which serves to unify or organize a development that includes cluster subdivisions, townhouses, condominiums, community apartments, and/or attached or detached single-family dwellings involving tailored development standards and site design. 
Precise plan means a plan prepared for a development that is based on the general proposals in the general plan. A precise plan may also be a detailed plan for developing property in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
Precise plan amendment means a request for the alteration of, or addition to, a structure which was originally approved under a precise plan. 
Principal use means the main, primary, or predominant use of any parcel or structure. 
Property line. See lot line. 
Public dance means any dance where two or more persons dance or are permitted to dance in or upon any premises to which the public is admitted, either with or without charge. 
Public right-of-way means a strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription or condemnation and occupied or intended to be occupied by a road, trail, water line, sanitary sewer, and/or other public uses. 
Qualifying patient or qualified patient shall have the same meaning as set forth in California Health and Safety Code § 11362.7, as may be amended from time to time. 
Queuing lane means an area for temporary waiting of motor vehicles while obtaining a service or other activity from a drive-up service window/facility. 
Reasonable accommodation means providing individuals with disabilities, and developers of housing for people with disabilities, flexibility in the application of land use and zoning and building regulations, policies, practices, and procedures, or waiving certain land use and zoning requirements when it is necessary to eliminate barriers to housing opportunities for individuals with disabilities. 
Recreational vehicle or object means a motorized or nonmotorized recreational vehicle or an object designed for recreational purposes, including camper shells off a truck, boats, trailer coaches, travel trailers, fifth wheel trailers, camp trailers, jet skis, and other non-self-propelled vehicles but also including off-road motorcycles, snowmobiles, airplanes, and any other vehicle made to carry one or more persons but not including bicycles, tricycles, on-road motorcycles and scooters. The term "recreational vehicle or object" shall not include permanently-founded manufactured homes or mobile homes. 
Religious institution means a structure that is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities, including churches, temples, and mosques. 
Research and development means the scientific or commercial investigation of, and inquiry into, new products and manufacturing processes, light manufacturing and related uses. 
Residence, second unit, means a second dwelling unit located in any residential zone that functions as separate living quarters from the primary unit of the property. A second unit has a separate entrance from the primary unit and contains its own living amenities. 
Resident means a person whose place of domicile or, in the case of an entity, its place of operation, is fixed, wherein the person has the intention of remaining, and to which, whenever he or she is absent, the person has the intention of returning. At any given time, a person may be a resident of only one city. For purposes of this chapter, the term "resident" includes each of the following: 
(1)  Every person who is in the City for other than a temporary or transitory purpose; 
(2)  Every person domiciled in the City who is outside the City for a temporary or transitory purpose; and 
(3)  Any person who is a resident even though temporarily absent from the City. 
Retail sales means establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of the goods. 
Review authority means the person, committee, or council designated by the City as responsible for the review and final determination on a land use entitlement, map, permit, or amendment. 
Rooming and/or boardinghouse means a dwelling structure, or part thereof, that has no more than one dining room and in which, for compensation, two or more rooms are leased and/or meals are provided by the week or month. 
Satellite dish antenna means a device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured and in the shape of a shallow dish/cone, used to transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or orbitally based uses. This definition is meant to include what are referred to as satellite earth stations, TVROs (television reception only satellite dish antennas), and satellite microwave antennas. 
School means an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, which offers instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code, or which is maintained in compliance with the standards set by the State Board of Education. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, junior high school, senior high school, or any special institution of education, but it does not include a vocational or professional institution of higher education, including a community or junior college, college, or university. Neither shall the term "school" apply to a tutorial facility, a child day care facility, or a day care center. 
Secondary dwelling unit. See residence, second unit. 
Secondhand/thrift store means a use where used articles, goods, merchandise, or wares are offered for sale but not including the working on or dismantling of such items. 
Self-storage facility means a building or group of buildings, in a controlled access and fully enclosed compound, which contains various sized, individual compartmentalized and controlled access stalls for the storage of customers' goods and possessions. The facility shall be limited to storage only. No other activities other than the replacement or retrieval of personal goods shall be allowed within the units or within the compound. 
Service station means any structure or parcel for a business whose primary use is to supply gasoline and other fuels, and may include the provision for minor services to automobiles and other motor vehicles. The term "service station" includes the term "gas station." 
Setback means the required distance that a structure, use, or parking area shall be located from a lot line. 
Sign means any medium, including its structure and component parts, which is used or intended to be used to attract attention to the subject matter for advertising purposes and shall include every announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration, insignia, surface, or space when erected, painted or maintained in view of the general public for identification, advertisement or promotion of the interest of any person. 
Sign, animated, means a sign with movement or rotation in excess of eight revolutions per minute or a sign using or being a stereopticon, motion picture, searchlight, or wind-activated device, including balloons, banners, or flags; or a sign using live animals; or a sign which changes color or flashes on and off. 
Sign, changeable copy, means a sign which is characterized by changeable copy, regardless of method of attachment. 
Sign, electronic, means a permanently installed illuminated panel that presents variable advertising messages displayed by an electronically controlled lighting pattern against a contrasting background, and may be programmed to change the message display periodically. 
Sign, official, means a sign required to be posted by the laws of the United States, the State, County, or the City or courts or administrative agencies thereof. 
Sign, offsite advertising, means a sign that promotes or advertises goods or services that are not available on the property where the sign is placed. 
Sign, projecting, means a sign extending outward in a plane other than parallel from the structure to which it is attached. 
Sign, roof, means a sign attached to a building so that a part of the sign is higher than the roof or parapet of the building. 
Signs, window, means signs mounted on windows and doors, except for allowed temporary signs. 
Single room occupancy (SRO) facility means a cluster of guest units within a residential hotel of weekly or longer tenancy providing sleeping or living facilities in which sanitary and cooking facilities may be provided in the unit or shared within the facility. 
Skilled nursing facility means facilities providing nursing and health-related care as a primary use with in-patient beds and includes board and care homes, convalescent and rest homes, extended care facilities and rehabilitation centers. The term "skilled nursing facility" does not include long-term personal care facilities that do not emphasize medical treatment. 
Slope means the degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal plane, usually expressed in degrees, percentages, or as a ratio of feet of vertical change over a given horizontal distance (e.g., 4:12). 
  
Solar access means the provision of direct sunlight to an area specified for solar energy collection when the sun's azimuth is within 45 degrees of true south. 
  
Special event. See community event. 
Special permit means a permit that authorizes an applicant to conduct a special event or type of business at a specific location. The event is subject to compliance with all the terms and conditions imposed on the permit. 
Specific plan means a regulatory tool authorized by California Government Code § 65450 et seq. for the systematic implementation of the general plan for a defined portion of a community's planning area. A specific plan specifies in detail the land uses, public and private facilities needed to support the land uses, phasing of development, standards for the conservation, development, and use of natural resources, and a program of implementation measures, including financing measures. 
Start of construction includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Storage means the keeping/maintaining of goods/materials for a period of time in excess of 72 hours. 
Story means that portion of a structure included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling above it. 
Streets, local. See streets, minor. 
Streets, major, means the transportation network that includes a hierarchy of freeways, arterials, and collectors to service through traffic. 
Streets, minor, means local streets not shown on the circulation plan, map, or diagram whose primary intended purpose is to provide access to fronting properties. 
Streets, through, means streets that extend continuously between other major streets in the community. 
Strip center means a multi-tenant shopping center with up to 15,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground and includes any building, road, pipe, conduit, siphon, telephone line, and/or electrical power transmission and distribution line. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
Supportive housing means housing with no limit on the length of stay, that is occupied by the target population, and that is linked to on-site or off-site services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. Supportive housing may be designed as a residential group living facility or as a regular residential use and includes the following: 
(1)  Residential apartment type means three or more dwelling units on one parcel, where each unit functions as a single housekeeping unit and no onsite social services are provided. This use is subject to the R-3 Multiple-Family Residential District development standards of this chapter. 
(2)  Residential duplex type means two more dwelling units on one parcel, where each unit functions as a single housekeeping unit and no onsite services are provided. This use is subject to the Duplex development standards of this chapter. 
(3)  Residential group living six persons or fewer or single-family type means one residential facility on a parcel, with six residents or fewer (including minor children), excluding staff, that operates as a group living facility, where the residents share a common living area and a kitchen. 
(4)  Residential group living seven persons or more means a residential facility, with seven or more residents, that operates as a group living facility where the residents share a common living area and a kitchen. 
Swap meet (indoor/outdoor) means the retail sale or exchange of new, handcrafted, and/or secondhand merchandise from temporary spaces/stalls/booths by one or more individual vendors. The term "swap meet" includes the terms "flea market" and "rummage sale." 
Target population means persons, including persons with disabilities, and families who are homeless, as that term is defined by 42 USC 11302, or who are homeless youth, as that term is defined by Government Code § 11139.3(e)(2). 
Tattoo parlor, body piercing, permanent make-up, and similar establishment or parlor means a place where people receive permanent decorative tattoos from a tattoo artist and/or body piercings, and/or permanent make-up, but does not include severe body mutilation. 
Tattooing means to insert pigment under the surface of the skin of a human being, by pricking with a needle or otherwise, to produce an indelible mark or figure visible through the skin. 
Transitional housing means buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six months. The term "transitional housing" shall be considered a residential use and only subject to those restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone. 
Transitional housing development means a housing development configured such that each unit constitutes a unit of transitional housing, with examples being the following: 
(1)  Residential apartment type means three or more dwelling units on one parcel, where each unit functions as a single housekeeping unit and no onsite social services are provided. This unit is subject to the duplex or R-3 Multiple-Family Residential District development standards of this chapter. 
(2)  Residential duplex type means two more dwelling units on one parcel, where each unit functions as a single housekeeping unit and no onsite social services are provided. This use is subject to the Duplex development standards of this chapter. 
(3)  Residential group living six persons or fewer or single-family type means one residential facility on a parcel, with six residents or less (including minor children), excluding staff, that operates as a group living facility, where the residents share a common living area and a kitchen. The facility is similar to a residential community care facility with six persons of less, and subject to the same development standards. 
(4)  Residential group living seven persons or more means a residential facility, with seven or more residents, excluding staff that operates as a group living facility where the residents share a common facility with seven persons or more, and subject to the same development standards. 
Telecommunication facilities. See communication facilities. 
Temporary use means a use established for a specified/limited period of time, with the intent to discontinue the use at the end of the designated time period. Temporary uses include such uses as construction trailers and guard offices, temporary structures, environmental remediation units, and outdoor sales. 
Tenant space access means a clearly defined and legal means of access for pedestrians and motor vehicles, either directly or indirectly, from a public right-of-way. 
Traffic safety triangle means a space that is set aside on a street corner or driveway entrance in which all visual obstructions (e.g., structures and plantings) that can prevent visibility, and thus could be a hazard to traffic and pedestrian safety, are prohibited. 
  
Trailer, residential. See mobile home. 
Transportation demand management (TDM) means the implementation of programs, policies, or permit approvals designed to encourage changes in individual travel behavior, including emphasis on alternative travel modes to single occupant vehicle use, including carpools, vanpools, and public transit, reduction or elimination of vehicle trips, shifts in peak hour vehicle commuting, and similar measures and programs. 
Turf, artificial, means a synthetic grass-like manmade surface made from nontoxic synthetic materials to resemble thriving, live, green grass. 
Turf, live, means a surface layer of matted earth covered with grass. 
Tutorial facility means a school, teaching, or training facility that provides individual instruction or instruction to groups of eight students or less in one or more topics of curriculum taught in California public schools, with clients from pre-kindergarten through adult. A tutorial facility shall not include a facility solely providing instruction in extracurricular activities including dance, swimming, music, martial arts, or religious studies. 
Uniform Building Code means the current edition of the Uniform Building Code as has been officially adopted by the City regarding construction standards, approved materials and projection standards unless otherwise specified herein. 
Use means the purpose (type and extent) for which land or a structure is arranged, designed, or intended or for which either land or a structure is occupied or maintained. 
Use inauguration (initiation) means the implementation of a use on a parcel or the occupancy of a structure, subject to determination by the Community Development Director. 
Variance means a discretionary entitlement which permits a departure from the strict application of the development standards contained in this chapter. 
Veterinary clinic means a use providing grooming, housing, medical care, or other services to animals, including veterinary services, animal hospitals, overnight or short-term boarding ancillary to veterinary care, indoor or outdoor kennels, and similar services. 
Village residential overlay district provides for a variety of housing types within one project or development, ranging from single-family housing to multiple-family dwellings, including affordable housing projects, senior housing projects, or planned unit developments that involve tailored development standards and site design. 
Vocational/trade schools means private schools offering preponderant instruction in the technical, commercial, or trade skills, such as real estate schools, business colleges, electronic schools, automotive and aircraft technical schools, and similar commercial establishments. 
Wall means any structure or device forming a physical barrier, which is so constructed that 50 percent or more of the vertical surface is closed and prevents the passage of light, air, and vision through such surface in a horizontal plane. This shall include concrete, concrete block, masonry, stone, wood, or other material that are solids and are so assembled as to form a solid barrier. 
Workshop means a permanently founded accessory structure that has access to electrical service and which shall not be utilized for habitation. 
Xeriscaping means landscaping designed specifically for areas that are susceptible to drought or for properties where water conservation is practiced. 
Yard means any open space, other than a court, on the same lot with a building or a dwelling group, which is generally open from the ground to the sky, except for the projections or accessory buildings permitted by this chapter. No required yard or other open space around an existing building, or which is hereafter provided around any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter, may be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building; nor may any yard or other required open space on an adjoining lot be considered as providing a yard or open space on a lot whereon a building is to be erected. 
Yard, front, means an area extending across the full width of the parcel between the front lot line or the existing or future street right-of-way and a structural setback line parallel thereto. 
Yard sale. See garage sale. 
Yard, side, means an area extending from the required front yard to the required rear yard and from the side lot line to a setback line parallel thereto. 
Yard, rear, means an area extending across the full width of the parcel between the rear lot line and a setback line parallel thereto. 
  
Zero lot line means the location of a structure on a parcel in which one or more of the structure's sides rest directly on a lot line and maintenance easements are provided. 
  
Zoning district means a land area shown or described in the zoning land use map to which uniform regulations apply. 
Zoning land use map means the official map which describes thereon the several zoning districts to which the regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 2016-01, § 4, 1-19-16; Ord. No. 2016-02, § 4, 1-19-2016; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 7, 5-3-2016)  
Secs. 44-11—44-38. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND ALLOWABLE LAND USE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 44-39. - Establishment of zoning districts. 
The City shall be divided into zoning districts that implement the general plan. The following zoning districts are established and shall be shown on the official zoning map, which is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter: 
Zoning Map Symbol 	Zoning Districts 
R-1 	Single-Family Residential 
R-3 	Multiple-Family Residential 
OP 	Office Professional 
NC 	Neighborhood Commercial 
B-1 	Mixed-Use Business 
GI 	General Industrial 
PI 	Public/Institutional 
OS/R 	Open Space/Recreation 
VRO 	Village Residential Overlay 
(IO) 	Industrial Overlay 
(FO) 	Freeway Overlay 
PND 	Planned Neighborhood Development 
 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-40. - Location of boundaries. 
The location and boundaries of the various zoning districts are as shown and delineated on the zoning map of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-41. - Changes in boundaries. 
Changes in the boundaries of the zoning districts shall follow the process established in Section 44-668. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-42. - Uncertainty of boundary location. 
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any zoning district, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Where zoning district boundaries are indicated as approximately following street and alley centerlines, the boundaries shall be construed to be the centerlines. Where zoning district boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot lines, the boundaries shall be construed to be the lot lines. 
(2)  In the case where a zoning district boundary divides a lot, the location of the boundaries shall be indicated by dimensions or description on the zoning map. Where dimensions or description are missing, the boundaries shall be determined by use of the scale shown on the zoning map. 
(3)  If uncertainty still exists, the City Council shall determine the boundary. 
(4)  Where a public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the area comprising the vacated street or alley shall acquire the classification of the property to which it reverts. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 8, 5-3-2016)  
Sec. 44-43. - Unclassified property. 
(a)  Property that, for any reason, is not designated on the zoning map as being classified in any of the zoning districts established by this chapter shall be deemed to be classified R-1, Single-Family Residential District. Land hereafter annexed to the City shall be zoned and classified in the R-1, Single-Family Residential District, unless a specific classification is established. 
(b)  Whenever the City deems that the zoning of annexed land as R-1 is not adequate or desirable, the Community Development Director may recommend, and the City Council may adopt, the zoning district applicable to the annexed lands through the manner prescribed for amending this Development Code. 
(c)  Dedicated streets or alleys and railroad rights-of-way, other than those designated on the zoning map, shall be deemed to be unclassified and, in the case of streets, permitted to be used only for purposes lawfully allowed and, in the case of railroad rights-of-way, permitted to be used solely for the purpose of accommodating tracks, signals, other operative devices, and the movement of the rolling stock. For the purpose of constructing residential units, the density shall be based upon the lot area after dedication, if any. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 9, 5-3-2016)  
Sec. 44-44. - Cannabis related uses, commercial cannabis activities, deliveries, and cultivation prohibited. 
(a)  Prohibitions. The following uses are prohibited in all zones in the City as follows: 
(1)  Cannabis related uses. All Cannabis related uses, including but not limited to cooperatives, cultivation, deliveries, dispensaries, and other commercial cannabis activities for which a State license is required under the MMRSA, are prohibited throughout the City. The City shall not issue any permit, or process any license or other entitlement for any Cannabis related use or any other activity for which a State license is required under the MMRSA. No person shall establish, operate, conduct, permit or allow any Cannabis related use anywhere within the City as prohibited under this subsection. 
(2)  Commercial cannabis activities. All commercial cannabis activities, including but not limited to cooperatives, cultivation, deliveries, and dispensaries, are expressly prohibited throughout the City regardless of whether or not the commercial cannabis activity is for medical cannabis or cannabis used for medicinal purposes. The City shall not issue any permit, or process any license or other entitlement for any commercial cannabis activity. No person shall establish, operate, conduct, permit or allow a commercial cannabis activity anywhere within the City. 
(3)  Cannabis deliveries. All deliveries of cannabis and medical cannabis are expressly prohibited in the City. No person shall conduct any deliveries of cannabis or medical cannabis that either originate or terminate at any location within the City. 
(4)  Cannabis cultivation. The cultivation of cannabis, regardless of whether for commercial or non-commercial purposes, and including cultivation by a qualified patient or primary caregiver, is expressly prohibited throughout the City. No person, including but not limited to a qualified patient or primary caregiver, shall cultivate any amount of cannabis in the City, regardless of whether or not the cannabis is intended to be used for medical purposes. 
(b)  Public nuisance. Any use or condition caused, or permitted to exist, in violation of any provision of this section shall be, and is hereby declared to be, a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by the City pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure § 731 or any other remedy available at law. 
(c)  Civil penalties. In addition to any other enforcement permitted by Code, the city attorney may bring a civil action for injunctive relief and civil penalties against any person who violates any provision of this section. In any civil action that is brought pursuant to this chapter, a court of competent jurisdiction may award civil penalties and costs to the prevailing party. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, § 5, 1-19-2016)  
Secs. 44-45—44-74. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 44-75. - Purpose. 
This division provides regulations applicable to development and land uses in the residential zoning districts established by Section 44-39. The purpose of the individual residential zoning districts and the manner in which they are applied is provided in Section 44-76. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-76. - Purpose of residential zoning districts. 
(a)  R-1, Single-Family Residential. The R-1 zoning district identifies areas intended for single-family housing types, including conventional single-family detached homes, patio homes, zero lot line homes, planned unit developments, mixed-use developments, and attached, lower-density developments such as duplexes. The allowable density range is from 1.0 to 8.7 dwelling units per net acre. This designation requires conventional single-family lots to be a minimum of 5,000 square feet. Allowable housing types, other than conventional single-family detached, are permitted on lots less than 5,000 square feet, subject to approval by the City Council. The R-1 zoning district is consistent with the single-family residential land use designation of the general plan. 
(b)  R-3, Multiple-Family Residential. The R-3 zoning district identifies areas intended for the development of a range of attached and detached residential uses. Typical housing types include higher density single-family residences, patio homes, zero lot line homes, planned unit developments, mixed-use developments, and attached multiple-family dwellings such as duplexes, townhomes, condominiums, and garden apartments. Congregate care facilities and similar uses may be approved as conditional uses in compliance with the provisions in Article V, Division 5 (Conditional Use Permits and Amendments). Smaller sites composed of two acres or less are permitted to be developed with a maximum density of ten dwelling units per net acre. Larger sites that are between two and one-tenth to four acres are permitted to be developed with densities up to 15 dwelling units per net acre and sites composed of at least four and one-tenth acres are permitted to be developed with a maximum density of 25 dwelling units per net acre. The R-3 zoning district is consistent with the multiple-family residential land use designation of the general plan. 
(c)  VRO, Village Residential Overlay. The VRO designation is intended as an overlay zone for certain areas within the multiple-family residential land use designation that involve special development opportunities and require a tailored approach to planning and design. The designation is intended to provide for a variety of housing types within one project or development, ranging from single-family housing to multiple-family dwellings, including uses incidental to the residential uses. The types of developments that are suitable to the Village Residential Overlay include affordable housing projects, senior housing projects, or planned unit developments that involve tailored development standards and site design. The maximum allowable density on a parcel within the Multiple-Family Residential (R-3) to which the VRO designation is applied shall be 30 units to the acre (30 du/ac), regardless of the size of the parcel in the Multiple-Family Residential (R-3) to which the VRO designation is applied. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 10, 5-3-2016)  
Sec. 44-77. - Precise plan required. 
(a)  New development. All new development shall require approval of a precise plan by the City Council. 
(b)  Residential remodel required. Any additions or remodeling to the exterior of an existing residential dwelling must undergo the residential remodel process as specified in Article V, Division 4. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 11, 5-3-2016)  
Sec. 44-78. - Allowed uses. 
The following table indicates those uses that are permitted (P), allowed subject to the approval of a conditional use permit (C), or prohibited (X) in residential zoning districts: 
KEY TO ALLOWABLE USES AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS 
Symbol 	Applicable Process 	See Section 
P 	Permitted use 	44-10 
C 	Conditional use 	44-10, Article V, Division 5 
X 	Prohibited use 	44-10 
B 	Block Party Permit 	44-947, 44-486 
 
Notes: 
See Section 44-139, regarding uses not listed. 
See Article I for definitions of land uses. 
TABLE II-1. ALLOWABLE USES AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 
LAND USE 	DISTRICT 	STANDARDS IN SECTION 
	R-1 	R-3 	
Single-Family Dwellings 	P 	P 	44-79 
Duplexes 	P 	P 	44-79 
Patio Homes and Zero Lot Line Residences 	P 	P 	44-79 
Apartments and Condominiums 	X 	P 	44-79 
Planned Unit Developments 	P 	P 	44-79 
Residential Accessory Uses and Structures (i.e., patios) 	P 	P 	44-102 
Home Occupations 	P 	P * 	Chapter 22, Article III 
Rooming/Boarding Houses 	X 	X 	N/A 
Child Day Care — Up to 8 children (small family) 	P 	P 	N/A 
Child Day Care — 9 to 14 children (large family) 	C 	C 	N/A 
Adult Day Care — up to 6 clients (residential) 	P 	P 	N/A 
Adult Day Care—7+ clients (business) 	C 	C 	N/A 
Drug/Alcohol Rehabilitation Homes — up to 6 residents 	P 	P 	N/A 
Congregate Care Facilities 	X 	C 	N/A 
Manufactured Home 	P 	X 	44-79 
Mobile Home Park 	X 	C 	N/A 
Supportive Housing — Residential Group Living 6 Persons or Fewer, Single-Family Type and Duplex Type 	P 	P 	44-110 
Supportive Housing — Residential Apartment Type 	X 	P 	44-110 
Supportive Housing — Residential Group Living 7 Persons or More 	C 	C 	44-110 
Transitional Housing — Residential Group Living 6 Persons or Fewer or Single-Family and Duplex Type 	P 	P 	44-110 
Transitional Housing — Residential Apartment Type 	X 	P 	44-110 
Transitional Housing — Residential Group Living 7 Persons or More 	C 	C 	44-110 
Schools 	C 	C 	N/A 
Secondary Dwelling Units 	P 	P 	44-111 
Religious Institutions 	C 	C 	N/A 
Public Utility Facilities 	C 	C 	N/A 
Block Parties 	B 	B 	44-947 
Marijuana Related Businesses 	X 	X 	N/A 
 
*   Requires written approval of landlord/property manager. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 2016-02, § 6, 1-19-2016)  
Sec. 44-79. - Development standards for residential zoning districts. 
(a)  New land uses and structures and alterations to existing land uses and structures shall be designed, constructed, and/or established in compliance with the requirements in Table II-2 (Development Standards for Residential Zoning Districts), in addition to all other applicable development standards (e.g., landscaping, parking, loading, etc.) in Article III (Standards Applicable in all Zoning Districts). 
(b)  Permanently sited manufactured homes certified under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 USC 5401 et seq.) may not be excluded from lots zoned for single-family dwellings, and are subject to the same rules a site-built homes, except architectural requirements concerning the manufactured home's roof overhang, roofing materials, and siding materials. Pursuant to California Government Code § 65852.4, and with the exception of architectural requirements, the City shall not subject an application to permanently site a manufactured home on a lot zoned for single-family dwelling to any administrative permit, planning or development process, or requirement which would not be imposed on a conventional site-built single-family residential dwelling on the same lot. 
TABLE II-2. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 
DEVELOPMENT FEATURE 	R-1 DISTRICT 	R-3 DISTRICT 
Minimum Parcel Size 	5,000 sq. ft. 1 	10,000 sq. ft. 
Density Range 	1.0 to 8.7 dwelling units per net acre 	Parcel Size of 0—2.0 acres 	Up to 10 
dwelling units per net acre 
		Parcel Size of 2.1—4.0 acres 	Up to 15 
dwelling units per net acre 
		Parcel Size of 4.1 or more acres 	Up to 25 
dwelling units per net acre 
Setbacks Required 	Front 2 	15 ft. 4 	20 ft. 4 
	Side 3 	5 ft. 	10 ft. 
	Side Adjacent to Residential Zoned Property 	N/A 	20 ft. 
	Street side 	5 ft. 	15 ft. 
	Rear 	15 ft. 	15 ft. 
	Rear Adjacent to Residential Zoned Property 	N/A 	25 ft. 
	Accessory structures 	See Section 44-102 	See Section 44-102 
Maximum Height Limit 	30 ft. 
two stories) 	30 ft. 
(two stories) 
Minimum Building 
Separation 	1 Story Building on Same Lot 	N/A 	10 ft. 
	2 Story Buildings or Between 1 and 2 Story Buildings on the Same Lot 	N/A 	20 ft. 
	1 Story Multifamily Buildings From Property Zoned for Single-Family Residences 	N/A 	20 ft. 
	2 Story Multifamily Buildings From Property Zoned for Single-Family Residences on Different Lots 	N/A 	30 ft. 
Maximum Lot Coverage 	45% 	40% 
 
1   For conventional single-family parcels only. For other permissible housing types, minimum lot size shall be determined by density range. 
2   Paved areas other than the driveway and paved ancillary parking area shall not encroach into the required front yard area in single-family developments. 
3   Tailored development standards and site design permitted on housing projects, other than conventional single-family, shall be permitted with approval of the City Council. 
4   23-foot setback for front loaded garages and 15 feet for side-loaded garages. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 12, 5-3-2016)  
Sec. 44-80. - Lighting in multifamily housing. 
(a)  Lighting in multifamily housing type occupancies shall be as follows: 
(1)  Aisles, passageways and recesses related to and within the building complex shall be illuminated with an intensity per Section 44-278 at the ground level during the hours of darkness. Lighting devices shall be protected by weather and vandalism-resistant covers. 
(2)  Open parking lots and carports shall be provided with a maintained minimum of one foot-candle of light on the parking surface during hours of darkness. Lighting devices shall be protected by vandal-resistant covers. These lighting devices shall be automatically energized during hours of darkness. 
(3)  Each residential unit of multifamily housing type occupancies shall have an enclosed parking space with a garage door equipped as in Section 10-336. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-81—44-101. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RESIDENTIAL SUPPLEMENTAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 44-102. - Accessory uses and structures. 
(a)  Required setbacks. 
TABLE II-3. REQUIRED SETBACKS FOR ACCESSORY STRUCTURES 
Accessory Structure 	Type of Setback 	Minimum 
Required 
Setback 
Patio covers, gazebos, storage 
sheds 4, 5 , stationary barbecues, gas fireplaces, gas fire pits, canopies and similar structures (R-1 and R-3 only). 	Interior side yard 1, 2 	5 feet 
	Street side yard 	5 feet 
	Rear yard 	5 feet 
	Between structures over 120 square feet of area 	6 feet 
Enclosed patios (R-1 and R-3 only). 	Interior side yard 	5 feet 
	Street side yard 	5 feet 
	Rear yard 	15 feet 
	Rear yard when backing up to an arterial roadway, railroad right-of-way, Southern California Edison right-of-way, County flood control channel, or non-residential zoned property 	10 feet 
Workshops 	Interior side yard 	5 feet 
	Street side yard 	5 feet 
	Rear yard 	10 feet 
Balconies 	Front setback — above yard area 	15 feet 
	Front setback-front entry garage 3 	23 feet 
	Interior side yard 	10 feet 
	Street side yard 	5 feet 
	Rear yard 	15 feet 
	Rear yard when backing up to a street, railroad right-of-way, Southern California Edison right-of-way, County flood control channel, or non-residential zoned property 	10 feet 
Swimming pools 	See Section 44-273 	
Mechanical equipment 	See Section 44-106 	
 
1   On lots with only one side yard, the minimum required side setback for patio covers shall be three feet. 
2   Condominiums and townhouses shall have a minimum side yard setback of three feet for patio covers. 
3   For side entry garages, setback to be determined by City Council at the time of precise plan or amendment to precise plan approval. 
4   Storage sheds requiring building permit per California Building Code (CBC) Section 105.1 must adhere to zoning setbacks. Storage sheds exempt from building permits per the California Building Code Section 105.2 are exempt from zoning setback requirements. 
5   The total number of exempt storage sheds allowed on a single family (R-1) lot shall not exceed 480 square feet of total aggregate area. 
(b)  Maximum height for an accessory structure. 
TABLE II-4. MAXIMUM HEIGHT FOR ACCESSORY STRUCTURES 
Accessory Structure 	Maximum Height 
Patio Covers and gazebos 	12 feet 
Storage sheds and similar structures 	8 feet 
Workshops 	12 feet 
Stationary barbecue, gas fireplaces, and gas fire pits 	8 feet 
Canopies 	10 feet 
 
(c)  Specific accessory structure development standards. 
(1)  Balconies or decks for single-family structures. 
a.  Outside stairway. There shall be no outside stairway in the R-1 zoning district. 
b.  Screen or guardrail. A minimum 36-inch high screen or guardrail shall be constructed of materials compatible with the design of the structure. 
c.  Screen wall. A screen wall, a minimum of six feet in height, shall be constructed on both sides (ends) of the balcony or deck for the full depth of the balcony or deck or as required by the conditions of approval. This requirement may be waived by the Community Development Director where it is clear that the balcony will not negatively impact adjacent residential properties. 
d.  Maximum size. The maximum size of a balcony or deck shall be 120 feet square feet. 
e.  Doors. There shall be no outside doors above the first story except when allowed with an approved balcony or deck. 
f.  Enclosure. Balconies or decks shall not be enclosed except by the adjoining residential unit and any required screen walls. 
(2)  Patio covers. Patio covers shall not cover more than 50 percent of the required rear yard area. 
(3)  Storage sheds. Storage sheds shall not exceed 120 square feet in area. Permanent electrical service shall not be allowed within storage sheds. 
(4)  Workshops. 
a.  Minimum/maximum. Workshops shall have a minimum area of 120 square feet and not exceed a maximum area of 400 square feet. 
b.  Habitable area. Workshops shall not contain any habitable areas and shall not be used for habitation of humans. 
c.  Enclosure. Workshops shall be fully enclosed and shall contain at least one door not less than 32 inches in width and may contain no interior walls. If greater than 200 square feet, workshops shall contain a window with a minimum dimension of 24 inches by 36 inches. 
d.  Air conditioning and heating units. Workshops shall not have air conditioning and heating units. 
e.  Permit. Building permits are required for workshops. 
f.  Separation. Workshops shall be located at least ten feet from any portion of a residential structure. 
(5)  Canopies. 
a.  Location. Canopies are not to be permitted in the front yard area or visible from the public-right-of-way. 
b.  Maintenance. Canopies shall be maintained and remain in good condition at all times. 
c.  Temporary permitted use. Canopies may be located in a front yard area or be visible from the public right-of-way for up to 72 hours, with a temporary use permit or block party permit. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 13, 5-3-2016)  
Sec. 44-103. - Garage/yard sales. 
(a)  Number of sales. A resident shall be allowed to hold a maximum of two garage/yard sales at his or her dwelling unit in each calendar year. 
(b)  Length of sale. Garage/yard sales shall not extend for more than two consecutive days or three consecutive days on extended national holidays. 
(c)  Sales area. Sale areas shall be confined to the garage and driveway area within the front yard. Where no driveway exists, one-half of the property width in the front yard area may be used for the sale of merchandise. 
(d)  Hours. Garage/yard sales may only be conducted within the hours of 7:00 a.m. and sunset. 
(e)  Permits. A person shall obtain a permit from the community development department prior to having a garage/yard sale. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-104. - Animals. 
Up to four household pets are permitted in the residential zones. For the purposes of this section, household pets shall include dogs, cats, parrots, canaries and other house birds of a similar nature, hamsters, rabbits, guinea pigs, white rats, white mice, turtles, salamanders, newts, chameleons, kangaroo rats, nonpoisonous reptiles not over six feet long, any nonpoisonous toad, lizard or spider, and other animals of a similar nature. Any unweaned litter from such household pets not over six months old shall be permitted. Fowl (other than house birds), horses, sheep, cattle, pigs, goats, and similar farm animals are prohibited. Fish shall be excluded from the limitations established by this section. Regardless of any permissions granted by this section, all dangerous animals, as defined by this chapter, shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-105. - Block parties. 
(a)  Permit required. No block party shall be permitted to operate within the City unless the event holder obtains a block party permit, as well as any other permits or licenses required by law. Procedures for obtaining a block party permit are established in Section 44-947. 
(b)  Regulations. Applicants for permits under this article shall comply with each of the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Block party hours are limited to 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
(2)  Only neighborhoods with cul-de-sacs may conduct block parties. 
(3)  Ninety percent of the residents affected by the closure of the street must consent to the block party by signing the application. For the purposes of this subsection, all residents of an affected property shall be deemed to have given consent if at least one owner or one legal tenant over the age of 18 of said property has signed the application. 
(4)  If the block party includes equipment or services from a private vendor to be used on a public right-of-way, the responsible party must submit a copy of the vendor's General Liability Insurance Certificate naming the City as an additional insured in an amount to be determined at the time of application. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-106. - Mechanical equipment. 
(a)  Location. Mechanical equipment (e.g., HVAC units) may be located in the rear yard, side yard, or on the roof. Such equipment may only be located in an interior side yard if it is not feasible to locate it in the rear yard. All equipment in the side yard shall be located at the furthest possible location away from windows on the adjacent property but in no case shall the equipment be less than ten feet from any window on the adjacent property. Pool equipment is only permitted in the rear yard area. 
(b)  Noise. HVAC units shall be exempt from the community noise standards established in Section 44-267, provided that the unit is properly located and is working at or below the manufacturer's decibel rating for the unit. All other mechanical equipment shall be subject to the requirements of Section 44-267. 
(c)  Visibility. All reasonable efforts shall be taken to ensure that mechanical equipment is not visible from public streets and is screened from view of adjacent residential properties in a manner approved by the Community Development Director. 
(d)  Chimney structures. 
(1)  Chimney structures that are incorporated within or affixed to the exterior of a residential structure shall be enclosed within a chassis and finished with brick, rock, stucco, or wood/metal siding. All materials, except for brick and rock, utilized for the chimney are required to be painted with colors that are compatible with the residence and any other chimney structure on the residence. 
(2)  Round metal pipes, clay pipes, guy wires, and straps for chimneys shall be fully enclosed within the chassis and shall not be visible from the property line. 
(3)  Gas vent pipes and other mechanical ducts that are less than six inches in diameter when leaving the interior of the structure are exempted from these requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-107. - Vehicles, motorized recreational vehicles, and recreational objects-maintenance and repair guidelines. 
(a)  No person shall perform other than minor or routine maintenance or repair on any vehicle, motorized recreational vehicle, or recreational object while parked on a driveway or paved ancillary parking area. Additionally, no person shall leave a vehicle, motorized recreational vehicle, or recreational object parked upon a driveway or paved ancillary parking area in a visible state of disrepair or semi-repair in excess of six hours. 
(b)  The term "visible state of disrepair or semi-disrepair" shall include, without limitation, such a state that it is apparent to a casual observer that the repair or maintenance of the vehicle, motorized recreational vehicle, or recreational object has not yet been completed. 
(c)  Upon written request of a residential property owner or residential tenant, the City Manager or his or her designee may grant a waiver of the regulations established by this section, provided that the waiver may be not granted for more than four days in a 30-day period or granted in an effort to facilitate an unauthorized home-based business. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-108. - Same—Parking and storage regulations. 
(a)  Unless the context indicates otherwise, the definitions set forth in Article I and the California Vehicle Code shall be applicable to this section. 
(b)  No vehicle, motorized recreational vehicle, or recreational object shall be parked or stored on any portion of a front yard area of a residential structure. Vehicles, recreational vehicles, and recreational objects parked in driveways shall be parked perpendicular to the garage door of the structure or the public street. For purposes of this section, the term "front yard area of a residential structure" shall include all areas in front of the residential structure with the exception of the driveway of the structure, as the driveway was originally constructed and not more than one paved ancillary parking area. 
(c)  No vehicle, motorized recreational vehicle, recreational object, or any accessory, which is parked or stored on private property, shall project into any public sidewalk or public right-of-way or be located in a position that would adversely affect vehicular or pedestrian traffic safety. 
(d)  Recreational objects shall not be parked or stored on a driveway or paved ancillary parking area between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. For the purposes of this section, the term "recreational objects" includes camper shells off a truck, boats, personal water craft, off-road vehicles, snowmobiles, airplanes, and any other object made to carry one or more persons, but not including bicycles, tricycles, on-road motorcycles, and scooters. 
(e)  Motorized recreational vehicle and recreational object storage is permissible in the side or rear yard area if and only if it is screened in such a way as to be not readily visible from any public right-of-way or separated from any public right-of-way by an opaque fence or wall of approximately six feet in height. Stored vehicles, motorized recreational vehicles, and recreational objects may undergo maintenance of unlimited duration, provided that the portion visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent property from ground elevation is maintained in a clean and orderly appearance. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, vehicles, motorized recreational vehicles, nonmotorized vehicles, and commercial vehicles may be parked or stored on driveways or paved ancillary parking areas only if road operational and kept clean and free of debris. For the purposes of this section, the term "road operational" means a vehicle that possesses the minimum required equipment and certifications to be legally driven on the highways of the State, including a valid current license and registration or temporary registration and all proper safety equipment. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-109. - Parking and storage of oversized vehicles in residential areas. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, company, or corporation to park, store, or permit to be parked or stored any oversized vehicle, as defined in Section 44-10, on any privately owned property lying within any residential zoning district unless one of the following conditions can be met: 
(1)  The vehicle can be parked or stored completely within an enclosed garage. 
(2)  The vehicle is parked or stored such that it can be fully screened from view from the public right-of-way and neighboring residential properties. The method of screening shall adhere to the requirements of this chapter in terms of materials used, maximum wall and structure heights, setback requirements, and other applicable standards and permitting requirements for the zoning district in which the subject property is located. 
(3)  The vehicle is in the act of making a pickup or delivery or is being used in conjunction with the performance of a bona fide service or construction activity on a residential property in the vicinity. 
(b)  This section shall not be applicable to recreational vehicles or objects. 
(c)  Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the parking of vehicles of public or private utility companies, including cable television companies, on any public street for a period of time required in the locating, relocating, installation, servicing, testing, or repair of equipment of such companies, nor shall the provisions of this section be construed to prohibit the parking of any vehicles used in the construction, repair, or maintenance of any road, street, or alley in such zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-111. - Second unit residences. 
(a)  Review. Second unit residences shall be reviewed ministerially and approved by the Community Development Director. Plans shall be submitted for review that show the lot dimensions, streets, utilities, drainage plan, building placement, access, parking areas, roof pitch, fencing, landscaping, exterior elevations, and material of all buildings. The plan should be detailed and adequately dimensioned and may contain added information to fully explain the development. 
(b)  Site and design standards. The design and incorporation of a second unit on a residential property shall be such that the second unit: 
(1)  Is limited to one story in height not exceeding 16 feet if it is detached from the primary unit; 
(2)  Conforms to the height limits established in this chapter for the zone in which the subject residential property lies, if the second unit is attached to the primary unit; 
(3)  Contains a total floor area of no more than 30 percent of the living area of the principal dwelling and in no case exceeds 1,200 square feet; 
(4)  Maintains architectural compatibility with the primary unit, which includes, but is not limited to, building proportion, architectural style, roof type, paint color, finish, details, and other qualities subject to the review and approval by the Community Development Director; 
(5)  Conforms to all setback and building separation requirements established in this chapter for the zone in which the subject residential property lies; 
(6)  Conforms to all density requirements in this chapter and in the general plan; 
(7)  Conforms to all parking requirements in this chapter; 
(8)  The applicant shall be the owner of the primary unit and shall occupy either the primary or second dwelling unit and shall record a covenant preventing rental of both units simultaneously. 
(c)  Sale of unit. A second unit may be rented but shall not be sold, transferred, or assigned separately from the primary residence. A second unit shall not be approved by the City prior to the applicant's submittal of evidence that a deed restriction affirming this requirement has been filed with the County Recorder. This deed restriction shall run with the land and be continuous in tenure with the life of the second unit. 
(d)  Fees. The fee for review of a proposed second unit shall be equivalent to the fee established by the City Council for a precise plan amendment. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-112—44-135. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 44-136. - Purpose. 
This division provides regulations applicable to development and land uses in the nonresidential zoning districts established by Section 44-39. The purposes of the individual nonresidential zoning districts and the manner in which they are applied are provided Section 44-137. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-137. - Purpose of nonresidential zoning districts. 
(a)  OP, Office Professional. The OP zoning district provides for single- or multi-tenant offices and may include limited supporting uses for onsite employees. Office developments may range from low-rise structures situated in a landscaped garden arrangement to mid-rise structures at appropriate locations. Typical uses include professional offices for legal, design, and engineering services, medical offices/health care centers, corporate headquarters, and general offices for insurance, real estate, and financial services. Supporting convenience services may be permitted to serve the needs of onsite employees or visitors/patients. 
(b)  NC, Neighborhood Commercial. The NC zoning district provides localized commercial retail and service activities for surrounding neighborhoods. Typical uses include food markets, drug stores, clothing stores, sporting goods, cleaners, banks, offices, private schools and child care centers, hardware stores, other retail and personal service uses, mixed uses (residential/commercial), and community facilities. Neighborhood commercial projects should be compatible in design and scale with adjacent residential areas. 
(c)  B-1, Mixed-Use Business. The B-1 zoning district provides for a compatible and complementary mixture of employment, commercial, and residential uses. Typical uses include business and professional offices, high-rise hotels, restaurants, retail and general service commercial uses, limited research and development operations, commercial recreation, and multiple-family residential development. Development in the Mixed-Use Business District should offer attractive and distinctive architectural design, integrated site layouts, substantial landscaping enhancements, and convenient pedestrian access between uses. 
(d)  GI, General Industrial. The GI zoning district provides for a range of industrial uses including manufacturing, assembly, distribution, research and development facilities, science laboratories, warehousing, distribution, and utility buildings/facilities. Uses may include ancillary office and commercial activities. Commercial developments such as home improvement stores and wholesale and retail commercial activities may be conditionally approved in compliance with Article V, Division 5. 
(e)  PI, Public/Institutional. The PI zoning district is intended for a range of public and private uses including schools, government offices, police and fire stations, public utilities, flood control channels, utility easements, libraries, museums, hospitals, congregate care facilities, religious institutions, temporary emergency shelters, transitional shelters, and cultural facilities. Public or institutional uses may be permitted in other land use designations under the procedures of Article V, Division 5. 
(f)  OS, Open Space/Recreation. The OS zoning district encompasses parkland and utility easements developed for recreational use. Only accessory buildings or those structures related to parks and recreation facilities are intended for open-space lands. This designation may also accommodate certain commercial outdoor recreation uses as a conditional use in compliance with Article V, Division 5. 
(g)  PND, Planned Neighborhood Development. The Planned Neighborhood Development (PND) is intended to encourage commercial infill, redevelopment, and rehabilitation opportunities by allowing innovative land design and diversification in the relationship of various uses, buildings, structures, lot consolidation, parking, and landscaping while ensuring substantial compliance with the general plan and the intent of this chapter. In addition, the PND zoning district provides adequate standards necessary to protect and promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the City. 
(1)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the PND zoning district is to promote economic viability and sensitivity to design contexts and individual neighborhood character crucial to the success of any commercial infill or redevelopment project. It is recognized that an integrated development provides an opportunity for creative design when flexible yet defined regulations are applied. The PND zoning district regulations are established in order to: 
a.  Encourage and accommodate quality restaurant and retail development, in a unified project, through creative and imaginative planning solutions; 
b.  Ensure a more efficient use of space, increased project amenities, and compatibility with the surrounding neighborhoods and existing development; 
c.  Encourage the use of modern land planning and design techniques to create attractive, vibrant commercial developments integrating a mixture of different types of site uses; 
d.  Support revenue generating commercial uses that add needed services with economic, social, and aesthetic benefits to the City and its residents without causing the City to incur costs for municipal services that exceed the tax revenues attributable from such uses; 
e.  Achieve the coordinated planning and orderly development and redevelopment of different contiguous parcels to achieve a comprehensive planning and project effort and outcome, such as the consolidation of adjacent parcels or building sites for maximum flexibility in design and use; and 
f.  Encourage public art as a community resource and establish incentives, programs and objectives for incorporating public art into private commercial development projects. 
(2)  Development objectives. The following objectives serve as a blueprint for all development projects within the PND zoning district and during the approval process. The City Council may require additional studies it determines necessary or appropriate to consider project design and impacts. It may also require additional standards, regulations, limitations and/or restrictions to facilitate and encourage project designs that satisfy the goals in subsection (g)(1). Development objectives are intended to produce the desired uses and the quality of site development that will bring new economic development opportunities into the City that will benefit City residents and not adversely impact the provision of City services. Objectives include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  To attract retail and restaurant uses that will promote economic and efficient use of land and unified development; 
b.  To permit the creation of functional and interesting commercial developments that do not adversely impact the City's ability to maintain its existing level of municipal services; 
c.  To promote building site planning that takes into consideration the context of the development, the location of nearby uses and, whenever possible, to cluster buildings with one another and/or with those on an adjacent property; and 
d.  To incorporate into the project unique and/or creative solutions specific to each site, project, and use in relation to the following requirements: 
1.  Height limitations or any bulk requirements on buildings and structures, lot and yard requirements, distances between buildings; 
2.  Percent coverage of land by buildings and structures; 
3.  Parking ratios and areas expressed in relation to use of various portions of the property and/or building floor area; 
4.  The location, width, and improvement of vehicular and pedestrian access to various portions of the property including portions within abutting streets; 
5.  Landscaped buffer areas to include fences, walls, and lighting of an approved design; 
6.  Limitations upon the size, design, number, lighting, and location of signs and advertising structures; 
7.  Arrangement and spacing of buildings and structures to provide appropriate open spaces around same; 
8.  Location and size of off-street loading areas and docks; 
9.  Uses of buildings and structures by general classifications, and specific designation when there are unusual requirements for parking; or when use involves noise, dust, odor, fumes, smoke, vibrations, glare, or radiation incompatible with present or potential development of surrounding property; 
10.  Quality architectural design of buildings and structures; and 
11.  Public art. 
(h)  FO, Freeway Overlay District. The FO designation is intended as an overlay zone for certain areas of non-residential land uses adjacent to the SR 91 freeway that provide special information display opportunities and require a tailored approach to planning and design. The designation is intended to allow for information dissemination from freestanding display structures along the SR 91. The types of mediums that are suitable in the Freeway Overlay District include freestanding display structures with static information displays or electronic/digital information displays which are tailored to certain specific development and site design standards. 
(i)  (IO), Industrial Overlay. The Industrial Overlay (IO) is intended to provide for areas where industrial uses are appropriate to provide for diverse commerce and employment in the City, while protecting adjacent and nearby commercial and residential uses from the potential impacts associated with industrial operations. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 14, 5-3-2016)  
Sec. 44-138. - Precise plan required. 
(a)  Approval required. All new developments, unless exempt per the provisions of this Development Code, shall require approval of a precise plan by the City Council pursuant to article V, division 3. 
(b)  Amendment to precise plan. All development on properties previously developed under an adopted precise plan shall require approval of an amendment to the precise plan by the City Council. 
(c)  Modification of development standards. The development standards listed in section 44-79 may be modified by the City Council in its approval of a variance pursuant to article V, division 11. The use of imaginative ideas for building and parking arrangements, architecture, and landscaping in order to make facilities convenient and attractive and in keeping with the goals and policies of the General Plan is encouraged. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 15, 5-3-2016)  
Sec. 44-139. - Allowable uses. 
(a)  Table. The following table indicates those uses that are permitted as of right (P), allowed subject to the approval of a conditional use permit (C), allowed as an accessory use (A), allowed with the approval of a temporary use permit (T), special permit (S), or adult oriented business permit (D), or prohibited (X). No uses shall be allowed which are not in compliance with all City, State, and federal laws and regulations. 
Key to Allowable Uses and Permit Requirements 
Symbol 	Applicable Process 	See Section 
P 	Permitted Use (in most cases also requires approval of a Precise Plan and/or approval by the Community Development Director) 	44-10 
C 	Conditional Use Permit 	Article V, Division 5 
A 	Accessory Use (in most cases also requires approval of a Conditional Use Permit, Special Permit, and/or approval by the Community Development Director) 	44-10 
T 	Temporary Use Permit 	Article V, Division 10 
S 	Special Permit 	Article V, Division 8 
D 	Adult Oriented Business Permit 	Article V, Division 9 
R 	Review and Approval from Community Development Director 	44-484 
X 	Use Prohibited 	44-10 
 
TABLE II-5. ALLOWABLE USES AND PLANNING PERMIT REQUIREMENTS FOR NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 
LAND USE 	ZONING DISTRICT 
	OP 	NC 	B-1 	GI 	PI 	OS 	PND 1 
Retail Uses 
Outdoor Display And Incidental Seating Area 	X 	P 	P 	X 	X 	X 	P 
Retail Stores under 10,000 sq. ft. floor area 	A 	P 	P 	A 	X 	X 	P 
Shopping Centers and Retail Stores with 10,000 to 50,000 sq. ft. total floor Area 	C 	P 	P 	C 	X 	X 	P 
Shopping Centers and Retail Stores with over 50,000 sq. ft. total floor area 	C 	C 	C 	C 	X 	X 	P 
Liquor and Convenience Stores under 10,000 sq. ft. floor area, with no consumption of alcohol on the premises 	C 	C 	C 	X 	X 	X 	C 
Pawn Shops, Secondhand Store 	X 	S 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Plant Nurseries and Garden Supply Stores, with no propagation of plants on the premises 	X 	C 	P 	C 	X 	X 	C 
Showroom/Catalog Stores, without substantial on-site inventory 	C 	P 	P 	P 	X 	X 	P 
General Services 
Barber Shops, Beauty, Nail and Tanning Salons, and similar uses 	P 	P 	P 	C 	X 	X 	X 
Laundromats and Dry Cleaners (except central cleaning plants) 	C 	P 	P 	P 	X 	X 	X 
Marijuana Related Businesses 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Miscellaneous Services such as Travel Services, Photo Developing, Videotape Rentals, Shoe Repair, Appliance Repair, and similar uses 	C 	P 	P 	C 	X 	X 	X 
Pet Grooming and Pet Supply 	X 	P 	P 	P 	X 	X 	X 
Printing, Blueprinting, and Copy Services 	P 	P 	P 	P 	X 	X 	X 
Office Uses and Health Services 
Ambulance Services 	X 	X 	P 	P 	X 	X 	X 
Banks 	P 	P 	P 	C 	X 	X 	C 3 
Business and Professional Offices 	P 	P 	P 	P 	X 	X 	X 
Check Cashing Services 	X 	S 	P 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Hospitals: General, and Convalescent 	C 	X 	C 	C 	C 	X 	X 
Laboratories, Medical, Dental, Optical, and X-Ray 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	X 	X 
Massage Facilities 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	X 	X 
Medical Offices (physicians, dentists, optometrists, chiropractors, and similar practitioners) 	P 	P 	P 	C 	A 	X 	X 
Medical Centers/Clinics (four or more offices in one building) 	P 	C 	P 	C 	A 	X 	X 
Surgicenters 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	X 	X 
Veterinary Clinics, Animal Hospitals, and Kennels (indoor only) 	X 	C 	P 	C 	X 	X 	X 
Dining, Drinking, and Entertainment Uses 
Restaurants, counter take-out with ancillary seating, (such as yogurt, ice cream, pastry shops, and similar) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	P 
Restaurants, drive-in or drive-through, with no alcohol sold on the premises 	X 	C 	P 	X 	X 	X 	P 
Restaurants, other than drive-in or drive-through, with no alcohol sold on the premises 	C 	P 	P 	C 	A 	X 	P 
Restaurants serving alcohol: bars, taverns, and cocktail lounges 	C 	C 	C 	X 	X 	X 	C 
Dancing or Live Entertainment as a principal use (excluding adult entertainment) 	X 	C 	C 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Dancing or Live Adult Oriented Entertainment as a principal use 	X 	D 	X 	D 	X 	X 	X 
Dancing or Live Entertainment as an accessory use (excluding adult entertainment) 	X 	C 	C 	X 	X 	X 	C 
Dancing or Live Adult Oriented Entertainment as an accessory use 	X 	D 	X 	D 	X 	X 	X 
Theaters: live or motion picture (excluding adult entertainment) 	X 	C 	P 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Adult Oriented Entertainment Theaters: live or motion picture 	X 	D 	X 	D 	X 	X 	X 
Recreation and Leisure Uses — Accessory 
Amusement Arcades with game machines, Internet cafes, and computer rental uses; all subject to Section 44-164 	X 	C 	C 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Bicycle and Pedestrian Trails 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	X 
Bowling, Pool, or Billiard Centers as a principal use 	X 	C 	C 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Family Recreation Centers (incorporating such uses as miniature golf or speedways and similar uses) 	X 	C 	C 	C 	C 	X 	X 
Game Machines as an accessory use, 1 to 2 machines 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	X 	A 
Game Machines as an accessory use, 3 to 8 machines 	C 	C 	A 	C 	C 	X 	C 
Internet cafes or Computer Rental 	X 	C 	P 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Health Clubs and Day Spas 	C 	C 	C 	C 	X 	X 	X 
Martial Arts Studios, Music Studios, and Dance Studios. 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	X 	X 
Indoor Pistol, Rifle, or Archery Ranges 	X 	X 	C 	C 	X 	X 	X 
Libraries and Museums 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	X 	X 
Parks, Play Fields, and Open Space 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	X 
Pool or Billiard Tables as an accessory use (4 tables or fewer) 	X 	C 	C 	A 	A 	X 	C 
Private Swim Schools 	X 	C 	P 	C 	C 	C 	X 
Skateboard Parks, Ice Rinks, and Roller Hockey Centers 	X 	X 	C 	C 	C 	C 	X 
Tennis Clubs, Racquetball, or Similar Centers 	A 	C 	P 	C 	C 	C 	X 
Assembly Uses 
Religious Institutions 	C 	X 	X 	C 	C 	X 	X 
Lodges, Union Halls, Social Clubs, and Senior Citizen Centers 	C 	X 	X 	C 	C 	X 	X 
Mortuaries and Funeral Homes 	X 	C 	P 	P 	C 	X 	X 
Public and Quasi-Public Uses 
Adult Day Care (as principal use) 	C 	C 	P 	C 	P 	X 	X 
Child Day Care Facilities, Centers, and Preschools (as a principal use) 	C 	C 	P 	C 	C 	X 	X 
Colleges and Universities 	C 	X 	C 	C 	P 	X 	X 
Communication Towers and related facilities as a primary use 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	X 
Electrical Substations 	X 	X 	X 	C 	C 	X 	X 
Fire and Police Stations 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	X 	X 
Government offices 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	X 	X 
Private Elementary, Intermediate, and High Schools 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	X 	X 
Public Flood Control Facilities and Devices 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	X 	X 
Public Reservoirs, Water Tanks, and Pump Stations 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	X 	X 
Public or Private Kennels and Animal Shelters (with indoor or outdoor pet boarding) 	X 	X 	C 	C 	X 	X 	X 
Tutorial Facility (after school hours) 	C 	C 	C 	X 	C 	X 	X 
Vocational Schools (barber, beauty, and similar) 	C 	C 	P 	C 	C 	X 	X 
Residential and Lodging Uses 
Emergency Shelter (Homeless) 	T 	T 	T 	P 	T 	T 	T 
Hotels and Motels 	C 	C 	C 	X 	X 	X 	C 
Multifamily Dwellings as a primary use 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Supportive Housing — Residential Apartment Type 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Supportive Housing — Residential Group Living 7 Persons or More 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Transitional Housing — Residential Apartment Type 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Transitional Housing — Residential Group Living 7 Persons or More 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Automotive Uses 
Vehicle Dealerships and Rental Agencies 	X 	C 	P 	C 	X 	X 	C 
Vehicle Body Repair and Painting; Major Engine and Transmission Repair/Rebuilding (including major auto repair) 	X 	X 	X 	C 	X 	X 	X 
Vehicle Storage Yards (not including dismantling) 	X 	X 	X 	C 	X 	X 	X 
Vehicle Parts Stores, with no repair or parts installation on the premises 	X 	P 	P 	P 	X 	X 	P 
Vehicle Repair Specialty Shops, providing minor auto maintenance: tire sales/service, muffler, brake, lube, and tune-up services (not including major engine or drivetrain repair) 	X 	C 	X 	C 	X 	X 	X 
Car Washes 	X 	C 	P 	C 	X 	X 	X 
Service Stations 	X 	C 	P 	C 	X 	X 	C 
Private Parking Lots/Garages as a principal use 	C 	C 	P 	P 	C 	X 	X 
Truck and/or Equipment Rentals 	X 	X 	P 	C 	X 	X 	X 
Truck, Recreation Vehicle, and Boat Sales 	X 	C 	P 	C 	X 	X 	C 
Accessory Uses and Structures 
Communication Towers and Facilities that may or may not be customarily associated with the principal use on the site 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Communication Facilities that are roof-mounted and not visible from a public right-of-way 	A 	A 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 
Communication Facilities that are roof-mounted and/or building mounted and visible from a public right-of-way 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 	R 
Fences and Walls 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	C 	A 
Incidental Products or Services for employees or businesses (child day care, cafeterias, and business support uses) 	A 	A 	R 	A 	A 	X 	A 
Portable Outdoor Vending Uses (such as flower stands, hotdog stands, and similar) 	C 	C 	A 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Recycling Drop-off Bins 	X 	C 	X 	C 	X 	X 	X 
Reverse Vending Machines — indoor only 	X 	A 	R 	A 	A 	X 	A 
Satellite Dishes one meter (39.37 inches) in diameter or less and other antennas 	A 	A 	R 	A 	A 	A 	A 
Satellite Dishes more than one meter (39.37 inches) in diameter 	C 	C 	A 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Signs (subject to Article III, Division 5, Signs) 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 
Swimming Pools as an accessory use 	C 	C 	A 	C 	C 	C 	X 
Other accessory uses and structures that the Community Development Director determines are customarily associated with, and subordinate to, the principal use on the premises and which are consistent with the purpose and intent of the zoning district 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	X 	A 
Warehousing and Heavy Commercial Uses 
Central Cleaning or Laundry Plants 	X 	X 	X 	C 	X 	X 	X 
Contractor, Public Utility, and similar equipment/storage yards 	X 	X 	X 	C 	X 	X 	X 
General Warehouses, with no sales to consumers 	X 	X 	X 	C 	X 	X 	X 
Lumber and Building Material Yards, Outdoor (see retail stores for indoor lumber sales) 	X 	X 	P 	C 	X 	X 	X 
Self-storage Warehouses 	X 	X 	X 	C 	X 	X 	X 
Pest Control Services 	X 	X 	P 	P 	X 	X 	X 
Plumbing Repair Shops, small non-auto related engine repair 	X 	C 	P 	P 	X 	X 	X 
Wholesaling and Distribution Centers, with no sales to consumers 	X 	X 	C 	C 	X 	X 	X 
Industrial and Research Uses 
Bottling plants 	X 	X 	X 	P 	X 	X 	X 
Indoor Manufacture and Assembly of Components or Finished Products from materials such as cloth, fiber, fur, glass, leather, stone, paper (except milling), plastics, metal, and wood 	X 	X 	X 	P 	X 	X 	X 
Junkyards 	X 	X 	X 	S 	X 	X 	X 
Offsite Hazardous Waste Facilities 	X 	X 	X 	C 	X 	X 	X 
Recording Studios 	X 	X 	P 	C 	X 	X 	X 
Recycling Centers as a primary use (collection and sorting only) 	X 	X 	X 	C 	X 	X 	X 
Research and Development 	X 	X 	P 	P 	X 	X 	X 
Sign Manufacturing 	X 	X 	C 	P 	X 	X 	X 
Special Events 
Circuses, Fairs, and Festivals 	X 	X 	S 	S 	S 	S 	X 
Community Events 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 
Cycling Events 	S 	X 	S 	S 	S 	S 	X 
Commercial Filming 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 
Farmers' Markets 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	X 
Organized Formation, Parade, Procession 	X 	X 	S 	X 	S 	S 	X 
Temporary Auto Sales 	S 	X 	S 	S 	S 	X 	X 
Walkathons and Running Events 	X 	X 	S 	X 	S 	S 	X 
Temporary Uses 
Christmas Tree Sales 	X 	T 	T 	T 	T 	X 	T 
Construction Trailers and Guard Offices 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 
Transitional Shelters (i.e., temporary shelter for homeless persons or victims of domestic abuse) 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	X 
Halloween Pumpkin Sales 	X 	T 	T 	T 	T 	X 	T 
Outdoor Sales 	X 	T 	T 	T 	T 	X 	T 
Temporary Structures 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 	T 
Environmental Remediation Equipment (Temporary or Accessory) 	T 	T 	R 	T 	T 	T 	T 
Vending Carts 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 
Other Uses 
Adult Entertainment Businesses, subject to Section 44-194—201 	X 	D 	X 	D 	X 	X 	X 
Fortune telling and palmistry establishments 	X 	S 	X 	P 	X 	X 	X 
Tattoo Parlors, Body Piercing, and Permanent Make-up 	X 	C 	C 	P 	X 	X 	X 
 
1   Subject to PND Transition period in subsection (c). 
2   Mixed-Use in the PND Zone is limited to Commercial Mixed-Use as defined in Section 44-10, Commercial Mixed-Use. 
3   Subject to use demonstrating how it satisfies conditions set forth in Sections 44-137(g)(1)d., (g)(2)b. and 44-788(4). 
(b)  Uses not listed in table. Land uses that are not listed in Table II-5 as allowed or prohibited may be permitted if: 
(1)  The Community Development Director determines that the use is consistent with the purpose and intent of the applicable district as set forth in Section 44-137; and 
(2)  A conditional use permit is approved in compliance with Article V, Division 5, and the use is in compliance with all City, State, and federal laws and regulations. 
(c)  Two or more uses on one site. Two or more uses may be established on one building site if neither are prohibited under this section and all development standards are met as specified in Section 44-140. However, the Community Development Director may require the processing of a conditional use permit if two or more principal uses are proposed that may cause, together or separately, adverse impacts on each other or on surrounding land uses. Impacts may include noise, vibration, odor, light, glare, or visual impacts. 
(d)  PND transition period. Until December 31, 2015, any nonconforming commercial use established and operating within a wholly enclosed building in the PND zone on December 31, 2010, may be replaced by any use permitted in the NC Neighborhood Commercial Zone, subject to the following: 
(1)  Notwithstanding the above, the following uses shall not be permitted to replace a nonconforming use in the PND at any time: 
a.  Car wash. 
b.  Bank. 
c.  Massage facilities, spas, and health or fitness clubs. 
d.  Fortune telling and palmistry. 
e.  Tattoo parlors, body piercing, and permanent make-up. 
f.  Check cashing services. 
g.  Pawn shops. 
h.  Veterinary clinics, animal hospitals, and kennels. 
i.  Dancing or any form of adult entertainment or sales of adult-only products. 
j.  Recreation and leisure uses. 
k.  Vehicle repair. 
(2)  In no event shall a conforming use in a single story commercial building or on the ground floor of any two-story commercial building be permitted to be replaced by a nonconforming use, regardless of whether the conforming use being replaced occupies the same space previously occupied by a nonconforming use. This limitation shall not apply to uses on the second floor of any two story commercial building, which may be replaced by any use permitted in the Neighborhood Commercial District. 
(3)  In no event shall a nonconforming use occupy a greater percentage of the building than the previous nonconforming use. 
(4)  Commencing on January 1, 2016, all new uses established in the PND zone shall conform to the land use table and this subsection shall be automatically repealed. 
(e)  Industrial uses in Industrial Overlay. The Industrial Overlay applies only to properties designated on the zoning map and shall only apply as an overlay to the B-1 zoning district. Notwithstanding the use regulations in this Section 44-139, the following uses shall be permitted to locate and/or continue as a legal use in the Industrial Overlay district: 
(1)  Bottling plants. 
(2)  Indoor manufacture and assembly of components or finished products from materials such as cloth, fiber, fur, glass, leather, stone, paper (except milling), plastics, metal, and wood. 
(3)  Sign manufacturing. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 2016-02, § 7, 1-19-2016; Ord. No. 2018-01, § 4, 2-6-2018)  
Sec. 44-140. - Emergency shelters, transitional and supportive housing. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and business license for an emergency shelter, submittal of a written agreement between the City and the operator of the shelter is required addressing all of the following conditions: 
(1)  Emergency shelters shall be permitted solely within the General Industrial District areas shown on the City zoning map. 
(2)  A single emergency shelter housing up to a maximum ten beds or persons to be served per night, or a combination of multiple shelters with a combined capacity not to exceed ten beds or persons per night, shall be a permitted use on any parcel within the General Industrial (GI) District. Religious institutions located within the GI District may establish onsite emergency shelters for up to ten beds or persons per night without the need to amend an existing precise plan and/or conditional use permit or apply for a new conditional use permit, regardless of current combined capacity with any existing emergency shelters currently in operation, subject to the minimum development standards contain within this section. 
(3)  The emergency shelter shall operate on a first-come, first-served basis with clients only permitted on site and admitted to the shelter between 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. during Pacific Daylight Time, and 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. during Pacific Standard Time. Clients must vacate the emergency shelter by 8:00 a.m. and have no guaranteed bed for the next night. 
(4)  The maximum stay of a given person at the emergency shelter shall not exceed a total of 180 days (cumulative, even if not consecutive) within a 365-day period. 
(5)  In no event shall an emergency shelter be established within 300 feet of an existing emergency shelter, as measured from the property line. 
(6)  Exterior lighting shall be provided for the entire outdoor and parking area of the emergency shelter property per subsections 26-101(6) and 44-362(e). 
(7)  Size and location of on-site waiting areas and client intake areas. An on-site waiting area shall be provided and clearly identified for all clients. The on-site waiting area shall be no larger than ten square feet for every one bed provided at the emergency shelter. Said waiting area shall be in a location that is not adjacent to the public right-of-way. The client intake area shall be located directly adjacent to the on-site waiting area. 
(8)  All emergency shelter improvements shall comply with this chapter, and the most current adopted building and safety code, specific to the establishment of dormitories. 
(9)  A security and safety plan shall be provided to the City for review and approval in conjunction with any application for a business license for an emergency shelter. The plan may be required to address additional security and safety needs as identified by the City Manager or his or her designee. The approved security and safety plan shall remain active throughout the life of the emergency shelter. The plan shall contain, at minimum, provisions addressing the following topical areas: 
a.  Sleeping areas. The separation of male/female sleeping areas, as well as any family areas within the shelter. 
b.  Loitering control. Specific off-site controls to minimize the congregation of clients in the vicinity of the shelter and in adjacent neighborhoods during hours that clients are not allowed on site. 
c.  Management of outdoor areas. A system for daily admittance and discharge procedures and monitoring of waiting areas, with the goal of minimizing disruption to nearby land uses. 
d.  Alcohol and illegal drugs. How the operator will control and regulate alcohol and illegal drug use by clients on the premises. 
e.  Contact information. The emergency shelter operators shall provide the City with the most current daytime office business hour contact information for the operator of the shelter, as well as the nighttime contact information for the "persons on duty" when the emergency shelter is open to clients. 
f.  Communication and outreach. A plan for the emergency shelter to maintain good communication and response to operational issues which may arise from whatever source. 
g.  The operators shall ensure proper compliance with all applicable federal, State and local laws pertaining to client residency and occupancy. 
(10)  At least one manager shall be on site during all hours of operation of the emergency shelter. Such manager must be an individual who does not utilize the shelter's beds or other services and who resides off site. The manager must be accompanied by one supporting staff member for every five beds, or fraction thereof, in the facility. Such staff members must be individuals who do not utilize the shelter's beds or other services and who reside off site. 
(11)  The emergency shelter shall provide off-street parking at the ratio of one space per five beds and/or one-half spaces per bedroom designed as a family unit with children, plus one space per employee or volunteer staff member on duty. Alternatively, the emergency shelter may submit a parking study, subject to approval by the City, demonstrating that the parking demand associated with the emergency shelter justifies requiring a reduced amount of off-street parking. Each shelter shall also provide a bike rack in a secured area on the premises. 
(12)  Public health and safety requirements. 
a.  Health permit. An emergency shelter operating without any food services shall be required to comply with applicable Orange County Health Care Agency standards and regulations and secure any necessary permits prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy and a business license. Any emergency shelter that contains a kitchen, but that does not provide food services, shall comply with all applicable Orange County Health Department standards and regulations; however, such kitchen shall not be remodeled into a commercial kitchen. 
b.  Fire and safety. Sleeping sections or rooms shall be equipped with a smoke detector, a hand-held fire extinguisher, and an evacuation plan, subject to review by the Orange County Fire Authority (OCFA). The City may require the installation of a sprinkler system or other appropriate safety measures if recommended by the OCFA. 
c.  Sanitation. The emergency shelter shall provide a minimum of one toilet and one shower per gender for every five beds, and a minimum of one private shower and toilet facility for each area designated for use by individual families. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 2018-01, § 5, 2-6-2018)  
Sec. 44-141. - Nonresidential zoning districts general development standards. 
(a)  New land uses and structures, and alterations to existing land uses and structures, shall be designated, constructed, and/or established in compliance with the requirements in Table II-6, in addition to the other applicable development standards (e.g., landscaping, parking and loading, etc.) in article III (Standards Applicable in all Zoning Districts). 
TABLE II-6. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR NONRESIDENTIAL AND MIXED (RESIDENTIAL AND NONRESIDENTIAL) USES IN NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 
DEVELOPMENT STANDARD 	OP 	NC 	B-1 	GI 	PI 	OS 	PND 
Min. Lot Size (sq. ft.) 	No minimum 
Max. Structure Height (ft.) 	55 	35 	250 	50 	55/30 4 	30 	55/35 5 
Max. Number of Stories 	4 	4 	* 	2 	3/2 4 	2 	4/2 5 
Max. Floor Area Ratio (FAR) 2 	0.6 	0.4 	0.75/1.5 8 27 DU/Ac. 	0.6 	0.6 	0.25 	0.6 
Min. Perimeter Building Setback/Perimeter Landscaping (in ft.) 3 	From Ultimate Public Right-of-way 	30/10 1 	30/10 	* 	30/10 1 	30/10 	* 	15 or 0/5 6 
	From Residential Districts 	30/10 1 	30/10 	* 	50/10 1 	30/10 	* 	10 
	From Abutting Commercial, Office, and Industrial Projects 	20/10 1 	10/5 	* 	20/5 1 	20/10 	* 	5 
	From Interior Property Lines Within the Same Project 	0 	0 	* 	0 	0 	* 	0 
Freestanding Communications Tower Max. Structure Height 	65 ft. 	50 ft. 	75 ft. 	65 ft. 	75 ft. 	155 ft. 	55/35 
Building Mounted Communications Facility Max. Structure Height 5 	65 ft. 	50 ft. 	155 ft. 	65 ft. 	75 ft. 	100 ft. 	55/35 ft. 
 
1   Minimum building setbacks shall be increased one-foot for every foot in height above 35 feet except for setbacks from interior property lines. 
2   FAR means the gross floor area of all buildings on a site (excluding parking levels, elevator shafts, or structures) divided by the building site area. FAR shall be inclusive of both residential and nonresidential uses. 
3   Perimeter landscaping shall consist of landscaped area (plus necessary driveways and walkways) located within the building setback. The remaining building setback area may contain parking and other facilities. In addition to the above perimeter landscaping, interior landscaping shall be provided as a percentage of the net project area as follows: 
Parking area: min. three percent; 
Non-parking areas: min. three percent. 
4   When the proposed land use abuts property zoned for residential use (R-1 and R-3), the maximum structure height is limited to 30 feet and maximum number of stories is limited to two stories. 
5   Building mounted communications facilities shall not extend more than 15 feet above the roofline of the building. 
*   As provided in the required precise plan for each project. 
5   When the proposed land use abuts property zoned for residential use (R-1 and R-3), the maximum number of stories is limited to two and maximum structure height is limited to the figures in Table II-6. 
6   Front setback requirements in PND districts are reduced to zero when identified building standards are met. 
7   Building mounted communications facilities shall not extend more than 15 feet above the roofline of the building. Cellular facilities in PND districts must be incorporated into a building structure. 
8   Development FAR of three-quarters for all B-1 properties located South of the 91 Freeway and a FAR of one and one-half for all B-1 properties located North of the 91 Freeway and a max 27 dwelling units (DU's) per acre in all B-1 designated properties as identified in Table II-7. 
(b)  New residential land uses and structures, and alterations to existing residential land uses and structures, shall be designated, constructed, and/or established in compliance with the requirements in Table II-7, in addition to the other applicable development standards (e.g., landscaping, parking and loading, etc.) set forth in Article III (Standards Applicable in all Zoning Districts). 
TABLE II-7. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL USES IN THE B-1 DISTRICT 
DEVELOPMENT STANDARD 	B-1 DISTRICT 
Min. Lot Size (sq. ft.) 	10,000 sq. ft. 
Density — Maximum 	27 dwelling units per net acre 
Max. Structure Height (ft.) 	250 
Max. Floor Area Ratio (FAR) 2 	0.75/1.5 4 
Minimum Unit Size 	500 sq. ft. 
Min. Perimeter Building Setback/Perimeter Landscaping (in ft.) 3 	From Ultimate Street Right-of-way 	15 ft. 
	From Abutting Commercial, Office, and Industrial Projects 	20/5 1 
	From Abutting Residential Projects 	10 1 
Minimum Building Separation 	Per the Building and Fire Codes 
Open Space — Per Unit 	200 sq. ft. minimum, which may be provided as private, common, or combined open space 
Maximum Lot Coverage 	75% 
 
1   Minimum building setbacks shall be increased one-foot for every foot in height above 35 feet, except for setbacks from interior property lines. 
2   FAR shall be inclusive of any residential component. 
3   Perimeter landscaping shall consist of landscaped area (plus necessary driveways and walkways) located within the building setback. The remaining building setback area may contain parking and other facilities. In addition to the above perimeter landscaping, interior landscaping shall be provided as a percentage of the net project area as follows: 
Parking area: min. three percent; 
Non-parking areas: min. three percent. 
4   Development FAR of three-quarters for all B-1 properties located South of the 91 Freeway and a FAR of one and one-half for all B-1 properties located North of the 91 Freeway. 
(c)  Whenever a change of use or occupancy occurs on a building constructed prior to 1973 in the GI zoning district, the building must be renovated to meet current seismic safety standards before the new tenant occupies the building or prior to obtaining a certificated of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-142. - Community benefits requirement for stand-alone housing in the B-1 zoning district. 
A mixed-use development consisting of housing units in combination with office, commercial retail, public, or entertainment land uses in a single of [or] physically integrated structure or group or structures shall not be permitted in the B-1 zone unless the development fulfills the community benefits requirement, as determined by the Review Authority. The community benefits requirement requires any application for a proposed mixed-use development with residential housing units in the B-1 zone to incorporate at least two community benefits, from a minimum of two different categories, from the (1)—(4) list itemized below. Community benefits project features within categories (2)—(3), and (4) as applicable, shall remain open for use by the public. 
(1)  Trip reduction and traffic management. 
a.  Bicycle facilities. These facilities can include, but are not limited to: bike storage facilities such as bike lockers, bike racks, or bike stands, or permanent bicycle repair stations. All such facilities shall be provided in proportion to the number of dwelling units in the development and shall be available to residents at no charge. 
b.  Car sharing. This shall require the designation of a specific number of parking spaces within the project area for car-share vehicles. The number of car-share spaces shall be determined by the Review Authority based on the size and density of the development, and in compliance with existing City parking requirements. 
(2)  Open space improvements. 
a.  Quality pedestrian, biking, and green connections. This includes, but is not limited to, lane designations and signage to create and/or improve connections to existing and planned bike lanes and infrastructure within and adjacent to the project site. 
b.  Community gathering and green open spaces. This includes, but is not limited to, public or quasi-public plazas, courtyards, community gardens, or open landscaped areas. 
c.  Recreational open space. This includes, but is not limited to, parks, playing fields or courts, or outdoor fitness zones. 
(3)  Social and cultural facilities. 
a.  Arts and cultural facilities. This includes uses such as public art and/or gallery or live performance space within the development, open to members of the general public. 
b.  Child care, senior, or youth facilities. This includes childcare facilities, youth centers, senior citizens centers, or similar services located on the premises as part of, or adjacent to, the project. 
(4)  Other benefit(s). Other benefits not included in the list shall be considered by and decided upon at the discretion of the Review Authority. To apply this category to meet the community benefits requirement, an applicant shall provide a narrative, with comprehensive site plans as appropriate, explaining the proposed feature and how it will benefit the larger City community. Compliance with this requirement shall be evaluated by the responsible review authority in the review process. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 2018-01, § 6, 2-6-2018)  
Sec. 44-143. - Architectural design standards for development in the B-1 zoning district. 
(a)  Architectural articulation. Buildings within the B-1 zoning district shall be designed to minimize the appearance of massing and provide for articulation and high-quality design. Buildings shall incorporate the features set forth below in a manner consistent with the style of the building(s). 
(1)  Façade plane modulation. Exterior walls that vary in depth and/or direction, exhibiting offsets, recesses, or projections with depth of at least 18 inches, or a repeated pattern of offsets, recesses, or projections of smaller depth. 
(2)  Feature projections and recesses. Projecting eaves and overhangs, balconies, porches, canopies, trellis features, arcades, and window recesses that provide human scale and help break up building mass. 
(3)  Variety in height and roof forms. Varied building heights that result in a noticeable change in height or changes in pitch, plane, and/or orientation. 
(4)  Façade detail. Details such as cornices, window trim, changes in material, and other architectural elements that provide architectural interest. 
(b)  Four-sided architecture. 
(1)  All façades of a building that front onto or are visible from public or private streets, State Route 91, or from publically accessible open space, shall be designed to maintain an attractive appearance similar to the front of the building. 
(2)  Building façades that face onto internal surface parking areas or adjacent properties shall have architectural features that have the same quality and similar treatments as the front façades with regard to roof design, architectural detail, recessed wall lines, and landscaping. 
(3)  For new construction, excluding additions to existing buildings, no street frontage wall may run in a continuous plane for more than 20 feet without an opening. Openings fulfilling this requirement shall have transparent glazing and provide views into work areas, display areas, sales areas, lobbies, or similar active spaces, or into window displays that are at least three feet deep. Exceptions are subject to approval by the Responsible Review Authority. 
(4)  For new construction, excluding additions to existing buildings, street-facing façades of all buildings shall incorporate windows and openings providing light to adjacent spaces, rooms, and uses. Placement and orientation of doorways, windows, and landscape elements shall create direct relationships with the street. 
(c)  Ground level floors shall be developed to create provide visual interest for pedestrians through elements such as, but not limited to: 
(1)  Outdoor gathering areas. 
(2)  Retail display windows/cases. 
(3)  Service-oriented activities visible through window glazing. 
(d)  Ground-related pedestrian entrances shall occur at least once every 100 feet, as measured along the front of the property line. Ground-related entrances include entrances to ground-floor uses, lobbies, or private courtyards. 
(e)  Buildings that do not feature glazed windows towards the sidewalk shall have the corresponding wall treated with decorative architectural finishes such as murals, plant materials, display cases, or art that increases visual character. 
(f)  Materials. 
(1)  All building materials shall be selected with quality, durability, and environmental conservation in mind. 
(2)  Buildings or structures on separate parcels or part of a multi-building complex shall be designed, sited, and massed in a manner that is sensitive and compatible with existing improvements through the relationship of building style, texture, color, materials, form, scale, proportion, and location. 
(3)  Regional materials are encouraged be used where possible and practical in order to minimize transportation costs and benefit the local economy. 
(4)  Recycled materials are encouraged to be used where possible and practical. 
(g)  Parking. 
(1)  Structured parking shall be fronted or wrapped with habitable uses where possible. 
(2)  Where a parking structure is visible from a public street, it shall be vertically landscaped or otherwise augmented, such as with vines and/or public art, to soften the façade. 
(3)  Parking garages shall be designed so the visual impact of parking structures on the pedestrian experience and streetscape is minimized. 
(4)  Expanses of blank wall space are prohibited. 
(5)  Façades on parking structures shall be designed to be compatible in character and quality to the adjoining buildings, plazas, and streetscapes. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-144—44-163. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - NONRESIDENTIAL SUPPLEMENTAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 44-164. - Amusement arcades, amusement devices, internet cafes, and computer rentals. 
(a)  Amusement devices accessory to an allowed use. 
(1)  Two amusement devices or computers for rental by the hour shall be allowed as an accessory use to an otherwise allowed use within the City without the issuance of a conditional use permit. 
(2)  Up to eight amusement devices or computers for rental by the hour may be allowed as an accessory use to an otherwise permitted use upon the issuance of a conditional use permit subject to the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Standards of operation. 
(1)  Persons under 18 years of age. No person under 18 years of age shall be permitted to operate any amusement device hereunder between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. Monday through Friday during the regular school year, except during legal school holidays, unless accompanied by a person over 18 years of age. 
(2)  Bicycle racks. Establishments that contain three or more amusement devices shall provide bicycle racks for the use of its patrons. 
(3)  Hours of operation. Amusement arcades and internet cafes, shall not be open between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
(4)  Location. Amusement arcades and internet cafes shall not be located closer than 1,000 feet from another amusement arcade. 
(5)  Adult attendant. There shall be a minimum of one adult employee on site at all times for every ten amusement devices or computers for rental by the hour. 
(6)  No obstruction of doors/windows. There shall be no obstruction of the view into the facility through windows and glass doors, including heavy tinting, blinds, or shades. 
(c)  Limitation on conditional use permits. If deemed appropriate, the conditional use permit shall be reviewed after an initial term not to exceed six months. In addition, the approving body for the use permit may, in its discretion, undertake an annual review of the operations to ensure compliance with the use permit. If it is determined that the use permit may have been operated in violation of the conditions of approval or the provisions of this section, or if the use permit is the subject of complaints from adjacent property owners or businesses, the Community Development Director may initiate proceedings to revoke or modify the permit in compliance with Section 44-853. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-165. - Automobile service stations. 
(a)  Distance. The distance between automobile service stations on the same side of the street shall be not less than 400 feet, except at intersections of major, primary, or secondary highways. 
(b)  Site area. The minimum site area shall be 150 feet by 150 feet and shall have a minimum of a 150-foot frontage on a major, primary, or secondary highway. 
(c)  Operations outside of structures. Operations outside of permanent structures shall be limited to the dispensing of fuel and the provision of water, air, and supplies for windshield cleaning. No outside display, work, or outdoor sales of merchandise shall be allowed. 
(d)  Orientation of service bays. Entries to service bays shall not face the public right-of-way. 
(e)  Landscaping. In addition to general landscaping provisions contained in Article III, Division 3, not less than ten percent of the area of the site shall be permanently landscaped, planted, and maintained in a healthy condition. 
(f)  Walls abutting residential district. A solid masonry wall not less than eight feet in height shall be constructed where an automobile service station abuts a residential zoning district or use. The wall shall be reduced to three feet in height within any required setback area adjacent to a street. 
(g)  Repairs. Only minor repairs to vehicles shall be allowed at service stations. No major repairs shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-166. - Community events. 
(a)  Permit required. No community event shall be permitted to operate within the City unless the event holder obtains a community event permit, as well as any other permits or license required by law. Procedures for obtaining a community event permit are established in 44-948. 
(b)  Regulations. Applicants for permits under this section shall comply with each of the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  If any City personnel (e.g., police or community services) is recommended to be used for the community event, the applicant shall pay in advance the estimated costs and reimburse any extra costs for all City personnel necessary. The costs will be based on the City personnel's salary from the current year's budget. The City will reimburse the applicant the amount of the prepaid fees that were not spent through the provision of City services to the community event. 
(2)  No dangerous animals may be permitted at any community event. 
(3)  There shall be no consumption of alcoholic beverages at any outdoor community event. 
(4)  Any facilities for the dispensing of food and beverages shall be inspected by the Orange County Health Department. 
(5)  The applicant must obtain a temporary sign permit from the Community Development Department for any banners or balloons displayed at the community event pursuant to Section 44-394. 
(6)  The applicant must obtain a temporary structure permit from the Community Development Department before the construction of any temporary structures. 
(7)  No applicant shall be issued more than four community event permits in a calendar year. 
(8)  The applicant shall, prior to the issuance of the community event permit, submit to the special permit committee a certificate showing that there is in full force and effect liability and property damage insurance, written on an occurrence basis, covering every activity of the proposed community event in a minimum amount to be determined at the time of application. 
(9)  Prior to the issuance of a community event permit, the applicant shall provide the City with an executed hold-harmless agreement on a form provided by the special permit committee, which shall substantially state that the applicant agrees to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the City and its officers, employees and agents and free from any liability, penalty, expense or loss of any nature, including but not limited to liability for damage or injury to any persons or property arising out of the willful or negligent acts, errors, or omissions of the applicant, its employees, agents, representatives, or subcontractors in the performance of any tasks or services conducted for or in connection with the event. The hold-harmless agreement shall in no way limit or affect the valid exercise of constitutionally protected speech and expression by the applicant or members of the event. Good cause shall include, but not be limited to, a determination that the application of this section would violate the constitutional rights of any individual. 
(c)  Regulations if on public property. If a community event takes place on public property, including a public park, public sidewalk or public street, the applicant shall submit an agreement on a form provided by the City and signed by the applicant, stating that, within 48 hours of the conclusion of the community event, the applicant will clean and restore the public property upon which the community event is to occur to its original condition. A cash deposit or a surety bond of $1,000.00, payable to the City, shall secure such agreement. The security deposit shall be refundable on compliance with the provisions and requirements of this article, including the removal of trash and debris, temporary signs, temporary circulation improvements, temporary fencing and accessory facilities and structures. In the event the applicant fails to comply with the terms of this section and remove all temporary facilities and structures or clean the site in a manner satisfactory to the special permit committee within 48 hours of the conclusion of the community event, the City may do so. The reasonable costs thereof shall be charged against the applicant's cash deposit or bond. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-167. - Dances. 
(a)  Permit required. 
(1)  Public dances. No public dance establishment shall be permitted to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on business within the City unless the owner of the business first obtains a conditional use permit and a business license from the City as well as any other permits or licenses required by law. 
(2)  Temporary public dances. No temporary public dance shall be permitted to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on business within the City unless the owner of the business first obtains a special event permit as well as any other permits or licenses required by law. 
(3)  Exemptions. Civic dances and dancing clubs shall not be subject to the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Hours of operation. No person shall operate or conduct any activity for which a permit is required under this section between the hours of 1:30 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
(c)  Illumination. All premises for which a permit is required by this section shall, during the activity for which a permit is required, be illuminated sufficiently so that there shall be average illumination of at least 50 footcandles at a height of 30 inches above the floor of such premises. All parking areas serving such premises which are owned or operated by any person for whom a permit is required by this section shall be well lighted and supervised. 
(d)  Dance floor space. No premises for which a permit is required under this section may have less than the following prescribed area, exclusive of hallway space, set aside and reserved exclusively for dancing: 
(1)  Three hundred square feet of dance floor, where the seating capacity of the establishment is not more than 50 persons. 
(2)  Four hundred square feet of dance floor, where the seating capacity of the establishment is not more than 75 persons. 
(3)  Five hundred square feet of dance floor, where the seating capacity of the establishment is in excess of 75 persons. 
(e)  Age of persons on premises. No person under the age of 21 years shall be permitted in or upon any premises for which a permit is required under this section where alcoholic beverages are sold, offered for sale, or consumed. No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted in or upon any premises for which a permit is required under this section unless accompanied by a parent or guardian. Any person of whom a permit is required by this section shall be held responsible for determining whether any person is disqualified by age from being permitted in or upon such premises. 
(f)  Solicitation of alcoholic beverages. No person of whom a permit is required by this section, nor any agent or employee of such person, shall solicit alcoholic beverages from any other person on any premises to which such permit applies. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-168. - Self-storage. 
(a)  Uses. Use of self-storage facilities shall be limited to storage only. No other activities other than the replacement or retrieval of personal goods shall be allowed within the units or within the compound. No business activity other than the rental of storage units and sale of related items (i.e., boxes, packing material, package tape, etc.) shall be conducted on the premises. 
(b)  Site area and access. The site shall have a minimum area of not less than one and one-half acres or more than five acres, with frontage access to a dedicated street. 
(c)  Setbacks. Enclosed structures, fencing, storage, or parking areas shall be set back according to Table II-8. 
TABLE II-8. SELF-STORAGE SETBACK REQUIREMENTS 
Minimum Front Setback 	Minimum Side Setback 	Minimum Rear Setback 
30 ft. (plus 5 feet for every story above 2 stories) 	30 ft. 	30 ft. 
40 ft. for sites within 300 ft. of residentially zoned property or uses 	40 ft. from any residential property line and a minimum of 100 ft. from any existing residential structure 	40 ft. from any residential property line and a minimum of 100 ft. from any existing residential structure 
 
(d)  Building heights. Enclosed structures shall be a maximum of 35 feet in height and a maximum of three stories. 
(e)  Limited storage of certain items. 
(1)  Rental units shall not be used to store hazardous or toxic materials as defined by the California Department of Health in quantities or in concentrations greater than those normally found in the living portion of a residential dwelling. 
(2)  Rental units shall not be used to store materials that detonate or pose an unreasonable fire hazard upon decomposition, unstable organic compounds, or corrosive acids. 
(3)  Recreational vehicles, trucks, automobiles, boats, motorcycles, snowmobiles, lawn mowers, and other equipment with internal combustion engines and combustible fuel contained in the fuel tank shall be stored only in rental units with a one-hour fire rating. 
(f)  Within enclosed units. Storage of merchandise, vehicles, trailers, or other materials is permitted only within the units and shall not be allowed outside enclosed units. 
(g)  Hours of operation. Self-storage facilities shall limit the hours of operation to between 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
(h)  Size of units. Individual rental units shall not exceed 400 square feet in area. 
(i)  Access and circulation. 
(1)  An access road a minimum of 40 feet in width shall be provided for entry and exiting. 
(2)  Each interior drive aisle shall be continuous with no dead ends and shall be a minimum of 40 feet in width, providing temporary loading lanes ten feet in width along the storage units or perimeter block wall or fence, and a reserved fire access lane of 20 feet in width down the center. This is in addition to any landscape requirement. 
(3)  Lane striping and pavement signs shall be provided to maintain continuous access for emergency vehicles. 
(j)  Off-street parking. Parking shall be provided in compliance with Article III, Division 4. 
(k)  Walls. The premises shall be completely enclosed using a combination of structures, fences, and/or walls. The walls shall be masonry construction not less than eight feet in height as measured from the property line at the highest grade. Sites within 300 feet of property zoned for residential use shall provide structures (i.e., masonry block walls or similar) on the outside perimeter of the development a minimum of ten feet in height to protect residences from noise, nighttime glare, and visual activity. 
  
(l)  Landscaping. 
(1)  Landscaping shall be provided in compliance with the approved landscape plan and adhere to the landscaping requirements in this chapter. 
(2)  Self-storage sites within 300 feet of a residential zoning district or use shall provide one 36-inch box tree and six 25-gallon trees for every 1,000 square feet of setback area. 
(m)  Architectural character. Self-storage facilities within 300 feet of a residential zoning district or use shall be designed to resemble a residential housing project in architectural character, landscaping, lighting, signage, color, and materials. 
(n)  Lighting. A lighting system of sufficient intensity to discourage vandalism and theft shall be provided during nighttime hours. All lights shall be shielded to direct light away from adjacent properties. 
(o)  Security. Self-storage facilities shall be operated under continuous supervision and/or surveillance to help discourage vandalism and theft. 
(1)  For the purposes of this section, the term "supervision" shall be defined as a facility with a resident caretaker. Housing accommodations for the resident caretaker shall have a clear view of the entrance and storage buildings. The housing unit shall contain a minimum of two bedrooms, two full bathrooms, and 1,150 square feet of area. 
(2)  For the purposes of this section, the term "surveillance" shall be defined as a facility utilizing a 24-hour security camera system to be monitored at all times by onsite personnel. The security camera system shall provide recorded videos of the entire perimeter of the property, around each structure, and within any public areas of structures such as interior hallways, elevators, and stairwells. Security tapes shall be kept onsite for a minimum of one month before being taped over or destroyed. 
(p)  Lease approval and right of entry. Self-storage operators shall submit a copy of the proposed lease documents to the City for approval. The lease documents shall clearly disclose the City's conditions of operation and the restrictions of uses. The lease documents shall contain provisions giving the self-storage operator the right to inspect the unit for the presence of hazardous, toxic, unstable, and explosive materials and to otherwise determine whether the lessee is complying with the terms and conditions of the lease. The provisions shall permit the self-storage operator to be accompanied by representatives of the City's Community Development Department, Community Services Department, and/or the Orange County Fire Authority during the inspections. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-169. - Tutorial facilities. 
(a)  Attendance limitations. The maximum number of hours an individual student may occupy a tutoring facility is three hours per day during weekdays, four hours per day on Saturday or Sunday for elementary students, and six hours per day on Saturday or Sunday for middle school and high school students. The individual student shall not exceed a total of 15 hours per week. These restricted hours are applicable to holidays and school recesses as well as the normal school year. There are no restricted hours for adult students. 
(b)  Location. Tutoring facilities shall not be located within 1,000 feet of another tutoring facility. Tutoring facilities with any student in the third grade or below shall not be permitted to operate on the second floor or higher of any building. 
(c)  Adult supervision. Students shall be under adult supervision at all times both inside and outside of the facility. There shall be a minimum of one adult supervisor for every 15 students overall. Tutoring class sizes shall be limited to eight students per teacher. 
(d)  Records of attendance. Tutoring facilities shall keep daily records of all attendants. Such records shall be maintained for two years and be available for inspection as provided herein. 
(e)  Inspections. Tutoring facilities shall permit City officials to conduct unscheduled inspections of the premises of the tutoring facilities for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this section and the conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-170. - Supplemental development standards for the PND zoning district. 
In addition to the requirements in Section 44-140(a), developments in the PND zoning district shall comply with the following development standards: 
(1)  Buildings and structures. 
a.  By adhering to a minimum of three of the standards below, the front setback requirement in PND districts is reduced to zero feet: 
1.  Place parking behind, underneath, or on side of building. 
2.  Buildings are located immediately behind a public or semi-public use, such as outdoor dining, display, public art, entry forecourts, or other amenity appropriate to an urban development. 
3.  A portion of the front building elevation may be set back to allow for outdoor use, such as outdoor patio dining. 
4.  A variable street setback may be used where the average setback is greater than five feet. 
b.  Corner parcels shall adhere to the traffic safety triangle standards in Section 44-276. 
c.  Lots fronting any street designated an arterial highway, regardless of size, are required to have commercial uses along their frontage with the façades facing the public street in a manner that enhances pedestrian connections to outdoor pedestrian spaces such as courtyards, paseos, plazas, and porticos. 
d.  All projects shall incorporate softscape to enhance the quality of development to the maximum extent reasonable. Softscape refers to the live, botanical elements of a landscape. Softscape includes green plants, flowering plants, trees, shrubs, vines, flowerbeds, various grasses and groundcovers, and includes the flower, greenery or botanical elements planted in containers, pots and raised beds. 
e.  A ten-foot buffer zone is required where a nonresidential property abuts residential property. This area may consist of: 
1.  Dense landscaping. 
2.  Decorative screening wall. 
3.  Landscaped berm. 
f.  While fences and walls are sometimes necessary to buffer uses, they can create visual barriers in an existing neighborhood. Fencing and walls constructed within the PND zoning district shall complement the design of the overall development and surrounding properties. All walls shall be constructed of decorative masonry. 
g.  Where a nonresidential property abuts residential property: 
1.  Open spaces shall be designed to discourage or prohibit the gathering or loitering of groups of persons which may cause noise or other nuisance upon the premises whereby the quiet or good order of the premises or neighborhood are disturbed; and 
2.  Excessive noise is prohibited and all exterior noise shall comply with Section 44-267. 
(2)  Encroachments. 
a.  No part of the structure, permanent attachment or other similar architectural feature may: 
1.  Extend into an established setback, side or rear yard or minimum distance between buildings for more than two feet; or 
2.  Extend into the public right-of-way without approval of an encroachment permit. 
b.  Hedges or any other shrubs or landscaping shall not encroach onto a curb or sidewalk or over a lot line. 
c.  No permanent seats, structures, or news-racks shall be placed in the public right-of-way without the review and approval of the City Engineer. 
(3)  Circulation. 
a.  Internal vehicle circulation shall provide a clear visual path to provide safe, convenient, and efficient vehicular access within and between developments. 
b.  Circulation patterns shall be designed to limit points of access from major thoroughfares and minimize the impacts of nonresidential traffic on adjacent residential properties. 
(4)  Loading, unloading, and service. 
a.  To the maximum extent feasible, common or shared service and delivery access shall be provided between adjacent parcels and/or buildings. 
b.  The loading and unloading area shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the numbers and types of vehicles that are likely to use this area, given the nature of the use. 
c.  Trash and loading facilities shall be located either: 
1.  At the rear of the site where they can be screened appropriately; 
2.  Along the sides of the buildings not visible from a public street; or 
3.  Incorporated into the building design. 
d.  Service and loading zones where visible from public streets and neighboring buildings and properties shall be screened by the use of decorative walls and/or dense landscaping that will serve as both a visual and a noise barrier. 
e.  In developments adjacent to residential uses, loading and unloading activities are permitted only during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
f.  Trash enclosures shall be screened by a fully enclosed, roofed structure that shall complement the colors and architecture of the building. 
g.  Refuse enclosures shall be constructed in accordance with Section 44-274 with exception to Section 44-274(c)(1)d., setbacks from residential districts. To permit flexibility in the PND zoning district, placement of refuse enclosures shall be sited and constructed to minimize any adverse impacts to adjacent residential uses. 
(5)  Parking. 
a.  Parking shall meet the requirements of Division 4 of this article, Parking and Loading. Upon a finding that a reduction in on-site parking is appropriate for a particular use, the review authority may reduce the on-site parking requirements. Any such reduction in parking requirements shall be supported by a site-specific parking study prepared by a qualified engineer, and the reduced on-site parking shall be in accordance with a parking management plan prepared by a qualified engineer and approved by the review authority in conjunction with the precise plan for the development. 
b.  Reduced on-site parking may be accomplished, as appropriate, by such means as: 
1.  Reducing the number of required parking spaces; 
2.  Reciprocal/shared parking between adjacent facilities and/or developments; 
3.  Off-site parking; 
4.  Flexible work hour schedule; 
5.  Bicycle parking facilities including associated shower and changing facilities; and 
6.  Reciprocal access. 
(6)  Architecture. 
a.  The architecture shall be compatible with the predominant styles in the surrounding area and adhere to the design guidelines for the PND zoning district. 
b.  The following four design issues shall be addressed through project architecture: 
1.  Quality; 
2.  Aesthetics; 
3.  Styles; and 
4.  Materials. 
c.  The design of the building shall provide a distinctive, quality, consistent architectural character and style that avoid monotones or featureless building massing and design. 
d.  The development shall include the following focal point features, which shall be visible from the streets: 
1.  A distinctive design that does not represent standard franchise architecture; 
2.  An architectural feature such as a clock tower, spire, or interesting roof form; 
3.  Public art or sculpture; 
4.  Enhanced customer walkways; 
5.  Public seating; or 
6.  Landscape feature. 
(7)  Roofs. 
a.  Where buildings are adjacent to residential uses, rooflines shall be of a similar height to the residential uses or stepped down to a similar height to enhance the compatibility with nearby residential areas. 
b.  Where architecturally appropriate, roofs shall provide articulation and variations to divide the massiveness of the roof. Sloped roofs shall include eaves which are a minimum of 18 inches in width. 
c.  All rooflines in excess of 40 feet must be broken up through the use of gables, dormers, plant-ons, cutouts or other appropriate means. 
(8)  Signage. 
a.  All PND developments shall comply with the signage requirements set forth in Article III, Division 5. 
b.  A master sign plan is required for each PND multi-unit development or as determined by the Community Development Director. 
c.  On all street frontages, signage material shall be integrated into the overall design of the building. 
d.  Signs shall be located to complement the architectural features of a building such as above the building entrance, storefront opening, or other similar feature. 
e.  Permitted sign types shall be limited to wall, window, awning and monument signs. 
f.  Second floor signage is subject to a master signage plan and shall incorporate the following features: 
1.  Signs shall be mounted in locations that respect the design of a building, including the arrangement of bays and openings; 
2.  Signs shall be appropriately sized for visibility and continuity with the typical storefront or commercial façade of the first floor; 
3.  Signs shall be centered within an area uninterrupted by doors, windows, or architectural details; and 
4.  The top of the sign should be suspended in line with the lowest point of the roof. 
(9)  Landscape. 
a.  All PND developments shall comply with the landscape requirements set forth in Section 44-336 and the drought tolerant landscape ordinance. 
b.  A master landscape design plan shall be submitted for approval with the precise plan. 
c.  All screening walls shall be landscaped with a minimum 50 percent coverage. 
(10)  Flexibility in design standards. Modifications greater than those previously mentioned in this section may be permitted if the improvement reflects best urban design practices and does not cause an unreasonable privacy nuisance, public health, or safety concern. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-171—44-193. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Adult Oriented Businesses[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of City to regulate the time, place, and manner of operation of sexually oriented businesses, Government Code § 65850.4, Penal Code §§ 318.5, 318.6. 
 
Sec. 44-194. - Purpose. 
(a)  The intent of this subdivision is to regulate adult oriented businesses which, because of their very nature, are believed to have many of the recognized significant secondary effects on the community which include: depreciated property values and increased vacancies in residential areas in the vicinity of the adult oriented businesses; higher crime rates, noise, debris, or vandalism in the vicinity of adult oriented businesses; and blighting conditions such as low level maintenance of commercial premises and parking lots which thereby have a deleterious effect upon adjacent areas. Special regulation of these uses is necessary to ensure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the neighborhoods in the vicinity of the adult oriented businesses. It is neither the intent nor effect of this subdivision to impose limitations or restrictions on the content of any communicative material. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this subdivision to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials or merchandise protected by the first amendment, or to deny access by the distributors or exhibitors of adult oriented business to their intended market. 
(b)  Nothing in this subdivision is intended to authorize, legalize, or permit the establishment, operation, or maintenance of any business, building, or use which violates any City ordinance or any statute of the State of California regarding public nuisances, unlawful exposure, sexual conduct, lewdness, or obscene or harmful matter or the exhibition or public display thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-195. - Definitions. 
When used in this subdivision, the words and phrases in this section have the following meanings ascribed to them, unless the context indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means any establishment, which, as a regular and substantial course of conduct, displays and/or distributes adult merchandise, books, periodicals, magazines, photographs, drawings, sculptures, motion pictures, videos, slides, films, or other written, oral, or visual representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on a matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts. 
Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, lounge, restaurant, or similar establishment or concern which features as a regular and substantial course of conduct, any type of live entertainment, films, motion pictures, videos, slides, other photographic reproductions, or other oral, written, or visual representations which are characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts. 
Adult hotel/motel means a hotel or motel, which, as a regular and substantial course of conduct, provides to its patrons, through the provision of rooms equipped with closed-circuit television or other medium, material which is distinguished or characterized by the emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts and/or which rents, leases, or lets any room for less than a 12-hour period and/or rents, leases, or lets any room more than once in a 24-hour period and/or which advertises the availability of any of the above. 
Adult live entertainment means any physical human body activity, whether performed or engaged in alone or with other persons, including singing, walking, speaking, dancing, acting, posing, simulating, wrestling or pantomiming, in which: 
(1)  The performer (including a topless and/or bottomless dancer, go-go dancer, exotic dancer, stripper, or similar performer) exposes to public view, without opaque covering, specified anatomical parts; and/or 
(2)  The performance or physical human body activity depicts, describes or relates to specified sexual activities whether or not the specified anatomical areas are covered. 
Adult model studio means any premises where there is furnished, provided, or procured a figure model or models who pose in any manner which is characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts where such model is being observed or viewed by any person for the purpose of being sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed, filmed, or videotaped for a fee, or any other thing of value, as a consideration, compensation, or gratuity for the right or opportunity to so observe the model or remain on the premises. The term "adult model studio" shall not include any live art class or any studio or classroom that is operated by any public agency or any private educational institution maintained pursuant to standards set by the Board of Education of the State of California. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any business establishment or concern containing coin- or slug-operated or manually or electronically controlled still, motion picture, or video machines, projectors, or other image producing devices that are maintained to display images to an individual in individual viewing areas when those images are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts. 
Adult oriented business. 
(1)  The term "adult oriented business" means any business establishment or concern which, as a regular and substantial course of conduct, performs as an adult bookstore, adult theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult cabaret, stripper, adult model studio or adult hotel/motel (but not clothing optional hotel/motel); or any business establishment or concern, which as a regular and substantial course of conduct, sells or distributes sexually oriented merchandise or sexually oriented material; or any business establishment or concern, which, as a regular and substantial course of conduct, provides or allows performers, models, actors, actresses, or employees to appear in any place in attire, which does not opaquely cover specified anatomical parts. 
(2)  For the purposes of this section, a business establishment or concern has established the provision of products, merchandise, services, or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts as a regular and substantial course of conduct when one or more of the following conditions exist: 
a.  The area devoted to adult merchandise and/or sexually oriented material exceeds more than 25 percent of the total display or floor space area open to the public; 
b.  The business establishment or concern presents any type of live entertainment which is characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activity or specified anatomical parts at least six times in any month in any given year; 
c.  The regular and substantial course of conduct of the business consists of or involves the sale, trade, display or presentation of services, products, or entertainment which are characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts. 
(3)  "Adult oriented business" does not include those uses or activities upon which regulation is preempted by State law. 
Adult theater means a business establishment or concern which, as a regular and substantial course of conduct, presents live entertainment, motion pictures, videos, slide photographs, or other pictures or visual reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts. 
G-string means an article of clothing that opaquely covers the buttocks at least one inch on either side of the natal cleft and covers the entirety of the genitalia and pubis. 
Individual viewing area means any area designed for occupancy of one person for the purpose of viewing live performances, pictures, movies, videos, or other presentations. 
Live art class means any premises on which all of the following occur: there is conducted a program of instruction involving the drawing, photographing, or sculpting of live models exposing specified anatomical parts; instruction is offered in a series of at least two classes; the instruction is offered indoors; an instructor is present in the classroom while any participants are present; and pre-registration is required at least 24 hours in advance of participation in the class. 
Pasties means an article of clothing that opaquely covers the nipple and areola of the female breast and is not designed to nor appears to look like the nipple and/or areola of the female breast. 
Performer means any person who is an employee or independent contractor of an adult-oriented business, and who, with or without any compensation or other form of consideration, performs adult live entertainment for patrons of an adult-oriented business. Performer does not include a patron. 
Regular and substantial course of conduct means when 25 percent of a business's stock in trade, and/or 25 percent of a business's total gross annual revenue, or 25 percent of a business's advertising, or 25 percent of a business's net interior public area (not including non-public areas such as office space, dressing rooms, non-public storage space and public and non-public bathrooms) is derived from or devoted to a particular thing. 
School means an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private which offers instruction in those courses of study required by the provisions of the California Education Code applicable to the type of school at issue and/or is maintained pursuant to standards set by the Board of Education of the State of California and has an approved use permit, if required under the applicable jurisdiction. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, junior high school, senior high school, or any special institution of learning under the jurisdiction of the California Department of Education, but does not include a vocational or professional institution or an institution of higher learning, including a community college or junior college, college or university. Neither shall the term "school" apply to a "tutorial facility" as that term is defined in Section 44-10; a "child day care facility" as that term is defined in Health and Safety Code § 1596.750; or a "day care center" as that term is defined in Health and Safety Code § 1596.76. 
Sexually oriented material means any element of sexually oriented merchandise, or any book, periodical, magazine, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film, video, or other written, oral, or visual representation or presentation which, for purposes of sexual arousal, provides depictions that are characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specific sexual activities or specified anatomical parts. 
Sexually oriented merchandise means sexually oriented implements and paraphernalia, such as, but not limited to: dildos, auto sucks, sexually oriented vibrators, edible underwear, benwa balls, inflatable orifices, anatomical balloons with orifices, simulated and battery-operated vaginas, and similar sexually oriented devices which are designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sado-masochistic activity. 
Specified anatomical parts means: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory function in the context of a sexual relationship, any of the following depicted sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism [picquerism], sapphism, or zooerastia. 
(2)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence. 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation. 
(4)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breast. 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating, or the infliction of pain. 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other sexually oriented contact with an animal by a human being. 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, or vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(8)  The removal of clothing to the point where specified anatomical parts are either not opaquely covered or minimally covered with devices commonly referred to as pasties and g-strings or equivalent clothing. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-196. - Permit required. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter no adult oriented business shall be permitted to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on business within the City unless the owner of the business first obtains an adult oriented business permit and a business license from the City, as well as any other permits or licenses required by law. The above notwithstanding, no adult oriented business proposing to provide live entertainment shall be required to obtain a special permit pursuant to Article V, Division 9. Nor shall any adult oriented business be required to be listed as a permitted or conditionally permitted use within the zone in which it proposes to locate if it otherwise complies with the other development requirements of this Code and the requirements of this section. If an adult oriented business intends to serve alcoholic beverages, the business shall be required to obtain a conditional use permit from the City for the service of the alcoholic beverages. Procedures for obtaining an adult oriented business permit are established in Article V, Division 9. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-197. - Findings/locational and operational requirements. 
The following findings and locational and operational requirements shall be applicable at all times to all adult oriented businesses. The City Manager shall deny the requested permit if the findings have not been made. 
(1)  The adult oriented business shall not be located within 300 feet of a residential zoning district or any properly approved residential use unless the proposed location of the adult oriented business is physically separated from the residential zoning district or use by a freeway or a creek drainage channel. 
(2)  For the purposes of this section, a use is "located" upon a site if an application for the use to be placed upon the site has been filed with the City prior to the date the adult oriented business application has been filed with the City. 
(3)  The adult oriented business shall not be located within 300 feet from the perimeter of any lot upon which there is properly located a public park, school, or religious institution unless the proposed location of the adult oriented business is physically separated from the public park, school, or religious institution by a freeway or a creek drainage channel. 
(4)  The adult oriented business property shall not be located within 100 feet from the perimeter of any lot of any establishment that serves alcoholic beverages for onsite consumption unless the proposed location of the adult oriented business is physically separated from the alcohol serving facility by a freeway or a creek drainage channel. 
(5)  The adult oriented business shall comply with the City's parking standards for the underlying use. Where no City parking standards exist for a particular underlying use, the adult oriented business shall provide one space per occupant as based upon the maximum occupancy as determined by the building official. 
(6)  Any signage for the adult oriented business shall comply with the sign regulations of this Code. 
(7)  The adult oriented business shall not be located completely or partially within any mobile structure or pushcart. 
(8)  The adult oriented business shall not stage any special events, promotions, festivals, concerts, or similar events that would increase the demand for parking beyond the approved number of spaces for the particular use or that would increase occupancy beyond the maximum building occupancy as determined by the fire marshal as required by law. 
(9)  The adult oriented business shall not conduct any massage, tattooing, acupressure, fortune telling, or escort services on the premises. 
(10)  The adult oriented business shall provide a security system that visually records and monitors all parking lot areas. All indoor areas of the adult oriented business shall be open to public view at all times with the exception of restroom facilities. The term "accessible to the public" shall include those areas that are only accessible to members of the public who pay a fee and/or join a private club or organization. 
(11)  The adult oriented business shall comply with the development and design requirements of the zoning district in which it is to be located. 
(12)  The adult oriented business shall not display any sexually oriented material, sexually oriented merchandise, or contain window display that would be visible from any location other than from within the adult oriented business. 
(13)  The adult oriented business shall not allow admittance to any person under the age of 18 if no liquor is served or under the age of 21 if liquor is served. 
(14)  The adult oriented business shall not operate between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. 
(15)  Neither the applicant, if an individual, nor any of the officers or general partners, if a corporation or partnership, of the adult oriented business shall have pled guilty or nolo contendre or been found guilty within the past two years of a misdemeanor or felony classified by this State or any other statute as a sex-related offense and shall have not violated any of the provisions of an adult oriented business permit or similar permit or license in any City, County, territory or State. 
(16)  The adult oriented business shall provide separate restroom facilities for male and female patrons. The restroom will be free from sexually oriented materials and sexually oriented merchandise. Only one person shall be allowed in the restroom at any time, unless otherwise required by law, in which case, the adult oriented business shall employ a restroom attendant/security officer of the same sex as the restroom user who shall be present in the public portion of the restroom, and that not more than one person is permitted to enter a restroom stall unless otherwise required by law and that the restroom facilities are used only for the intended sanitary uses. 
(17)  The interior of the adult oriented business shall be configured such that there is an unobstructed view, by use of the naked eye and unaided by video, closed circuit cameras, or any other means, of every public area of the premises, including the interior of all individual viewing areas, from a manager's station, which is no larger than 32 square feet of floor area with no single dimension being greater than eight feet, in a public portion of the establishment. No public area, including the interior of any individual viewing area, shall be obscured by any door, curtain, wall, two-way mirror or other device that would prohibit a person from seeing the interior of the individual viewing area, solely with the use of the naked eye and unaided by video, closed circuit cameras or any other means, from the manager's station. The entire body of any patron in an individual viewing area must be visible from the manager's station without the assistance of a mirror or other device. A manager at least 21 years of age shall be stationed in the manager's station at all times the business is in operation or open to the public in order to enforce all laws and regulations. No individual viewing area shall be designed or occupied by more than one patron at a time. 
(18)  All areas of the adult oriented business shall be illuminated at the following minimum foot-candle levels, evenly distributed at ground level: 
TABLE II-7. ILLUMINATION REQUIREMENTS FOR ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESSES 
USE 	ILLUMINATION REQUIREMENT 
Bookstores 	20 foot-candles 
Retail Establishments 	20 foot-candles 
Theaters 	5 foot-candles (except during performances when it may be 1.25 foot-candles) 
Cabarets 	5 foot-candles (except during performances when it may be 1.25 foot-candles) 
Motion Picture Arcades 	10 foot-candles in public areas 
Individual Viewing Booths 	1.25 foot-candles 
Motion Picture Theaters 	10 foot-candles (except during performances when it may be 1.25 foot-candles) 
Motel/Hotel 	20 foot-candles in public areas 
 
(19)  The individual viewing areas of the adult oriented business shall be operated and maintained without holes, openings, or other means of direct visual or physical access between the interior spaces of two or more individual viewing areas. Any hole or opening shall be repaired within 24 hours using "pop" rivets to secure a metal plate over the hole or opening to prevent patrons from removing the metal plate. 
(20)  A traffic study shall be prepared for the adult oriented business in conformance with industry standards. The applicant shall demonstrate that the project will not result in a reduction in any roadway level of service below that level of service designated in the general plan for that roadway. 
(21)  The adult oriented business shall comply with the noise element of the general plan and noise standards of this chapter, interior and exterior noise standards, and any mitigation measures necessary to reduce the project's noise impacts to the City's articulated noise standard. 
(22)  The adult oriented business shall comply with all building and construction standards of the Uniform Building Code, Chapter 24, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations (24 CCR 24), and all other federal, State and City-adopted standards for the specific use. 
(23)  Live entertainment shall only be performed on a permanently fixed stage raised at least 18 inches above the floor and separated from patrons by a fixed rail at least 30 inches in height placed at a distance of not less than eight feet from the perimeter of the stage such that no portion of the performer is, at any time, within six feet of any patron. This provision shall not apply to an individual viewing area where the performer is completely separated from the area in which the performer is viewed by a partner by a permanent, floor-to-ceiling solid barrier enclosed on all sides such that access by the patron is not possible. 
(24)  No performer engaged in a performance which includes adult live entertainment shall have physical contact with any patron, and no patron shall have physical contact with any performer, while the performer is performing on the premises. In addition, while on the premises, no performer shall have physical contact with a patron and no patron shall have physical contact with a performer, which physical contact involves the touching of the clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, cleft or the buttocks, perineum, anal region, or female breast with any part or area of the other person's body either before, during or after any adult live entertainment by such performer. This prohibition does not extend to incidental touching. Patrons shall be advised of the separation and no touching requirements by signs conspicuously placed on the railing separating patrons and performers and in each individual viewing area. If necessary, patrons shall also be advised of the separation and no touching requirements by employees or independent contractors of the adult business. 
(25)  No building, premises, structure, or other facility shall be permitted to contain more than one type of adult oriented business as such types of adult oriented business are defined in Section 44-195. For the purposes of this subsection, the phrase "adult oriented business" shall not itself embody all the various types of adult oriented businesses. 
(26)  No individual viewing area may be occupied by more than one person at any one time. No beds shall be permitted in an individual viewing area. 
(27)  No patron shall directly or indirectly pay or give any gratuity to any performer, and a performer shall not solicit or accept any direct gratuity from any patron. For the purposes of this section, the phrase "directly pay or give" shall mean the person-to-person transfer of the gratuity. This section shall not prohibit the establishment of a non-human gratuity receptacle placed at least eight feet from the stage or area occupied by the performer. 
(28)  Public nudity shall be prohibited on the premises at all times. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "public nudity" shall mean the removal of clothing to the point where the individual is clothed in less than pasties and a g-string, as those terms are defined in Section 44-195. 
(29)  The adult oriented business shall be operated consistent with the floor plan approved by the City. No changes to the floor plan shall be implemented unless and until the changes have first been approved by the City. 
(30)  The adult oriented business shall provide dressing rooms for performers that are separated by gender and exclusively dedicated to the performers use, and which the performers shall use. Same gender performers may share a dressing room. Patrons shall not be permitted in dressing rooms. 
(31)  The adult oriented business shall provide an entrance/exit for performers which is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons, which the performers shall be required to use when entering and exiting the business. 
(32)  At least one security guard will be on duty outside the premises, patrolling the grounds at all times the business is open to the public. The security guard shall be charged with prohibiting violations of law and enforcing the provisions of this chapter. All security guards will be uniformed so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the public. No person acting as a security guard shall act as a doorman, ticket taker or seller, or perform any other function while acting as a security guard. For all adult oriented businesses providing live entertainment, an additional security guard will be required with each increase in maximum occupancy of 50 persons. All security guards shall be licensed under the California State Private Security Services Act, Business and Professions Code § 7580 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-198. - Distribution of harmful matter. 
(a)  Blinders required. No person shall distribute, show, or otherwise display in any location which is visually accessible to minors, any harmful matter as defined in subsection (b) without the placement of a completely opaque material covering the display such that the lower two-thirds of the material is not exposed to view. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Harmful matter means any matter, taken as a whole, which to the average person, applying contemporary statewide standards, appeals to the prurient interest, and is matter which, taken as a whole, depicts or describes in a patently offensive way sexual conduct and which, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value for minors. 
Location visually accessible to minors means any location on a public or private street, sidewalk, or right-of-way as well as any location on private property which is visible from a public street, sidewalk or other right-of-way or from an area in which the public is invited and minors are not excluded. 
Minor means any natural person under the age of 18. 
(c)  Punishment. A violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor punishable according to the general penalties described in Section 2-350 (Misdemeanor penalty). 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015) 
State Law reference— Authority of City to require blinders in front of material harmful to minors, Penal Code § 313.1(d).  
Sec. 44-199. - Inspections. 
The holder of an adult oriented business shall permit officers of the City and any of their authorized representatives to conduct unscheduled inspections of the premises of the adult oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law at any time the adult oriented business is open for business or occupied. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-200. - Expansion of legal nonconforming uses. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, no adult oriented business legally operating prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section may be expanded in any manner unless and until the entire adult oriented business complies in all respects with the provisions of this section and/or any other provision of this chapter pertaining to the operation of the business. For the purposes of this section, the term "expansion" shall include any physical expansion of the facility in which the adult oriented business is located or operating and/or the introduction and/or addition of any category of adult oriented business use not legally operating on the property prior to the enactment of said ordinance as such separate categories of adult oriented business uses are contained in Section 44-195. For the purposes of this section, the phrase "adult oriented business" shall not itself embody all the various types of adult oriented business. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-201. - Health services fee. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Health Department or department means the Orange County Health Care Agency. 
Health Officer means the County Health Officer or his/her duly authorized representative. 
Receipt means a County public health services fee receipt. 
(b)  Purpose and authority. The purpose of this section is to establish fees sufficient to meet the reasonable expenses of the Health Officer in enforcing State statutes, orders, quarantines, and rules and regulations of State offices and departments relating to public health, which expenses are hereby found not to be met by the fees prescribed by the State. The authority for this subsection is contained in the Health and Safety Code § 101325, as amended. 
(c)  Area of application. This section shall be enforceable within the territory in which the Health Officer enforces any State statute, order, quarantine, or rule or regulation of State offices and departments relating to public health, which expenses are hereby found not to be met by the fees prescribed by the State. The authority for this subsection is contained in Health and Safety Code § 101325, as amended. 
(d)  Violation. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, it shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any activity enumerated in this section without obtaining a valid receipt. 
(e)  Separate activities. If a person shall conduct more than one of the activities for which a receipt is required, he/she must obtain a separate receipt for each activity, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(f)  Applications. Applications for a receipt shall be filed with the health department on a form to be provided by that department. The applications shall be accompanied by payment of the required fee. An applicant for or a recipient of a receipt shall provide the Health Officer with any information requested by him or her. 
(g)  Rules and regulations. The Health Officer shall administer this section and may issue regulations and prepare application and identification forms pertaining thereto. 
(h)  Fees. The County shall, by annual resolution of the Board of Supervisors, adopt health service fees to be paid by the proprietor or operator of the adult oriented business. The fees are to be paid directly to the health department and retained by the department as reimbursement for services related to the administration and enforcement of this subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-202—44-225. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Massage Facilities 
 
Sec. 44-226. - Permit and licenses required. 
(a)  No person, association, partnership, corporation or other entity shall be permitted to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, the operation of a massage establishment unless: (1) all persons providing massage at the establishment are certified massage practitioners and/or certified massage therapists; and (2) the massage establishment operator has obtained a business license and a conditional use permit from the City, as well as any other permits, licenses and other approvals required by law. Procedures for obtaining a business license are set forth in Chapter 22. 
(b)  Any person administering massage in the City for compensation must be certified massage practitioner and/or certified massage therapist holding a valid certification from the Massage Therapy Council. No person may administer massage within the City without first providing, to the Community Development Department, a copy of his or her massage certificate and a list of the names and addresses of all massage establishments at which he or she will provide massage for compensation. Any change in the locations at which a person will provide massage for compensation shall be reported to the City within five working days of the change. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-227. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this subdivision shall not apply to the following types of individuals while engaged in the performance of the duties of their respective professions: 
(1)  Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, acupuncturists or physical therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the State of California; 
(2)  Nurses registered and practicing under the laws of the State of California; 
(3)  Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the State of California; 
(4)  Licensed employees of hospitals, nursing homes, sanatoriums, or other health care facilities that are duly licensed by the State of California. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-228. - Massage establishment business license. 
(a)  Application. In addition to the information required to be provided under Section 22-11, a person applying for a business license for a massage establishment shall provide the following information: 
(1)  The prior business and permit history of the applicant, including but not limited to whether the applicant has ever had any permit or license issued by any agency, board, city, county, territory, or state; the date of issuance of such a permit or license; whether the permit or license was revoked or suspended; and whether a vocational or professional license or permit was issued, revoked, or suspended, and the reason for any revocation or suspension. 
(2)  All criminal convictions, other than misdemeanor traffic violations and infractions, the jurisdiction in which the conviction occurred, and the circumstances thereof. 
(3)  A description of the proposed massage establishment, including the type of treatments to be administered. 
(4)  Authorization for the City, its agents and employees, to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application. 
(5)  A complete current list of the names and residence addresses of all proposed massage technicians, aides, trainees and other employees who are or will be employed in the massage establishment, if known. If not known at the time of submission of the application, the applicant shall provide the required information no later than seven calendar days prior to opening for business. 
(6)  For each person that the massage establishment does or will employ, retain or permit to perform massage for compensation, a copy of that person's current certificate issued by the Massage Therapy Council, and a copy of that person's identification card issued by the Massage Therapy Council. 
(7)  The name and residence addresses of the proposed operator(s) and manager(s) who will be principally in charge of the operation of the massage establishment. 
(b)  Changes in information. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this subdivision, once a business license is issued to a massage establishment, the applicant shall submit to the City any change to any of the information required above within seven calendar days of discovering that change. Such changes include, but are not limited to, changes in the types of services to be provided, and changes in the persons employed or retained by the massage establishment to perform massage for compensation. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-229. - Out-call massage prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to provide out-call massage, or to cause or allow out-call massage to be provided. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-230. - Massage establishment operating requirements. 
Every person operating or maintaining a massage establishment in the City shall comply with each of the following requirements at all times: 
(1)  Location. A massage establishment shall not be located within 1,000 feet of another massage establishment. The distance between massage establishments shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest exterior wall of one massage establishment to the closest exterior wall of the other massage establishment. 
(2)  Hours of operation. Massage operations shall be carried on or conducted, and the premises shall be open, only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. The operator and/or manager of the massage establishment shall notify the City, in writing, at least 30 calendar days prior to the effective date of any change to the establishment's hours of operation. No person shall administer a massage in any massage establishment outside the permissible hours of operation specified in this subsection. 
(3)  Management. One or more managers shall be designated to act as the person(s) in charge of managing day-to-day operations of the massage establishment, including receiving all complaints. The names of such managers must be provided to the City. At least one manager shall be on premises of the massage establishment at all times during all business hours of operation. In addition to the holder of the massage facility's business license, on-site managers shall be responsible for all violations taking place on the massage establishment premises during their respective shifts. 
(4)  List of services. A list of all available services, and their respective cost, shall be posted in an open public place within the massage establishment. The list shall, at minimum, be posted in English. No service shall be included on the list unless it is a service that falls within the professionally recognized scope of practice of a certified massage therapist or certified massage practitioner. No owner, manager or operator of a massage establishment shall allow, and no person shall perform or offer to perform, any service other than those posted pursuant to this subsection. 
(5)  Display of licenses and certificates. The massage establishment's business license and a copy of the massage certificate for every certified massage therapist and certified massage practitioner employed by the massage establishment, as an employee, independent contractor or otherwise, shall be displayed in an open and conspicuous public place on the massage establishment's premises. 
(6)  Records of treatment. Every massage facility operator shall keep a written record of all services rendered on the premises. The record shall include, at minimum, the date and hour of each service, the full name and complete address of the patron, the full name of any certified massage practitioner or certified massage therapist who administered any portion of such service. The record shall be retained for a minimum of two years from the date of service, and shall be open to inspection upon demand by officials charged with the enforcement of this subdivision, and by emergency personnel, for law enforcement and emergency purposes and for no other purpose. The information furnished or secured as a result of any such records shall remain confidential to the extent permitted by law. 
(7)  Inspections. All areas of the massage establishment shall be subject to reasonable inspections during all hours of operation to ensure compliance with the City's Code, state law regulating the practice of massage, and all other applicable laws and regulations. 
(8)  Massage school prohibited. No massage establishment shall operate as a school of massage or use, or permit use of, any portion of its facilities as a school of massage. 
(9)  Advertisements. No massage establishment owner, operator, manager, employee or independent contractor shall place, publish or distribute, or cause or allow to be placed, published or distributed, any advertising matter that would reasonably suggest to prospective patrons that any service is available unless such service is listed on the massage establishment's list of available services required under subsection (4). 
(10)  Clothing. All owners, operators, managers, employees, and independent contractors of a massage establishment shall be clean and shall wear clean, nontransparent outer garments at all times when present on the premises of the establishment. Such garments shall not expose any genitals, pubic areas, buttocks or breasts, and shall otherwise comply with the standards set forth in Business and Professions Code § 4609. 
(11)  Employees and independent contractors. The operator and/or manager of a massage establishment shall maintain on the premises a register of all employees and independent contractors of the establishment. Information concerning an employee or independent contractor shall be maintained for a minimum of two years after the person ceases to work for the establishment. The operator and/or manager shall make the register immediately available for inspection upon reasonable demand of a representative of City law enforcement or code enforcement. The register shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
a.  The name, nicknames and/or aliases used by an employee. 
b.  The employee's home address and relevant phone numbers (including but not limited to home, cellular and pager numbers.) 
c.  The employee's age, date of birth, gender, height, weight, color of hair and eyes. 
d.  The employee's Social Security number. 
e.  The date of employment and termination, if any. 
f.  The duties of each employee 
(12)  Compliance with laws. Massage establishments shall be operated in compliance with all applicable laws and regulations, including without limitation, the California Massage Therapy Act (Business and Professions Code § 4600 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-231. - Massage establishment facility requirements. 
To ensure the health and safety of all persons, every person operating or maintaining a Massage Establishment, and/or providing massage services, in the City shall comply with all of the following requirements at all times: 
(1)  A recognizable and readable sign, compliant with all applicable City sign regulations, shall be posted at the main entrance of the massage establishment, identifying it as such an establishment. 
(2)  The hours of operation of the massage establishment must be posted in the front window in a manner that is clearly visible from the exterior of the establishment. 
(3)  One front door that enters into the lobby and/or other waiting room of the establishment shall be provided for customer use. All customers and any other persons other than employees of the establishment shall be required to enter and exit through the establishment's front door. 
(4)  Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the Section 44-278. In addition, at least one unobstructed, artificial light of not less than 40 watts shall be provided in each room or booth where massage services are performed on patrons and shall be illuminated at all times while any patron is present therein. 
(5)  Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the California Building Standards Code. 
(6)  Instruments used in performing massage services shall not be used on more than one patron unless they have been sterilized using approved sterilizing methods between use on different patrons. Adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments used in performing the acts of massage shall be provided at all times. 
(7)  Hot and cold running water shall be provided at all times on the premises. 
(8)  Adequate bathing, dressing, locker, and toilet facilities shall be provided for patrons. Each massage establishment shall provide a minimum of one tub or shower, one toilet, one sink, and one dressing room containing a separate locker for each patron to be served, which locker shall be capable of being locked and a minimum of one toilet and one washbasin. If male and female patrons are to be served simultaneously at the establishment, separate bathing, separate massage rooms, separate dressing areas and separate toilet facilities shall be provided for each gender. 
(9)  All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms, and all other physical facilities for the establishment must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam vapor rooms, steam and vapor cabinets, shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned with a disinfectant at least once each day that the business is in operation. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned with a disinfectant after each use. All walls, floors and ceilings of each restroom and shower area shall be constructed with materials that are smooth and easily cleanable. No carpeting shall be installed in these specified areas. 
(10)  Clean and sanitary towels, coverings and linens shall be provided for each patron of the establishment. No common use of towels or linens shall be permitted. Clean towels, coverings and linens shall be stored in enclosed cabinets. Disposable towels and coverings shall be permitted, but shall not be used on more than one patron. Soiled linens, coverings and towels shall be deposited in separate, approved receptacles. 
(11)  If any pads are used on massage tables, such pads shall be covered with a durable washable plastic or other waterproof material which shall be cleaned and disinfected with a disinfectant at least once each day the establishment is open. 
(12)  A minimum of one separate washbasin shall be provided in each massage establishment for the use of employees of any such establishment, which basin shall provide soap or detergent and hot and cold running water at all times and shall be located within or as close as practicable to the area devoted to the performing of massage services. In addition, there shall be provided at each washbasin sanitary towels placed in permanently installed dispensers. 
(13)  No massage establishment shall be equipped with any of the following improvements: 
a.  Tinted or "one-way" glass in any room or office; 
b.  Door-viewer or peephole designed to look through a door or wall; or 
c.  Locking mechanisms on any interior door that would impede unobstructed entrance to massage treatment rooms, including but not limited to a locking mechanism on any treatment room door, unless there is no staff person available to assure the security for clients and massage personnel who are behind closed doors. For the purpose of this subsection, a staff member is available to assure the security of clients and massage personnel when the massage establishment employs a receptionist or other person who is stationed in a public location outside of the massage treatment rooms. 
(14)  With the exception of massage establishments owned by one individual with one or no employees or independent contractors, massage establishments shall keep all doors leading to the exterior of the premises unlocked during the establishment's business hours. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-232. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  No massage shall be allowed in any areas of a massage establishment other than in designated massage rooms. If male and female patrons are to be served simultaneously at the establishment, separate massage rooms shall be provided for each gender. In any establishment in which massage services are rendered only to members of the same sex at any one time, such persons of the same sex may be placed in a single room, or the operators of the massage establishment may elect to place such persons in separate massage rooms. 
(b)  No massage services shall be rendered to a patron unless the patron's genitals are fully covered. In the case of a female patron, the patron's breasts must also be fully covered. In addition, no patron's genitals or the breasts of any female patron shall intentionally be touched while the patron is on the premises of the massage establishment. 
(c)  No alcoholic beverage or drug, other than a prescription medication in the possession of the person for whom the prescription was written, and no condoms, shall be stored or allowed on a massage establishment's premises. Service of alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted. 
(d)  No person shall enter or remain on any part of the premises of a massage establishment, and no person shall conduct, operate, be employed by or provide massage, while in the possession of, while consuming, or while under the influence of any alcoholic beverage or drug, except for medication provided pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a physician duly licensed to practice in the State of California. 
(e)  No sexually oriented material or sexually oriented merchandise may be allowed, displayed or stored anywhere on a massage establishment's premises. For purposes of this subsection, the terms "sexually oriented material" and "sexually oriented merchandise" shall have the same meanings as set forth in Section 44-195. 
(f)  No person may record, or cause or allow to be recorded, any audio and/or video of the performance of a massage or of the conversation or other sounds in any massage room, dressing area, toilet area or other portion of the premises where there is a reasonable expectation of privacy, without the knowledge and express written consent of the patron. 
(g)  No massage establishment shall have installed or utilize any signaling devices of any type to alert employees and/or patrons to the presence of law enforcement or other persons charged with enforcement of the provisions of this Code and/or other applicable laws and regulations. 
(h)  No person shall reside, dwell, occupy or live inside, or be allowed to reside, dwell, occupy or live inside, a massage establishment at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-233. - Records of treatment. 
Every person operating a massage establishment under a permit as herein provided shall keep a record of the date and hour of each treatment, the name and address of the patron, the type of treatment administered and the name of the person administering such treatment. Such record shall be maintained for a period of two years from the date services are rendered, and shall be open to inspection by officials charged with the enforcement of these provisions for the purposes of law enforcement and for no other purposes. The information furnished or secured as a result of any such inspection shall be confidential to the extent permitted by law. Any unauthorized disclosure or use of such information by any officer or employee of the City shall constitute a misdemeanor and such officer or employee shall be subject to penalties provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-234. - Name of business. 
No person licensed to do business as herein provided shall operate under any name or conduct business under any designation not specified in the person's massage certificate. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-235. - Inspection. 
The Police Chief or his or her agent, the Community Development Director, Fire Marshal, and/or the Orange County Health Care Agency or its successor agency may from time to time conduct unannounced inspections of a massage establishment, in accordance with applicable laws, for the purpose of confirming that the provisions of this subdivision are met, and may furnish a copy of the inspection report to any appropriate governmental agencies. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-236—44-259. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STANDARDS APPLICABLE IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 44-260. - Street numbers and identifying data. 
Street numbers and other identifying data shall be displayed according to the provisions of Section 44-277, Address numerals, and as follows: 
(1)  Every dwelling unit shall display illuminated street address numerals during hours of darkness. 
(2)  There shall be positioned at each entrance of each multifamily housing complex an illuminated diagrammatic representation of the complex which shows the location of the viewer and the unit designations within the complex. In addition, each individual unit within the complex shall display a prominent identification number which is easily visible to approaching vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-261. - Dish antennas, amateur radio communication facilities, and citizen band (CB) radio antennas. 
This section provides standards for the location and installation of amateur radio communication antennas/facilities, citizen band radio antennas, and dish antenna, which shall be located, constructed, installed, and maintained in the following manner: 
(1)  In all zoning districts, all antenna types shall comply with the following: 
a.  Antennas shall be designed, installed, and maintained in compliance with Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) standards. 
b.  Antennas shall not be located within required front or side yard setback areas or closer than five feet from the rear property line. 
c.  No portion of an antenna shall extend beyond the property lines of the subject parcel. 
d.  Antennas and supporting structures shall be a neutral, non-glossy, non-reflective color (i.e., earth-tones, black, gray) and be located in the most inconspicuous location possible to receive and transmit signals. 
e.  Electrical and antenna wiring shall be placed underground. 
f.  Any antenna that requires a footing shall be required to have a building permit issued by the Community Development Director. 
g.  Antennas shall be maintained in proper working order and any graffiti shall be removed within 24 hours from the time it is reported. 
h.  No commercial advertising material shall be allowed on any antenna, except for requisite safety text and other labeling required by law. 
i.  Approval by the City shall not be deemed as approval by a homeowners' association pursuant to any covenants, conditions, and restrictions (CC&Rs). 
j.  Antenna poles and towers installed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be deemed to be legally nonconforming. 
(2)  In all zoning districts, all amateur radio and citizen band (CB) single pole and tower communication facilities shall comply with the following: 
a.  Maximum height of any pole or tower antenna is 15 feet above the highest point of the roof of the main or primary structure located on the same parcel. 
b.  Antenna poles and towers greater than 25 feet in height above the average finished grade of the subject site, when fully extended, shall require the approval of a conditional use permit. 
c.  Retractable poles and towers shall be fully retracted when not in use. 
d.  All antenna poles and towers shall be the self-supporting type, with no supporting guy wires. 
e.  No portion of any antenna pole or tower shall be allowed within required setback areas. 
f.  Any equipment on the base of an antenna pole or tower shall be screened subject to the approval of the Community Development Director. 
g.  Anti-climb devices shall be installed at the base of the antenna tower if required by the Community Development Director. 
(3)  Dish antenna. In addition to the conditions in subsection (1), the following conditions shall apply: 
a.  In residential zoning districts, dish antennas: 
1.  Shall not project or overhang into areas where they are prohibited (i.e., setback areas). 
2.  With masts higher than 12 feet above the roofline, shall require a building permit issued by the Community Development Director. 
3.  Shall be screened from public view so long as antenna placement does not prevent reception of an acceptable quality signal or impose unreasonable expense or delay. 
4.  Shall only be used for private, noncommercial, purposes unless the use is directly related to a business for which the property owner has obtained a home occupation license pursuant to Chapter 22, Article III. 
5.  Larger than one meter (39.37 inches) in diameter, shall be subject to the following additional standards: 
(i)  Shall be located only within the rear yard of the parcel, at least five feet from the rear or side lot lines and at least 15 feet from any street side property line. 
(ii)  Shall require a building permit issued by the Community Development Director. 
b.  In nonresidential zoning districts, dish antennas: 
1.  Shall not project or overhang into areas where they are prohibited (i.e., setback areas). 
2.  With masts higher than 12 feet above the roofline, shall require a building permit issued by the Community Development Director. 
3.  Shall be screened from public view so long as antenna placement does not prevent reception of an acceptable quality signal or impose unreasonable expense or delay. 
4.  Larger than one meter (39.37 inches) in diameter, shall be subject to the following additional standards: 
(i)  Shall be located only within the rear yard of the parcel, at least five feet from the rear or side lot lines and at least 15 feet from any street side property line. 
(ii)  Shall require a building permit issued by the Community Development Director. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015) 
State Law reference— City authorized to regulate amateur radio station antenna structures, Government Code § 65850.3. 
Note— Does not pertain to telecommunication transmission equipment.  
Sec. 44-262. - Fences, walls, and hedges. 
(a)  Applicability. The provisions of this section pertaining to height shall not apply to fences required by State law to surround and enclose public utility installations or to chain link fences enclosing school grounds and public playgrounds. However, the provision pertaining to safety vision at corners shall apply to such fences. 
(b)  General provisions. 
(1)  Measuring height. The height of a wall shall be measured from the top of the street curb to the top of the wall, including any retaining wall, if present. If there is no curb present, then the height shall be measured from the lowest adjacent finished grade. For a wall between commercial or industrial and residential zoning districts, the measurements shall be taken from the residential side. 
(2)  Height. The maximum height of a wall, fence, hedge, or lattice, or any combination of along an arterial highway, a local street, or other public easement shall be eight feet unless otherwise approved by a precise plan. 
(3)  Maintenance. A property owner is responsible for the maintenance and repair of any fence, wall, hedge or lattice extension exhibiting damage or a worn out appearance. 
(4)  Painting of wall. Painting or changing the surface of any block wall facing an arterial highway, local street, or other public right-of-way is permitted with only the approved color as designated by the City Council. 
(5)  Location. No fence, wall or hedge shall be located within the public right-of-way without approval of an encroachment permit from the Community Services Department. 
(6)  Joint ownership of a wall. Any modification, repair or construction of a joint ownership (common) wall shall be subject to prior written approval of all joint owners. 
(7)  Water barrier. Any modification, repair or construction of a wall that abuts a planter area will require a waterproof barrier located on the inside of the wall between the surface of the wall and the soil in the planter. 
(8)  Residential use adjacent to nonresidential use. A decorative block wall of at least eight feet in height, and using at a minimum a six-inch-wide block, shall be constructed adjacent to all side and rear yard property lines, where a residential district or use is adjacent to a nonresidential district or use. 
(9)  Commercial property abutting residential property. A decorative block wall of three feet in height shall be constructed where a commercial property line abuts the side of the front yard setback of a residential property. 
(10)  Permits required. All block walls over three feet high and any extension to existing block walls shall require building permits from the Community Development Department. A height extension using lattice to a block wall shall require Community Development Director Approval and a building permit. 
(11)  Access to rights-of-way. Gate openings from private property to any public right-of-way or street must be approved by the Community Development Director, based on the following criteria: 
a.  The gate opening shall not be located less than 30 feet from an intersection. 
b.  The gate opening shall not impact the vehicular or pedestrian traffic on the public right-of-way. 
c.  There shall be no modifications to the public right-of-way (e.g., curb cuts or drive approaches). Any gate openings that would require modifications to the public right-of-way will require a precise plan amendment. 
d.  All gate openings shall slide from side-to-side on the private side of the gate or shall be inward opening. 
e.  Southern California Edison shall approve all requests, in writing, for a gate opening onto its right-of-way. 
(c)  Lattice height extensions. 
(1)  A lattice extension to a wall is only permitted in the Single Family Residential (R-1) zone. 
(2)  A lattice extension must be made of pressure-treated wood, vinyl or similar synthetic material. 
(3)  A lattice extension of a wall shall be no higher than the lesser of two feet in height, or a total height for the wall plus lattice extension of eight feet, centered and mounted securely onto the top course of a wall as shown in figure B-1. 
  
(4)  A lattice extension shall not project above the maximum height of a wall allowed under Table III-1 in this section. 
(5)  A lattice extension shall be white in color, unless the wall it is attached to is painted. In such circumstances, the lattice may be painted to match the wall color at the City's discretion. 
(6)  A lattice extension is not permitted within the front setback area. 
(7)  A lattice extension to a wall facing an arterial highway, local street or the public right-of-way does not have to be a complete section of wall. The lattice extension can be installed solely on an individual property basis and result in a "stair-stepping" effect at the property line. 
(8)  If a lattice extension includes trained vegetation growing onto the lattice, then such vegetation shall not include thorns or other features that would cause injury to the public passing by the lattice. 
(9)  A lattice extension shall be a framework made up of one and one-quarter-inch wide strips of pressure-treated wood or solid synthetic material that is overlapped in a 3D diagonal pattern. A lattice extension shall also feature cap and divider moldings. 
(10)  A lattice extension shall have openings in a diagonal pattern that are no less than one-inch square and no greater than two inches square. 
(d)  Block height extensions. 
(1)  A block extension shall not be of a different style, type or color of material used in the existing wall. If the block extension is on a painted wall, then the block extension shall be painted to match the wall color at the City's discretion. 
(2)  Any existing cap on a wall must be removed prior to an extension. 
(e)  Residential provisions. 
(1)  Maximum heights. The maximum height of a wall, fence, or hedge shall be as follows: 
TABLE III-1: MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF FENCES, WALLS, AND HEDGES 
Location 	Maximum Height 1 
Front yard, within the required setback area 	4.5 feet 
Side yard, interior lot 	8 feet 
Side yard, corner and reverse corner lots 	8 feet 
Rear yard 	8 feet 
Traffic safety triangle (Section 44-276 ) 	3 feet 
 
1   A height extension to a wall shall not exceed the maxi-mum height identified in Table III-1. 
(2)  Required residential walls. For all new developments, a decorative masonry block wall of at least six feet in height and six inches thick shall be constructed so as to be centered on all side and rear property lines. Replacement of existing residential walls between lots may be of any fencing type, except chain link. 
(3)  Required points of extension. Required walls along side yard property lines of corner lots shall extend to a point perpendicular to the front elevation closest to the street. When side and rear yards abut, the wall shall extend the entire length of the rear property line. 
(4)  No chain link. No chain link fencing shall be permitted in any residential yard where it is visible from the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-263. - Glare. 
All lighting, both exterior and interior, shall be designed and located so as to confine direct light rays to the subject premises and to minimize the effects of reflected light on adjacent or nearby properties. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-264. - Hours of operation. 
The operation of permitted uses located within 300 feet of any property zoned R-1 or R-3 shall be limited to the hours between 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., except as approved by a precise plan or a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-265. - Irregular lots. 
This section provides standards for the establishment and measurement of setbacks on irregular lots. 
(1)  Perimeter setbacks. Perimeter setbacks shall be measured from the property line or the ultimate street right-of-way line, whichever results in the larger setback. 
(2)  Flag lots. 
a.  Setbacks. All perimeter setbacks shall be measured from property lines, except that the property line adjacent and most perpendicular to the "panhandle" portion of the lot shall be extended across that portion and serve as the basis for measuring setbacks in that area. 
b.  No structures in panhandle. Structures shall not be allowed in the "panhandle" portion of the lot, nor shall that portion be credited to minimum lot area requirements. 
(3)  Determination of property lines. Where a building site is situated so that any of the property lines are not readily determinable, required setbacks shall be as determined by the Community Development Director in compliance with the following criterion: required setbacks shall not allow the placement of buildings on the site in a manner that will constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations placed on other properties in the vicinity and incompatible with surrounding uses. 
(4)  Setbacks from easements. Where a surface easement for street, vehicular access, bikeway, recreation trail, or similar purposes has been granted across a lot, the building setback shall be measured from the property line or from the edge of the easement, whichever is closer to the building. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-266. - Measurements, projections, and encroachments. 
(a)  Measuring building height. The maximum height of buildings and other structures shall be defined as the vertical distance from finish grade to an imaginary plane above the building site. The imaginary plane shall be established above and parallel to the finish grade adjacent to the exterior walls at a vertical distance equal to the specified maximum height as established for the corresponding district. 
  
(b)  Allowable height projections. Architectural features not containing usable floor space, such as chimneys, towers, gables, and spires, are permitted to extend five feet above the maximum structure height as established for the corresponding district, if approved as part of a precise plan or conditional use permit. The aggregate floor or "footprint" area of such architectural features shall not encompass more than ten percent of the ground floor area of the structure. Chimneys shall comply with building code regulations. 
(c)  Determining lot frontage. The Community Development Director shall determine which property lines shall be considered the lot frontage for the purpose of complying with setback requirements. On all irregular and nonrectangular lots, the Community Development Director shall determine the location of front, side, and rear yard areas. 
(d)  Allowable encroachments. The following structures may encroach a maximum of two feet into any required setbacks established for the corresponding district, provided the projections do not extend over the property line: 
(1)  Eaves, buttresses, cornices, sills, or other similar architectural features. 
(2)  Fireplace structures not wider than eight feet. 
(3)  Awnings or open patio covers. 
(4)  Guard railings for safety protection around ramps. 
(5)  Bay windows, without a foundation, located in the front or rear setback area. 
(e)  Prohibited encroachments. Bay windows not meeting the allowable encroachment criteria identified above, balconies, pop outs, and similar features shall not encroach into the required setbacks established for the corresponding zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-267. - Noise. 
(a)  Excessive noise prohibited. A person shall not willfully make or continue, or willfully cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise that disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or zoning district or constitutes a public nuisance. 
(b)  Exterior noise standards. Property owners/business operators/tenants shall be responsible for the attenuation/mitigation of noise. The following noise levels are the maximums permitted in the City, unless otherwise stated in a precise plan or conditional use permit. 
TABLE III-2. EXTERIOR NOISE STANDARDS 
TIME PERIOD 	MAXIMUM NOISE LEVEL * 
7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 	65 dBA 
7:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. 	50 dBA 
10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 	45 dBA 
 
*   As measured at the property line of the noise source. 
(c)  Noise measurement. Noise measurements shall be made with a sound level meter using the "A" weighted network (scale). Calibration of the measurement equipment, utilizing an acoustic calibrator, shall be performed immediately prior to recording any noise data. 
(d)  General regulations to control noise. 
(1)  Loading and unloading. Loading, unloading, opening, closing, or other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans, or similar objects shall not occur between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a manner that would cause a noise disturbance to a residential zoning district. 
(2)  Vehicle repairs and testing. Repairs, rebuilding, modifying, or testing of motor vehicles, motorcycles, motorboats, or other motorized vehicles shall not occur between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a manner that would cause a noise disturbance to a residential zoning district. 
(3)  Maintenance activities. Maintenance activities in landscape and parking areas (i.e., mechanical sweeping, mechanical grass cutting, mechanical blowing) shall not occur between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. in a manner that would cause a noise disturbance to a residential zoning district. 
(4)  Construction activities. Construction activities shall include noise generated at the site during site preparation and construction, which includes utilizing various types of machinery and equipment. Construction activity also includes the transport of workers and export of debris and import of construction materials from the site. Construction activity shall be limited to the following: 
TABLE III-3. RESTRICTED HOURS FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES 
Day 	Time * 
Monday — Friday 	7:00 a.m.—5:00 p.m. 
Saturday 	9:00 a.m.—5:00 p.m. 
Sunday and Federal Holidays 	No construction permitted 
 
*   Modification of construction hours may be granted for temporary uses per Section 44-1007(7). 
Note— Section 26-202(g) provides for modification of hours for temporary uses. 
(e)  Exceptions. Short-term or temporary intermittent bursts of noise may exceed maximum noise levels for approved construction projects, emergency vehicles and equipment, and other short-term incidents with City approval. Such short-term or temporary intermittent noises shall not exceed 30 seconds of constant sound above the established levels nor occur more frequently than one incident of noise level excession every five minutes over a period of not more than three hours. 
(f)  Residential design requirements. New residential development shall be consistent with Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations in order to ensure an adequate interior noise environment for residential uses. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-268. - Outdoor display, advertisement, and sales of merchandise. 
There shall be no outdoor display, storage, or sales of merchandise, except where specifically permitted by Section 44-139 or by a conditional use permit or by an outdoor display and seating permit. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-269. - Outdoor work. 
(a)  Outdoor work such as assembling, repairing, dismantling, and manufacturing of merchandise shall not be allowed unless approved by a conditional use permit. 
(b)  Gardening, permitted construction activities, and loading and unloading of merchandise from vehicles shall not be considered outdoor work. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-270. - Items in the public right-of-way. 
No person shall store, place, locate, or display any item in the public right-of-way other than operational vehicles, emergency equipment, or items approved by the City with an encroachment permit. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-271. - Stormwater runoff. 
All new development shall comply with the County of Orange Areawide Urban Storm Water Runoff Guidelines and any additional standards or guidelines that may be adopted by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-272. - Screening of equipment. 
All mechanical equipment, including heating, ventilating, and air conditioning equipment, shall be screened from view of a public street or adjacent property in a manner approved by the Community Development Director, whether such equipment is located within a building, behind a roof parapet, or on the ground. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-273. - Swimming pools, fish ponds, and fountains. 
(a)  Compliance with codes. Swimming pools, fish ponds, or other bodies of water 12 or more inches in depth at any point shall be developed in compliance with any applicable standards and codes as required by the City, County, and State. 
(b)  Required setbacks. 
TABLE III-4. SETBACKS FOR SWIMMING POOLS 
TYPE OF SETBACK 	MINIMUM REQUIRED SETBACK 
Interior Side Yard 	5 feet 
Street Side Yard 	10 feet 
Rear Yard 	5 feet 
Front Yard 	15 feet 
 
(c)  Front yard. Fish ponds, fountains, and other water features located in the front yard of a residence shall not exceed 12 inches in depth or 50 square feet in area. 
(d)  Mosquito abatement. All fish ponds, fountains, or other water features shall contain mosquito fish or other mosquito abatement measures recommended by the Orange County Vector Control District. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-274. - Trash and recyclable materials storage. 
(a)  Provisions for trash required. Adequate, accessible, and convenient areas for collecting and loading trash and recyclable materials shall be provided in compliance with State law. 
(1)  Multifamily uses. The following are minimum requirements for common refuse and recyclable material storage areas for multifamily developments with five or more units. Storage areas may be located indoors or outdoors as long as they are readily accessible to all residents. Areas are measured in square feet. If the trash storage area is located outdoors, a trash enclosure is required. 
TABLE III-5. MULTIFAMILY DEVELOPMENT 
MINIMUM COMMON STORAGE AREAS REQUIRED (SQ. FT.) 
DWELLINGS 	TOTAL AREA 
5 or more 	24 
10—15 	48 
16—25 	96 
26—50 	192 
51—75 	288 
76—100 	384 
101—125 	480 
126—150 	576 
151—175 	672 
176—200 	768 
201+ 	Every additional 25 dwellings shall require an additional 200 sq. ft. 
 
(2)  Nonresidential uses. Nonresidential uses shall provide refuse areas in compliance with the following requirements. Requirements apply to each individual structure. Areas are measured in square feet. 
TABLE III-6. NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES MINIMUM STORAGE AREAS REQUIRED (SQ. FT.) 
BUILDING FLOOR AREA 	TOTAL AREA 
Up to 5,000 	24 
5,001—10,000 	48 
10,001—25,000 	96 
25,001—50,000 	192 
50,001—75,000 	288 
75,001—100,000 	384 
100,001 + 	Every additional 25,000 sq. ft. shall require an additional 96 sq. ft. 
 
(b)  Area to be shown on plans. Trash and recyclable materials storage areas shall be included on all applicable plans to be approved by the City. Design specifications shall include space allocation, location, design, and signage, if applicable. 
(c)  Enclosure standards. Trash and recyclable materials containers shall be located within an enclosed area. Enclosures for trash and recycling containers shall comply with the following standards. 
(1)  Enclosure placement. Trash and recyclable materials enclosures shall be provided as follows: 
a.  Located within 250 feet of all businesses served by the enclosure. 
b.  Directly available to collection vehicles via alleys or driveways to avoid the necessity of substantial hand carrying of containers or hand pushing of dumpsters. 
c.  Located substantially away from public view and pedestrian and vehicle circulation areas unless determined infeasible by the review authority. 
d.  Located a minimum of 25 feet away from residentially-zoned property. 
(2)  Enclosure design. Enclosures shall be constructed on a concrete pad with a concrete apron and be of an adequate size to accommodate the containers they enclose, per disposal company standards. Access to the containers for collection shall also meet disposal company requirements. Enclosures shall comply with City standards as illustrated below. Walls shall be at least six feet high and shall be made of strong, masonry block, and finished as to match colors and finishes of nearby buildings and be consistent with current City standards. Doors shall be self-latching, metal or metal framed, and of heavy-duty construction sufficient to withstand hard usage. Trash enclosures shall incorporate a drain that carries wastewater to the sanitary sewer. Interior six-inch-high concrete or metal curbs shall be included to prevent damage to the walls from collisions with heavy containers. 
  
(d)  Weather protection. Each enclosure shall be designed and maintained so that deposited materials are contained during windy periods. The trash enclosure shall have a roof and individual containers shall have lids. The roof shall be constructed of a solid, high quality, and durable material, and shall incorporate a design that is architecturally compatible with the building on the property. Enclosures or containers designated for recyclable materials that could be damaged or be rendered unmarketable by rain or other environmental conditions shall provide adequate protection against such conditions. 
(e)  Maintenance of trash facilities. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to ensure that the immediate surroundings and the floor of the enclosures are kept clean and free of debris, that the enclosure gates have operable latches, that the enclosure gates remain closed, and that the container lids remain closed at all times except during periods of depositing trash and emptying the bin. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-275. - Underground utilities. 
(a)  Underground installation. Utilities, including electrical, telephone, cable television, and similar service wires or cables that provide direct service to the development on the property shall be installed underground unless otherwise approved by the City Council when approving a precise plan. The developer or owner is responsible for complying with the requirements of this section and making the necessary arrangements with the utility companies for installation of facilities. Freestanding electrical boxes are not permitted in residential zones. 
(b)  Aboveground exceptions. For the purpose of this section, appurtenances and associated equipment such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts in an underground system may be placed aboveground with approval of the Community Services Department. Such exceptions shall not be placed in required front or side yard setbacks and shall be adequately screened so as not to be visible from the street. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 16, 5-3-2016)  
Sec. 44-276. - Traffic safety triangle. 
(a)  Corner parcels. Traffic safety triangles shall be developed in a manner that ensures visibility across the corners of the intersecting streets, alleys, and private driveways. The traffic safety triangle shall be described as a triangular shaped area on a corner parcel formed by 20 feet from the intersection of lines tangent to the face of the curb, and connecting the lines diagonally across the property making a 90-degree triangle as shown in the figure below. 
(b)  Height of obstructions. The maximum height of any object (i.e., fence, landscaping, signs, or walls) located in the traffic safety triangle area shall be three feet, measured from the adjoining top of curb. The three-foot height limit shall not apply to traffic safety devices, trees trimmed to eight feet above the adjacent top of curb, utility poles, and other government or utility installed devices. 
  
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-277. - Address numerals. 
Street address numerals shall be provided pursuant to the following: 
(1)  Single-family units. Street addresses shall be visible from the public street and may be displayed either on the front door, on the fascia adjacent to the main entrance, or on another prominent location. Numerals shall be a minimum four inches in height with not less than one-fourth-inch stroke and shall contrast sharply with the background. 
(2)  Multifamily units. Street addresses shall be visible from the public street and shall be displayed on the complex identification sign. If there is no complex identification sign, the street address may be displayed on the fascia adjacent to the main entrance or on another prominent location. When the property has alley access, address numerals shall be displayed in a prominent location visible from the alley. Street address numerals shall be a minimum six inches in height with not less than one-half-inch stroke and shall contrast sharply with the background. Identification of individual units shall be provided adjacent to the unit entrances. Letters or numerals of individual units shall be a minimum of four inches in height with not less than one-fourth-inch stroke and shall contrast sharply with the background. 
(3)  Nonresidential properties. Street addresses shall be visible from the public street. Street addresses shall be displayed on a freestanding sign, on the fascia adjacent to the main entrance, or on another prominent location on the building. When the property has alley access, address numerals shall be displayed in a prominent location visible from the alley. Numerals shall be a minimum six inches in height with not less than one-half-inch stroke and shall contrast sharply with the background. Identification of individual units shall be provided adjacent to the unit entrances. Letters or numerals for the individual units shall be four inches in height with not less than one-fourth-inch stroke and shall contrast sharply with the background. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-278. - Outdoor and exterior lighting standards. 
Where applicable all outdoor and exterior lighting standards shall meet the recommended illumination levels as published by the then-current edition of the Illuminating Engineer Society of North America (IESNA or IES) Lighting Handbook. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-279—44-302. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - AFFORDABLE HOUSING 
 
Sec. 44-303. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to implement the provisions of California Government Code § 65915, and the City's Housing Element, regarding the provision of density bonuses and other regulatory incentives for affordable and senior housing projects. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-304. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this division shall apply to projects qualifying for density bonuses provided for by California Government Code § 65915. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-305. - Government Code § 65915 adopted by reference. 
California Government Code § 65915, a copy of which shall remain on file in the office of the La Palma City Clerk for use and examination by the public, is adopted and incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth, and shall constitute the affordable housing density bonus regulations of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-306—44-334. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - LANDSCAPING 
 
Sec. 44-335. - Residential landscape standards. 
(a)  Applicability. This section provides landscaping requirements for residential uses that shall apply to: 
(1)  All proposed new residential developments. 
(2)  All existing residential developments. 
(3)  All existing landscape and irrigation systems. 
(b)  General provisions. 
(1)  All residentially zoned properties and nonresidential zoned properties developed with residential uses shall provide landscaping as required under this section. 
(2)  Landscape design may emphasize water conservation through minimal irrigation and the use of plant materials that are drought tolerant and well adapted to the local climate and soil conditions. 
(3)  New development. All new development shall require approval of a landscape and irrigation plan pursuant to Section 44-77. 
(4)  Should any provision of this chapter conflict with other any other provisions of this Code or any adopted specific plan, the Community Development Director shall clarify the spirit and intent of the Code. 
(5)  All landscaping shall be maintained in an attractive and healthy condition. Attractive and healthy condition shall include the proper pruning, mowing of live turf areas, weeding, litter removal, replacement of all dead and deceased plants, and the regular application of appropriate quantities of water to all landscaped areas. Indoor/outdoor plastic or nylon carpeting and similar materials that do not resemble thriving, live, green grass shall not be permitted as a substitute for artificial turf and/or live turf. 
(6)  Irrigation systems shall be maintained in a proper operating condition. Water line breaks, head/emitter ruptures, overspray or runoff conditions and other irrigation system failures shall be repaired immediately. 
(7)  Restrictions for traffic safety. In compliance with Section 44-276, landscaping in the traffic safety triangle shall not exceed a height of three feet. 
(c)  Artificial turf standards. 
(1)  Artificial turf shall have polyethylene monofilament fiber with a minimum grass zone pile height of one and one-half inches. 
(2)  A minimum face weight of 42 ounces per square yard of unfilled artificial turf. 
(3)  Nylon, polypropylene, and similar fibers can be permitted in the thatch zone provided that the thatch zone is a minimum one-quarter inches lower than the grass zone pile height. 
(4)  Artificial turf installations requiring infill materials shall use infill of the silica sand variety. Rubber infill made from old tires is not acceptable for use as infill for artificial turf. 
(5)  All electric, water, gas, and irrigation lines and conduits shall be run outside the perimeter of an artificial turf installation with the exception of those that provide direct service to the residence. 
(6)  An appropriate solid barrier device (i.e., concrete mow strip) is required to separate artificial turf from soil and live vegetation. 
(7)  Artificial turf shall be lead free. 
(8)  Artificial turf shall be trimmed to fit against all regular and irregular edges to resemble a natural look. 
(9)  Artificial turf shall be designed to allow water to percolate through the synthetic grass at a minimum drain rate of 30 inches per hour to an adequate drainage system installed underneath the artificial turf to prevent run-off, pooling, and flooding. 
(10)  All artificial turf shall have a warranty that protects against color fading and a decrease in pile height. A minimum four-year manufacturer's warranty is required for a "do it yourself" homeowner's installation, and a minimum eight-year manufacturer's warranty is required for an installation certified by the manufacturer. 
(11)  Installation shall be done at minimum to the manufacturer's specifications, and include the following: removal of all sod or existing groundcover, a synthetic porous filter fabric shall be installed, compacted and porous decomposed crushed granite and/or road base material (minimum three inches), all edges and seams of the artificial turf are to be anchored with nails and glue, all seams shall be nailed and glued, not sewn, and artificial turf shall be visually level with the grain pointing in a single direction. 
(d)  Maintenance. 
(1)  All landscaping, including parkway landscaping, plant materials, and live turf areas shall be maintained by the property owner, in a healthy, neat, and orderly condition that is free of weeds, trash, and debris. 
(2)  Artificial turf shall be maintained by the property owner in an effective manner which includes cleaning, brushing, debris removal; repairing of depressions and ruts to maintain a level visual surface; elimination of any odors, flat or matted areas, weeds, evasive roots, looseness at edges, seams; and the replacement of the artificial turf when maintenance or repair is unable to simulate a natural thriving, green, grass appearance. 
(3)  Dead or diseased plants and/or any damaged or worn-out artificial turf areas shall be removed and appropriately replaced by the property owner. Repaired artificial turf areas shall be done so with like for like materials from the same manufacturer and done so in a manner that results in a repair that blends in with the existing artificial turf. 
(e)  Single-family development landscaping. 
(1)  Landscaped yards. Landscaping shall illustrate a concern for aesthetic elements such as balance, scale, texture, form, water conservation, and unity. Yards visible from the public right-of-way, excluding driveways, shall be landscaped. Seventy percent of the yard area visible from the public right-of-way, excluding the driveway, shall be landscaped with plant materials, and/or live turf or artificial turf. 
(2)  Period for landscape installation. Minimal landscaping shall be installed prior to initial occupancy of a residential dwelling. Full landscaping shall be installed within six months of initial occupancy. 
(3)  Landscaping should encourage the use of drought-tolerant plant materials, drip irrigation systems, and minimal use of turf and artificial turf, where feasible. Landscape design should encourage the implementation of landscape maintenance practices that foster long-term water conservation. 
(4)  Planned unit developments (PUD). In planned unit developments, a minimum of 30 percent of the site area shall be landscaped. An exception to this requirement may be granted with approval of a precise plan or precise plan amendment if the approval authority finds that the landscape plan provides exceptional creativity, which may include artificial turf. 
(5)  A permit shall be required for the installation of artificial turf in the single family residential (R-1) zoning district. 
(f)  Multiple-family development landscaping. The following features shall be incorporated into the design of the proposed landscape and shown on the required landscape plans for multiple-family developments: 
(1)  Landscaping shall be required in all setback areas except for driveways and walkways; 
(2)  Landscaping adjacent to the driveways and parking areas shall be protected from vehicle damage through the provision of a minimum of six-inch-high concrete curbs or other types of barriers as approved by the Community Development Director; 
(3)  Landscaping planter areas shall have a minimum inside width of three feet where trees and/or shrubs are provided and six feet where turf is provided; 
(4)  All landscaped areas shall incorporate an irrigation system and comply with the commercial irrigation standards in Section 44-336(f); 
(5)  Plant materials shall be selected and installed to comply with the provisions for plant materials in the commercial landscaping requirements in Section 44-336(e); 
(6)  Common open area. At least 200 square feet of recreational open space shall be required for each dwelling unit. 
a.  Recreational open space shall be lawn, garden, or other natural landscaping, and may include paved surfaces for walking/jogging, swimming pools, BBQ grills, play areas, and places to sit down. 
b.  Common open area shall not include setback areas or walkways providing access to buildings and/or other parts of the site. 
(7)  Private open area. At least 200 square feet on ground level shall be provided for each first floor unit. Second floor units may be exempt from providing private open area. 
a.  Private usable open space shall be provided for each dwelling unit immediately adjacent to, accessible to, and private to the unit it is designated to serve. Private open area shall not be permitted to be located in setback areas, driveway or parking areas and shall be distinguished from adjacent areas by a retaining wall, fence, or landscaping. 
b.  The space shall not be less than ten feet in any horizontal distance. 
(8)  Three percent landscape in parking areas and three percent in non-parking areas. A minimum landscaping area of three percent in the parking areas and three percent in the non-parking areas of all remaining areas of the site where no building will be located shall be provided. 
a.  The method of calculating the three percent parking and three percent non-parking landscaping shall not include setback areas, private open areas, or the common open area. 
b.  The three percent non-parking landscaping requirement shall be distributed evenly throughout the project site and located immediately adjacent to each building on the site and is not permitted to be located in the setback areas, private open space areas, or the common open area. 
(9)  A permit shall be required for the installation of artificial turf in the multiple-family residential (R-3) zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-336. - Commercial landscape provisions. 
(a)  Applicability. This section provides landscaping and irrigation requirements for new construction on vacant property and for new construction increasing an existing development by 50 percent or more. 
(b)  Required landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided for all setback areas adjacent to public rights-of-way, plus a minimum of three percent in the parking areas and three percent in the non-parking areas of all remaining areas of the site where no building will be located. 
(c)  Exceptions. The approval authority may approve exceptions to the above requirements for plans that demonstrate exceptional creativity. 
(d)  General design standards. The following features shall be incorporated into the design of the proposed landscape and shown on the required landscape plans: 
(1)  Landscaping shall be planned as an integral part of the overall project design considering the benefits of cooling, reduced evaporation, special continuity, and aesthetics. Landscaping shall not simply be located in excess space left over after parking areas and structures have been planned. 
(2)  Pedestrian access, solar access, and shading of window areas shall be considered in the design of landscaped areas. 
(3)  Landscaping adjacent to driveways and parking areas shall be protected from vehicle damage through the provision of minimum six-inch high concrete curbs or other types of barriers as approved by Community Development Director. 
(4)  Landscaped planter areas shall have a minimum inside width of three feet where trees and/or shrubs are provided and six feet where turf is provided. 
(5)  Landscaping within traffic safety triangles on corner lots shall be provided in compliance with Section 44-276. 
(6)  Re-circulating water shall be used for all decorative water features. 
(e)  Plant materials. Plant materials shall be selected and installed to comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  A mix of plant materials and sizes shall be planted. Plant type variety is required to be attractive and to reduce the chance of landscape failure due to disease infestation. In addition, it is recommended that plant container sizes vary in order to further provide visual interest during initial project planting. 
(2)  Trees and shrubs shall be planted and maintained so that at maturity they do not interfere with utilities and traffic safety sight areas. 
(3)  Trees and shrubs shall be planted and maintained in a manner that protects the basic rights of adjacent property owners. 
(4)  Trees planted near public sidewalks or curbs shall be planted and maintained in a manner that prevents physical damage to sidewalks, curbs, gutters, and other public improvements. 
(5)  Ground cover shall be of live plant material, although limited quantities (ten percent maximum) of gravel, bark, or similar materials may be used in combination with a living ground cover. 
(6)  The landscape design plan shall provide for water-efficient landscaping. 
(7)  Turf areas shall not exceed 50 percent of the landscaped area with the following exceptions: 
a.  Public parks; 
b.  Child day care facilities; 
c.  Common open area, private open area, and park areas within planned unit residential developments. 
(8)  A two-inch layer of bark mulch shall be installed in areas where lawn or other ground cover material is not provided. 
(9)  A permit shall be required for the installation of artificial turf in any non-residential zoning district. 
(f)  Irrigation design standards. 
(1)  Water efficiency. The irrigation design plan shall provide for a permanent water-efficient irrigation system (i.e., drip systems, bubblers, or soakers). 
(2)  Runoff and overspray. Soil types and infiltration rates shall be considered when designing irrigation systems. Irrigation systems shall be designed to avoid runoff, low head drainage, overspray, and other similar conditions. Appropriate irrigation equipment and schedules shall be used to closely match application rates to rates of infiltration. Special attention shall be given to avoid runoff on slopes and overspray in narrow planting areas and median strips. 
(3)  Equipment. 
a.  Controllers. Automatic controllers are required for all irrigation systems and shall be able to accommodate all aspects of the design. 
b.  Sprinkler heads. Heads and emitters shall have consistently matched precipitation rates within each control valve circuit. Sprinkler heads shall be selected for proper area coverage, application rate, adjustment capability, operating pressure, and ease of maintenance. 
c.  Rain-sensing override devices. Rain-sensing override devices are encouraged on all irrigation systems. 
(g)  Maintenance. Landscaping shall be maintained in an orderly and healthy condition. This shall include proper pruning, mowing of turf, weeding, removal of litter, fertilizing, replacement of plants when necessary, and application of appropriate quantities of water to all landscaped areas. Practices may include performing routine irrigation system repair and adjustments, scheduling irrigation based on CIMIS (California Irrigation Management Information System), using moisture-sensing or rain shut-off devices, conducting water audits, and prescribing the amount of water to be applied per landscaped area. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-337—44-360. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PARKING AND LOADING 
 
Sec. 44-361. - General parking standards. 
(a)  Spaces accessible and usable. Off-street parking spaces, whether in a garage, carport, or open area, shall be located so as to be accessible and usable for the parking of motor vehicles at all times. 
(b)  Parking purposes only. Required parking shall be maintained exclusively for parking purposes and shall not be used for storage or other purposes. 
(c)  Provided on same lot. Parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as the use they are intended to serve unless a reciprocal parking agreement is approved by the City Council. Said reciprocal parking agreement shall be recorded on the title of all properties subject to the agreement in the Orange County Clerk-Recorder's office, a copy of which agreement shall be given to the City. 
(d)  Multiple uses on a lot. Where there is more than one type of use on a lot, the parking requirements shall be the sum total of the requirements for the individual uses. A reduction in this parking requirement may be supported by a site-specific parking study prepared by a qualified engineer, and the reduced on-site parking shall be in accordance with a parking management plan prepared by a qualified engineer and approved by the City Council. 
(e)  Open air spaces. Where a garage or carport is not specifically required, open-air parking spaces are permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 17, 5-3-2016)  
Sec. 44-362. - Nonresidential parking standards. 
(a)  Dimensions. Parking spaces may include a two-foot overhang into landscape areas provided that concrete barriers (wheel stops) are provided and the landscaping is appropriately designed to accommodate the overhang. 
(b)  Clearly marked. Parking spaces shall be clearly marked, maintained in an easily discernible manner, and conform to the adopted striping requirements of the City. 
(c)  Surface and parking area. The thickness of paving and base material shall be established by a recognized soils engineer. However, the minimum thickness shall be two inches asphaltic concrete or three and one-half inches Portland cement concrete. 
(d)  Border barricades. Every parking area that is not separated by a wall from a street or alley shall be provided with a concrete barrier not less than six inches in height. No portion of the barrier shall be closer to the back of the sidewalk or the required yard line than two feet. Barriers shall be securely installed and maintained. 
(e)  Lighting. Lighting shall be provided to illuminate parking areas for safety and security. Illumination levels shall comply with Section 44-278. Lighting shall be arranged to reflect light away from adjoining or nearby residential properties. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-363. - Residential parking standards. 
(a)  Garage dimensions. When an enclosed garage is required, the minimum interior dimension for each parking space shall be ten feet wide by 23 feet deep. 
(b)  Doorway width. Parking spaces within a garage or carport shall have a doorway not less than eight feet in width. 
(c)  Required driveway. Parking spaces within a garage or carport shall be provided with an unobstructed driveway area of at least 20 feet in length paved with Portland cement concrete. The driveway shall have a vertical clearance of not less than eight feet. 
(d)  Driveway width. The entire length of a driveway shall extend the full width of the garage or carport entry. The entire driveway in a residential district shall be paved with Portland cement concrete or other comparable nonasphaltic material as approved by the City Engineer. The width of a driveway shall not be in excess of that specified by a precise plan or by a conditional use permit except that the Community Development Director may issue a permit for a paved ancillary parking area. 
  
(e)  Paved ancillary parking area. 
(1)  A permit for a paved ancillary parking area shall be obtained from the Community Development Director prior to installation. 
(2)  Paved ancillary parking areas must be designed and constructed to the specifications required by this Code for driveways. All material utilized for the paved ancillary parking area shall be consistent with the driveway material. 
(3)  Paved ancillary parking areas shall not exceed ten feet in width and may extend from the front of the garage to the back of the right-of-way providing access to the driveway. 
(4)  Paved ancillary parking areas shall be located on the side of the original driveway that is closest to an adjacent property line. Where it is not obvious which side of the driveway is the closest to an adjacent property line, the Community Development Director shall make the determination. 
(5)  The proposed widening shall not be detrimental to the adjacent property by creating conditions that would result in an appreciable diminution of adjoining property values or a potential traffic hazard. 
(6)  Modifications to the public right-of-way are not permitted unless a permit is obtained from the Community Services Department. 
(7)  Paved ancillary parking areas shall have the same parking and storage standards as driveways. 
(f)  Drive aisles. If the driveway does not connect directly to a street or alley, a drive aisle paved with Portland cement concrete shall be provided. For drive aisles not exceeding 100 feet in length, the width shall be not less than ten feet. For drive aisles over 100 feet in length, the width shall be at least 15 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-364. - Parking calculations. 
Parking calculations for all zoning districts shall be determined by use, as identified in the following table. 
TABLE III-7. PARKING REQUIREMENTS BY LAND USE 
Land use 	Minimum Vehicle Spaces Required 
Single Family Residential 	Two parking spaces in a fully enclosed garage for each dwelling unit. 
Multiple-family Residential 	Up to 2 bedrooms 	2 plus 1 guest space — at least 66% covered 
	3 bedrooms 	3 plus 1 guest space — at least 50% covered 
	4 or more bedrooms 	4 plus 1 guest space — at least 40% covered 
Second Unit Residences 	One parking space per secondary unit or one space per every bedroom of the secondary unit, whichever is greater. 
Religious Institutions 	One parking space for each 3 seats in the main sanctuary or assembly area. Where no fixed seats are provided, 1 space for every 30 sq. ft. in the main assembly room. 
Congregate Care/Assisted Living Facilities 	0.5 space for each residential unit, plus one space for each 4 units for guests unless specified in an approved precise plan. 
Hospitals 	One space for each 2 patient beds the facility is licensed to accommodate plus required spaces for ancillary uses as determined by the planning division. 
Hotels/Motels 	One space for each guest room, plus 0.75 space for each employee, plus any spaces required for ancillary uses. 
Self-Storage, Personal Storage Facilities 	One space for each 10 storage units but not less than 6 spaces total, plus 2 spaces for the manager's office. If a resident caretaker is provided, an enclosed garage, 20 feet by 20 feet shall be included in the parking requirements. 
Offices 	One parking space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area. 
Restaurants 	One parking space for each 100 square feet of gross floor area. 
Retail and services 	One parking space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
Schools (Private) Elementary/Junior High 	1.5 spaces for each classroom, plus one space for every 75 sq. ft. of assembly area in an auditorium, plus one bus loading space for each 100 students or portion thereof. 
High School 	Five spaces for each classroom, plus one space for each 75 square feet in assembly rooms and auditoriums, plus one bus loading space for each 150 students or portion thereof. 
Trade and Business Schools 	One space for each student. 
Tutoring Facilities 	One space for every 50 sq. ft. of gross floor area. 
Service Stations (Including Multi-Use Stations) 	One space for each 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area, plus 3 spaces for each service bay. 50 percent of the parking provided at pump islands may be credited towards meeting parking requirements. 
Light Manufacturing and Warehouses 	First 25,000 sq. ft.: 1 for every 500 sq. ft. 
	25,001 to 100,000 sq. ft.: 1 for every 750 sq. ft. 
	100,001 to 200,000 sq. ft.: 1 for every 1,000 sq. ft. 
	Anything over 200,000 sq. ft.: 1 for every 2,000 sq. ft. 
	(This is a cumulative requirement: for example, a 250,000 sq. ft. building requires 50 + 100 + 100 + 25 = 275 spaces) 
	Incidental office areas for warehousing and distribution facilities exceeding 15 percent of the gross building area will require one parking space for each 300 square feet of floor area. 
Emergency Shelter (Homeless) 1 	One parking space for every 5 beds and 0.5 space per bedroom designed as a family unit with children, plus 1 space for every employee and/or volunteer staff member on duty. Each shelter shall also provide a bike rack for clients in a secured area. 
 
1   Alternatively, an emergency shelter may submit a parking study, subject to approval by the Community Development Director, demonstrating that the parking demand associated with the emergency shelter justifies requiring a reduced amount of off-street parking. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-365. - Minimum dimensions for angled parking layouts. 
The following table depicts the minimum parking space dimensions for all parking areas: 
TABLE III-8. MINIMUM DIMENSIONS FOR ANGLED PARKING LAYOUTS 
Angle 
(a) 	Curb length 
per vehicle 
(b) 	Stall length 
(c) 	Aisle dimension 
(d) 	Bay width 
(e) 
30° 	18'-0" 	18'-0" 	11'-0" 	47'-0" 
45° 	12'-9" 	20'-0" 	13'-0" 	53'-8" 
60° 	10'-5" 	21'-0" 	18'-0" 	60'-0" 
90° 	9'-0" 	20'-0" 	25'-0" 	65'-0" 
 
For parallel parking, the dimensions of the parking stall shall be not less than ten feet in width and 23 feet in depth. 
Where two-way traffic is desired, the aisle width shall be a minimum of 25 feet. 
The location of bumpers or wheel stops shall depend on the angle of parking, ranging from at least two feet from the property line for 90-degree parking to one foot from the property line for 30-degree parking. 
  
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-366. - Loading. 
(a)  Every hospital, institution, hotel, commercial, or industrial building shall have and maintain off-street loading spaces in addition to required off-street parking requirements as follows: 
TABLE III-9. LOADING REQUIREMENTS BY LAND USE AND BUILDING SIZE 
Type A loading spaces shall be not less than 20 feet in length and 12 feet in width, with 14 feet of vertical clearance. 
Type B loading spaces shall be not less than 40 feet in length and 12 feet in width, with 14 feet of vertical clearance. 
 
Total Gross Floor Area (Square Feet) 	Loading Spaces Required 
Commercial Buildings 
3,000 to 15,000 	One Type A 
15,001 to 50,000 	Two Type A 
50,001 and over 	Three Type A 
Hospitals and Institutions 
3,000 to 20,000 	One Type A 
20,001 to 50,000 	Two Type A 
50,001 to 80,000 	Three Type A 
80,001 to 110,000 	Four Type A 
110,001 and over 	Five Type A 
Hotels and Office Buildings 
3,500 to 50,000 	One Type A 
50,001 to 100,000 	Two Type A 
100,001 and over 	Three Type A 
Industrial Buildings 
3,000 to 15,000 	One Type B 
15,001 to 50,000 	Two Type B 
50,001 and over 	Three Type B 
 
(b)  Loading areas shall be clearly marked with striping and lettering to indicate that such areas are for loading purposes only. Parking and circulation areas shall not be used for loading purposes. 
(c)  Loading areas may be used for truck parking when the associated facility is closed. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-367—44-390. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - SIGNS AND SIGNBOARDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of City Council to regulate outdoor advertising, Government Code § 38774. 
 
Sec. 44-391. - Purpose. 
This division is intended to guarantee the rights of persons to use their properties for private gain under reasonable limits, while also protecting the public interest as it relates to signs. Installation or continued use of signs that unduly distract the attention of motorists from driving, create traffic hazards, constitute a danger to vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or constitute an obstacle to effective fire and police protection are prohibited. Recognizing the rights of businesses and the importance of proper design, placement, and maintenance of signs to the appearance of the community, it is the intent of these sections to ensure that: 
(1)  Sign design. Signs shall be designed, erected, and maintained in a manner that enhances the appearance of the community. 
(2)  Sign maintenance. Signs erected within the City shall be properly maintained and kept in an attractive and clean condition. 
(3)  Sign removal. Failure to properly maintain a sign shall be reason for the City to revoke the permit and cause the sign to be removed. Cost of such removal shall be charged against the owner of the property upon which the sign is located. (See Section 44-638.) 
(4)  Sign materials. Signs must be made of a durable material. With the exception of political signs, cardboard or paper signs shall not be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-392. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Billboard. Shall mean an advertising sign structure which advertises goods, products, services or facilities that are not, or only incidentally, sold, produced, manufactured or furnished on the premises on which the sign structure is located (also known as outdoor advertising, off-premises sign or off-site sign). 
Digital display billboard. A billboard with an electronic "message center" advertising display that is located at the top of a monopole structure where the message is changed more than once every two minutes, but no more than once every six seconds. 
Official sign. A sign installed by governmental jurisdiction when acting in its governmental capacity. 
Pole sign. A sign located at the top of a monopole structure or pylon that promotes or advertises a business, goods, products, services and/or facilities sold, produced, manufactured or furnished on the premises on which the sign structure is located. Pole signs may not use a digital display. 
Sign. Any medium of visual communication, including copy, structure, component parts, and humans which is used or intended to be used to attract attention to and identify an establishment, product, service, activity, location, or to provide information. 
Signboard. A pole sign or digital display billboard oriented toward motorists on SR 91 Freeway within the FO District. 
Temporary sign. A sign not permanently attached to the ground, a wall or a building, and not designed or intended for permanent display. 
Traffic safety triangle. A triangular shaped area on a corner parcel as defined in Section 44-276. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-393. - Sign permits. 
(a)  Required. A sign permit is required for all signs, unless specifically exempted under Section 44-396. 
(b)  Application. An application for a sign permit shall be made to the Community Development Department upon a form provided by the Community Development Director in conformance with Section 44-876. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-394. - Temporary sign permit. 
(a)  Required. Unless specifically exempted under Section 44-396, a permit shall be obtained from the Community Development Director for temporary signs, subject to the limitations provided in this section. 
(b)  Approval authority. The Community Development Director shall examine and approve each temporary sign for which a permit is required as to materials, method of construction, attachment, and location, before it may be placed or erected within the City subject to the following standards: 
(1)  Duration. Temporary signs (including banners and flags) may be displayed for a total of 63 days within a calendar year. The period of display shall not exceed 21 consecutive days with a minimum of 30 days between display periods. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following exceptions shall apply: 
a.  "Grand opening" temporary signs for new business may be displayed for up to 30 consecutive days provided that the period of display shall count toward the maximum number of days permitted by this subsection. 
b.  Non-commercial temporary signs may be displayed consecutively for the full number of days in a calendar year permitted by this subsection provided that the period of display shall count toward the maximum number of days permitted by this subsection. 
(2)  Size. Temporary sign size shall not be greater than the size permitted for permanent building-mounted signage contained in Table III — 10. 
(3)  Location. The location of temporary signs shall be the same general area as permitted for permanent signs. Temporary signs over three feet high shall not be located within the traffic safety triangle. 
(c)  Temporary balloon signs. The Community Development Director shall examine and approve each temporary balloon sign both as to materials and location, before it may be placed or erected within the City. Temporary balloon signs may be displayed for a total of ten days within a calendar year. The period of display shall not exceed five consecutive days, with a minimum of 30 days between display periods. 
(d)  Nonresidential real estate signs. 
(1)  Commercial and office/professional. For commercial, office, and professional buildings, there shall be a limit of one sign per street frontage not to exceed 24 square feet, to be removed within 30 days after the property is no longer available for sale, lease, or rent. 
(2)  Industrial. For industrial buildings, there shall be a limit of one sign per street frontage not to exceed 32 square feet, to be removed within 30 days after the property is no longer available for sale, lease, or rent. 
(3)  Unimproved parcels. For unimproved nonresidential parcels, there shall be a limit of one sign per street frontage not greater than 32 square feet per acre, with a maximum of 200 square feet, to be removed within 30 days after the property is no longer available for sale, lease, or rent. 
(4)  Signs within public right-of-way. No sign advertising nonresidential real property, either improved or unimproved, for sale, lease, or rent shall be allowed within the public right-of-way. 
(5)  General standards for nonresidential real estate signs. Freestanding real estate signs shall be mounted on sturdy wood or metal stakes. Cardboard or paper signs shall not be allowed. All real estate signs shall include the name of the owner of the sign and the owner's address and telephone number. Signs shall be posted so as not to obstruct the public right-of-way or to constitute a hazard to public safety. 
(e)  Future development signs. Signs advertising future development on a site shall be limited to one sign per street frontage, not greater than 32 square feet in area and ten feet in height, to be placed a minimum of 20 feet from any property line. 
(f)  Construction signs. Signs posted on construction sites of new residential or commercial buildings providing the names of the building contractor, architect, or engineer working on the site shall be limited to one sign per development. Maximum sign area shall be 32 square feet and maximum sign height shall be eight feet, to be placed a minimum of ten feet from any property line. The sign shall be removed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(g)  Minor residential projects. One construction sign for minor projects (remodeling, swimming pools) on residential sites shall be allowed provided the sign does not exceed five square feet in area and is placed a minimum of five feet from the property line. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-395. - Master sign plan. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of a master sign plan is to integrate a project's signs with the structure's design into a unified architectural statement of high quality. It is expected that the design quality of signs proposed under a master sign plan will be of a superior quality and creativity as those that might result through the normal sign permit process. 
(b)  Applicability. The approval of a master sign plan in accordance with Article V, Division 7 shall be required whenever any of the following circumstances exist: 
(1)  Whenever three or more separate nonresidential tenant spaces are created on the same parcel. 
(2)  Whenever three or more non-exempt signs are proposed for a single use. 
(3)  Whenever a pole sign is proposed on a parcel in the Freeway Overlay District. 
(4)  Whenever the Community Development Director or the Development Committee determines that a Master Sign Plan is needed because of special project characteristics (e.g., the size of proposed signs, limited site visibility, a business within a business, or the location of the site relative to major transportation routes). 
(c)  Modification of regulations. A variance pursuant to Article V, Division 11 shall be obtained for any deviations from the regulations of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-396. - Exemptions from sign permits. 
Sign permits shall not be required for the signs listed in this section. Exempt signs shall not be included in the determination of the total allowable number of signs or total allowable sign area for a site or use. Exempt signs shall be required to follow the applicable regulations provided below. 
(1)  Political signs. Noncommercial signs related to a campaign issue, ballot measure, or candidate in a municipal, state, or federal election, or a municipal, county, state, or federal political issue shall be allowed in any zoning district subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Removal. Political or voting signs shall be removed not later than ten days following the date of the election. 
b.  California Elections Code. All signs posted under this section shall comply with all applicable provisions of the California Elections Code (Elections Code § 1 et seq.), including, the identification and address of the persons or organizations responsible for the signs. 
c.  Authority to remove. The City shall have the authority to remove signs placed contrary to the provisions of this division. 
d.  Location. Signs shall not be permitted in the public right-of-way. 
e.  Size. Election and voting signs shall not exceed 12 square feet. 
(2)  Residential real estate signs. Real estate signs offering property for sale, lease, or rent are allowed on private property in any residential zoning district subject to the owner's permission and the following limitations: 
a.  A maximum of one real estate sign not greater than six square feet for single family uses and 12 square feet for multi-family, to be removed within 30 days after the property is no longer available for sale, lease, or rent. 
b.  Open house directional signs. Temporary and portable real estate signs promoting the viewing of real property for sale as open house are permitted only during periods when either the property owner or sales agent is present and are subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Size and height. The maximum size shall not exceed five square feet and the maximum height shall not be more than three feet above grade. 
2.  Identification. The owner of the sign(s) shall affix its name and telephone number to the sign prior to placement of the sign. 
3.  Location. Signs may be placed on private property with the consent of the owner or within the public right-of-way subject to the following: 
(i)  Placement shall be prohibited on all median strips, center dividers, roadway islands or safety zones; and, 
(ii)  Placement cannot reduce in size, or interfere with, the required disabled access path of travel or impede pedestrian, bicycle, or vehicular travel; and, 
(iii)  The sign shall not be affixed to traffic control devices, government signs, light standards, utility poles, bus shelters, or other structures, posts, fences, shrubs or trees; and, 
(iv)  On days weather forecasts predict winds of 15 miles per hour or greater, freestanding signs shall be anchored with appropriate weight to prevent dislodging of signs placement. 
4.  Time period. Open house signs may be displayed during the hours of 11:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on Saturdays and Sundays, and during the hours of 8:30 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. on Wednesdays. 
5.  Number. The total number of open house directional signs per owner or its agent pursuant to this section shall not exceed one per change in direction from the nearest major arterial to the property for sale. 
(3)  Garage sale signs. Garage sale signs may be placed within the public right-of-way during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on Saturdays and Sundays, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Size and height. The maximum size shall not exceed five square feet and the maximum height shall not be more than three feet above grade. 
b.  Identification. The owner of the sign(s) shall affix its name and telephone number to the sign prior to placement of the sign. 
c.  Location. Signs may be placed on private property with the consent of the owner or within the public right-of-way subject to the following: 
1.  Placement shall be prohibited on all median strips, center dividers, roadway islands or safety zones; and, 
2.  Placement cannot reduce in size, or interfere with, the required disabled access path of travel or impede pedestrian, bicycle, or vehicular travel; and, 
3.  The sign shall not be affixed to traffic control devices, government signs, light standards, utility poles, bus shelters, or other structures, posts, fences, shrubs or trees; and, 
4.  On days weather forecasts predict winds of 15 miles per hour or greater, signs shall be anchored with appropriate weight to prevent dislodging of signs placement. 
d.  Removal. Garage sales signs shall be removed no later than 24 hours after event. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-397. - Prohibited signs. 
The following signs are inconsistent with the purposes and standards of this division and are prohibited in all zoning districts: 
(1)  Signs erected or maintained without the consent of the owner of the land upon which the sign is located. 
(2)  Tract directional signs that advertise property developed outside of the City. 
(3)  Signs placed, attached, or hung from any vehicle to advertise goods or services, except signs on common carriers or names, trademarks, and addresses permanently placed on business vehicles. 
(4)  Abandoned signs that advertise goods or services that have not been available for a period of 60 days or more. 
(5)  Permanent signs not made of durable materials or not appropriately constructed, such as the following: 
a.  Signs made of cloth, paper, or plywood. 
b.  Sandwich, A-frame, freestanding, or movable signs. 
c.  Signs placed on the ground or propped against a vehicle or object in the public right-of-way or in a parking lot. 
d.  Signs attached to light standards, trees, and similar items. 
e.  Signs painted directly on a wall of a building or structure. 
(6)  Signs covering more than ten percent of a window area of a commercial business. 
(7)  Permanent signs identifying or advertising for a business, whether on-site or off-site, located on real property in a residential zone. 
(8)  Projecting signs, roof signs, electronic signs, and animated signs. Electronic signs are conditionally permitted in the public/institutional zone only and digital display billboards and pole signs are permitted in the Freeway Overlay District as specified in this division. 
(9)  Subdivision or tract directional signs within 500 feet of the following: Valley View Street, Walker Street, Moody Street, Orangethorpe Avenue, La Palma Avenue, Crescent Avenue, or the SR 91 freeway. 
(10)  Signs that may obstruct fire escapes or stairways or interfere in any way with public or private safety enforcement. 
(11)  Signs related to outdoor merchandising or display unless explicitly approved by an outdoor display and incidental seating permit. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-398. - Sign standards. 
The sign standards provided in Table III-10 are intended to apply to signs in all zoning districts, unless otherwise approved pursuant to a master sign plan in accordance with Section 44-39. Only signs authorized by this section shall be allowed unless otherwise expressly provided in this chapter or by an approved master sign plan. Refer to the regulations for specific types of signs (e.g., monument and wall) that follow Table III-10. 
TABLE III-10: SIGN STANDARDS 
Use 	Sign Type 	Maximum Number 	Maximum Sign Area 	Maximum Height 	Remarks 
Neighborhood Commercial 	Wall or Marquee 	One sign per street frontage 	0.5 sq. ft. per lineal foot of building frontage 	Not above the parapet on a flat roof or the eave on a pitched roof. 	No building shall be given credit for more than two street frontages. 
	Window 	One per window 	Not to exceed 10% of window area 		
	Monument 	One per project 	0.5 sq. ft. per lineal foot of building frontage Max. 100 sq. ft. per face 	8 ft. 	Sign shall be a minimum of 30 ft. from a side property line and shall not obstruct visibility of motorists or pedestrians. Shopping Centers with two street frontages can have two signs as approved in a Precise Plan or Precise Plan Amendment. 
	On-site Directional 	As needed for traffic safety 	8 sq. ft. total all signs 	3 ft. 	Sign shall not contain business or product names or advertisements. Logos are permitted. 
	Flag Pole 	Four per project 	Not applicable 	Shall not exceed either the height of the building or 35 ft. 	Shall not be in "safety triangle area" and shall be at least 15 feet from property line. 
Planned Neighborhood Development 	Wall or Marquee 	As required by Master Sign Plan (Section 44-395) 
	Window 	As required by Master Sign Plan (Section 44-395) 
	Monument 	As required by Master Sign Plan (Section 44-395) 
	On-site Directional 	As required by Master Sign Plan (Section 44-395) 
	Flag Pole 	As required by Master Sign Plan (Section 44-395) 
Office Professional 	Wall 	One per street frontage 	0.5 sq. ft. per lineal foot of building frontage Max. 75 sq. ft. 	Not above the parapet on a flat roof or the eave on a pitched roof. 	Sign text shall give the building/business name and address only. Logos are permitted. 
	Window 	One per window 	Not to exceed 10% of aggregate window area 		
	Monument 	One per project 	Max. 75 sq. ft. 	8 ft. 	Sign text shall give the building name and address only. Logos are permitted. 
	Office Directory 	Two signs subject to approval of a Master Sign Plan 	Max. 100 sq. ft. or 50 sq. ft. per face 	8 ft. 	Each name panel within the directory sign shall not exceed 15 sq. ft. Location shall not be within the front setback area. 
	Flag Pole 	Four per project 	Not Applicable 	Shall not exceed either the height of the building or 35 ft. 	Shall not be in "safety triangle area" and shall be at least 15 feet from property line. 
Public or Institutional 	Wall 	One per street frontage 	0.5 sq. ft. per lineal foot of building frontage 	Not above the parapet on a flat roof or the eave on a pitched roof. 	
	Monument 	One per project 	100 sq. ft. per face 	8 ft. 	Sign text shall give the building name and address only. Logos are permitted. Electronic monument signs shall not exceed 50% of the permitted sign area and shall require a conditional use permit and comply with the specific provisions under subsection (a)(7) of this section. 
	Flag Pole 	Four per project 	Not Applicable 	Shall not exceed either the height of the building or 35 ft. 	Shall not be in "safety triangle area" and shall be at least 15 feet from property line. 
General Industrial 	Wall or Marquee 	As required by Master Sign Plan (Section 44-395) 
	Window 	As required by Master Sign Plan (Section 44-395) 
	Monument 	As required by Master Sign Plan (Section 44-395) 
	On-site Directional 	As required by Master Sign Plan (Section 44-395) 
	Flag Pole 	As required by Master Sign Plan (Section 44-395) 
Multi-Use Business 	Wall or Marquee 	As required by Master Sign Plan (Section 44-395) 
	Window 	As required by Master Sign Plan (Section 44-395) 
	Monument 	As required by Master Sign Plan (Section 44-395) 
	On-site Directional 	As required by Master Sign Plan (Section 44-395) 
	Flag Pole 	As required by Master Sign Plan (Section 44-395) 
Freeway Overlay 	Pole Sign (single or double faced) 	One per freeway adjacent parcel occupied by a commercial retail establishment 	160 square feet per face 	Maximum 18 feet above adjacent finished grade of the SR 91 Freeway to bottom of sign face 	As required by Master Sign Program (Sec 44-395). 
	Billboard Sign (single or double faced) 	One per 2,500 lineal feet on each side of SR 91 Freeway 	1,200 square feet per face 	Maximum 55 feet above adjacent finished grade of the SR 91 Freeway to bottom of Digital Display Billboard 	Sign shall require approval of a Precise Plan (Section 44-138); a conditional use permit (Section 44-848); a development agreement (or other similar type of agreement with the City), and shall be consistent with Chapter 44 Sections 399 through 402. 
Service Station 	As required by Master Sign Plan (Section 44-395) 
Multifamily Residential 	Monument 	One per project 	32 sq. ft. per frontage 	6 ft. 	Sign text shall give the name of the development and address only. Logos are permitted. 
	Flag Pole 	Three per project 	Not Applicable 	Shall not exceed either the height of the building or 20 ft. 	Shall not be in "safety triangle area" and shall be at least 15 feet from property line. 
Single Family Residential 	Flag Pole 	One 	Not Applicable 	20 ft. 	Must be at least 15 feet from right-of-way. 
 
(1)  Monument signs. 
a.  Monument signs are allowed only for frontages adjoining a public street and shall be located in compliance with the traffic safety triangle requirements of Section 44-276. 
  
b.  Monument signs shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the edge of a driveway. 
c.  There shall be a minimum ten feet between a monument sign and any other structure that exceeds ten feet in height. 
d.  Landscaping shall be provided at the base of the supporting structure equal to twice the area of one face of the sign or 75 square feet, whichever is greater. For example, 40 square feet of sign area equals 80 square feet of landscaped area. 
e.  Signs shall contain an address plate identifying the project or use by specific street address or range of addresses. Numbers shall be a minimum of six inches in height and shall be clearly visible from the adjacent street. Address plates shall not be calculated against the allowed sign area. 
f.  The height of monument signs shall be measured from the nearest sidewalk grade. 
g.  Electronic monument signs in the public/institutional zoning district shall also comply with the following: 
1.  Sign shall not contain content that creates a distraction or confusion to vehicular traffic, with such words as "stop," "go," "look," "danger," etc. 
2.  Message content shall not blink, flash, or continuously scroll. 
(2)  Wall signs. 
a.  Signs shall be located only on a building frontage and shall not extend above an eave or parapet or above or below a fascia on which they are located, unless approved by a precise plan, conditional use permit or master sign plan. 
b.  Can or cabinet signs are not allowed. Signs shall use channel letters or have the appearance of channel letters. 
c.  Signs shall be placed flat against the wall and shall not project from the wall more than required for normal construction purposes and in no case more than 12 inches. The Director of Community Development may waive this requirement in special circumstances when an especially creative and unique sign design is proposed. 
d.  Signs shall not be placed to obstruct any portion of a window. 
(3)  Window signs, permanent, and temporary. 
a.  Signs on the inside of the building that are located within five feet of a window and can be seen from the exterior of the building shall be considered a window sign. 
b.  Window signs shall be counted in the aggregate sign area allowed for wall signs. 
(4)  Service station signs. In addition to all other provisions of this division, the following regulations shall be applicable to service stations. 
a.  A Master Sign Plan shall be approved in conjunction with the application for a sign permit to erect, move, alter, or reconstruct any service station sign. 
b.  One monument sign, not to exceed 100 square feet for each sign face, and six feet in height shall be allowed. 
c.  The total area of all building-mounted signs (including canopy signs) shall not exceed one-half square foot of sign area for each linear foot of street frontage. Corner lots are permitted two street frontages to determine maximum allowable sign area. 
(5)  Directional signs. 
a.  On-site directional signs are intended to aid vehicle and pedestrian traffic to maneuver safely onto and within the site. Copy shall relate only to the provision of directions for motorists and pedestrians. 
b.  Directional signs shall not exceed two square feet in area and three feet in height. 
(6)  Flags. 
a.  A building permit must be obtained prior to erecting a freestanding flagpole. 
b.  Flags shall be displayed only on flagpoles or staffs designed and constructed specifically and exclusively for flag display. No flag shall be displayed or attached in any manner to light poles, sign poles, trees, or similar structures or objects. 
c.  Flagpoles shall not be closer than 15 feet from any property line. 
d.  The vertical length of a permitted flag on a flagpole shall not exceed 30 percent of the length of the pole upon which the flag is hung. For single-family residential use, the gross surface area of a flag shall not exceed 24 square feet. 
e.  No portion of a flag shall project over any property line or contact any other structure when fully extended. For the purposes of this section, a structure shall include trees, shrubs, and landscaping. 
f.  Flags shall not be mounted on roofs. Wall-mounted flags shall be displayed from flag poles not to exceed ten feet in length, and such poles shall not extend above the roof line. In a single-family residential zone, building-mounted flagpoles shall not exceed five feet in length. 
g.  Official flags should be displayed in accordance with the Flag Code, Title 36. U.S.C. Chapter 10, as amended by P.L. 344, 94th Congress, approved July 7, 1976, or as amended from time to time. 
h.  Flags shall be maintained in an orderly fashion and in good condition. Tattered or torn flags shall be removed or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-399. - Signboards, purpose. 
These regulations in this division concerning signboards are established to permit larger on-site and off-site signage on properties within the Freeway Overlay District (FO) in a manner that furthers the following: 
(1)  Promotion of the economic advantage of the SR 91 Freeway within the City while ensuring an attractive business climate for businesses and agencies along the SR 91 Freeway corridor; 
(2)  Protection of La Palma rights-of-way street views by strategically limiting pole and billboard signs to the parcels within the FO District; 
(3)  Limitation of visual clutter by providing regulations as to the number, size and location of signboards; 
(4)  Provision of clear development standards pursuant to which allowable signboards may be designed and installed within the FO District; 
(5)  Support of revenue generating commercial uses and activities that add economic benefit to the City and its residents without causing the City to incur municipal expenses that exceed the tax revenue attributable to those uses; 
(6)  Promotion of the public's health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-400. - Signboards, general provisions. 
The regulations applicable to the land use designations underlying the FO District shall apply to property within the FO District with the exception of the subject matters regulated in Sections 44-399 through 44-402, which shall be known as the La Palma Signboard Code. Signboards in the FO District shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Federal Highway Beautification Act of 1965, the California Outdoor Advertising Act, the California Vehicle Code, all other applicable laws and regulations, and all of the following: 
(1)  No signboard shall imitate or resemble any official traffic sign, signal, or device. 
(2)  No signboard shall obstruct or interfere with an official sign, as that term is defined in this chapter. 
(3)  No signboard shall be larger than 25 feet in height and 60 feet in width, excluding border, trip, and supports. 
(4)  Signboards shall not include flashing, intermittent lights, moving lights, and shall not emit light that could obstruct or impair the vision of a driver. 
(5)  Signboards shall not display any statements, words or depictions of an obscene, indecent, or immoral nature, as provided for in the California Business and Professions Code and the California Code of Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-401. - Application. 
Applications for new signboard permits in the FO District shall be filed in compliance with Article V, Division 6 (Sign Permits), and shall contain the additional information listed below, based on the type of signboard being requested. 
(1)  Applications for a pole sign shall include all of the following: 
a.  Lot survey with topographic data that extends to the centerline of the abutting SR 91 right-of-way. 
b.  View simulations of the area of the project site and surrounding area. 
c.  A vicinity map showing where in the FO District the project is located. Map must show the project is located in compliance with all applicable California Department of Transportation (CalTrans) regulations, the California Outdoor Advertising Act and the federal Highway Beautification Act if project is located within 660 feet of the SR 91 right-of-way. 
d.  A master sign plan package for all existing and proposed signage at the site. 
e.  Elevation drawings of the site that include any building(s) and proposed structures, with the lowest and highest points identified for height measurement purposes. 
f.  Title report for the parcel on which the pole sign is proposed to be erected. 
g.  Any other information reasonably requested by the Community Development Director. 
(2)  Applications for a digital billboard shall include all of the following: 
a.  Lot survey with topographic data that extends to the centerline of the abutting SR 91 right-of-way. 
b.  View simulations of the area of the project site and surrounding area. 
c.  A vicinity map showing where in the FO District the project is located. Map must show the project is located in compliance with all applicable CalTrans regulations, the California Outdoor Advertising Act and the federal Highway Beautification Act. Map must show the project is located within 660 feet of the SR 91 right-of-way. 
d.  Elevation drawings of the site that include any building(s) and proposed structures, with the following identified: 
1.  The lowest adjacent grade to the billboard support (datum point), 
2.  The finished grade elevation of the SR 91 right-of-way perpendicular to the billboard support, and 
3.  The elevation of the highest point of the billboard. 
e.  Luminance documentation demonstrating compliance with CalTrans luminance standards. 
f.  Title report for the parcel on which the billboard is proposed to be erected. 
g.  Any other information reasonably requested by the Community Development Director. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-402. - Regulations for signboards in the FO District. 
(a)  Pole signs. 
(1)  Pole signs shall only be allowed on parcels in the FO District occupied by a commercial retail establishment. 
(2)  The allowable sign area for the face of a pole sign shall be a maximum of 160 square foot for each sign face, with a total aggregate area not to exceed 320 square feet for each double-sided pole sign. 
(3)  No more than one pole sign per parcel in the FO District. 
(4)  Each pole sign shall utilize only one support post which shall be clad with an architectural finish. 
(b)  Billboard signs. Only digital display billboards are permitted in the FO District, subject to approval of a conditional use permit and development agreement (or other similar type of agreement with the City), and subject to the following standards: 
(1)  Quantity. The number of billboards located within the FO District shall not exceed a total of two, with a maximum of two faces per billboard. 
(2)  Spacing. No digital display billboard may be located within 2,500 feet of another digital display billboard on the same side of the SR 91 right-of-way. 
(3)  Height. The maximum height of each digital billboard shall be 55 feet above the adjacent pavement level of the SR 91 freeway to the bottom of the digital display. 
(4)  Size. The maximum size of each digital billboard face display area shall be 25 feet in height and 60 feet in width, with the area of each face not to exceed an overall maximum of 1,500 square feet, including border and trim. 
(5)  Location. 
a.  Digital display billboards may be free-standing or located on the wall or roof of another structure. 
b.  Digital display billboards shall not be erected on properties zoned as: 
R-1 — Single-family district residential, 
R-3 — Multiple family residential districts, 
VO — Village residential overlay district, or 
OS — Open-space/Recreation district. 
(6)  Design. 
a.  Each digital display billboard shall utilize only one support post which shall be clad with an architectural finish. 
b.  All digital display billboards shall either be double faced or include covered backs or facings. 
(7)  Brightness. Digital display billboards must comply with all applicable laws and regulations concerning brightness and illumination, including, without limitation, California Vehicle Code § 21466.5. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-403—44-422. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 44-423. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to: 
(1)  Meet the requirements of Orange County's Measure M Growth Management Program. 
(2)  Mitigate the impacts that development projects may have on transit mobility and air quality and to promote transportation demand management strategies that encourage employers to more efficiently utilize the existing and planned transportation system. 
(3)  Specify the responsibilities of public and private developers proposing nonresidential development within the City to consider transportation demand management strategies in conjunction with development application submittal and to incorporate design standards during project review that facilitate the reduction of single-occupant vehicle trips and support trip reduction activities of employers on the site. 
(4)  Support the development of physical facilities that would promote and encourage the use of alternative and energy-conserving transportation modes. 
(5)  Encourage the development of safe and secure transportation facilities at worksites. 
(6)  Achieve related reductions in vehicle trips, traffic congestion, and air pollution through utilization of existing local mechanisms and procedures for project review and permit processing. 
(7)  Promote coordinated implementation of transportation demand management strategies that may reduce transportation demand and achieve the most efficient use of local resources. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-424. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alternative transportation mode means any mode of travel that serves as an alternative to the single occupant vehicle. This can include all forms of ridesharing such as carpooling or vanpooling, as well as public transit, bicycling, or walking. 
Applicable project means a development project that is determined to meet or exceed a 100-employee threshold. 
Carpool means two to six persons traveling together in a single vehicle. 
Development project means a nonresidential project being processed by the City that requires discretionary action. 
Employee means a person employed by a firm, person, business, educational institution, non-profit agency or corporation, government agency, or other entity that collectively employs 100 or more persons at a single worksite. The term "employee" shall include persons employed on a full-time, part-time, or temporary basis. 
Employer means a person, firm, business, educational institution, government agency, non-profit agency or corporation, or other entity that employs or houses tenants and that collectively employs 100 or more employees at a single worksite within the City on a full-time, and/or part-time or temporary basis, and may either be a property owner or tenant of an applicable development project. 
Improvement plans means plans submitted to the City as part of an application for a building permit for a new or an enlarged or expanded existing nonresidential building or use, or change of use (as defined by the Uniform Building Code) of a nonresidential building. 
Minimum building size means the total gross floor area measured in square feet of a building or group of buildings at a common work location (includes the total floor area of both new and existing facilities). 
Mixed-use development means the development of a parcels or structures with two or more different land uses such as, a combination of residential, office, commercial retail, public, or entertainment in a single or physically integrated group of structures. 
Property owner means the legal owner of the applicable development project who serves as lessor to an employer or tenant. The property owner shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of this division either directly or by delegating such responsibility as appropriate to an employer or tenant. 
Tenant means the lessee of facility space at an applicable development project who may also serve as an employer. 
Transportation demand management (TDM) means the implementation of programs, plans, or policies designed to encourage changes in individual travel behavior. TDM can include an emphasis on: 
(1)  Alternative travel modes to the single occupant vehicle such as carpools, vanpools, and transit; 
(2)  Reduction or elimination of the number of vehicle trips; or 
(3)  Shifts in the time of vehicle commutes to other than the peak period. 
Trip reduction means a reduction in the number of work-related trips taken during peak period hours in single occupant vehicles. 
Vanpool means a van or similar vehicle occupied by seven or more persons traveling together. 
Worksite means a building or group of buildings that is in actual physical contact or separated solely by a private or public roadway or other private or public right-of-way, owned or operated by the same employer (or by employers under common control), and includes the place of employment, base of operation, or predominate location of an employee. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-425. - Applicability to development projects; exemptions. 
(a)  Applicability. The provisions of this division shall apply to all development projects as follows: 
(1)  New commercial, office/professional, business park/industrial, mixed-use, institutional, or other nonresidential use or combination thereof, at a worksite that is expected to employ 100 or more persons, as determined by employee projections or by employee generation factors established by the City. 
(2)  An existing or approved facility or development for which the property owner/tenant submits subsequent discretionary application to change the proposed use, project design, or development intensity, and which will employ 100 or more persons as determined as stated in subsection (a)(1). 
(b)  Exemptions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the following uses and activities shall be specifically exempt from the provisions of this division: 
(1)  Development projects expected to employ fewer than 100 persons. 
(2)  Temporary construction activities on any affected project, including activities performed by engineers, architects, contract subcontractors, and construction workers. 
(3)  Other temporary activities, authorized by the City, when such temporary activities shall discontinue at the end of the designated time period. 
(c)  Applicable development size. For purposes of determining whether an applicable development project, as set forth in this section, is subject to this division, either of the following options shall apply: 
(1)  Employment projections developed by the project applicant, subject to approval by the Community Development Director. 
(2)  The following minimum building sizes that shall be considered equivalent to the 100-employee threshold: 
TABLE III-11. MINIMUM BUILDING SIZE EQUIVALENT TO 100 EMPLOYEES 
Type of use 	Minimum building size equivalent to 100 employees 
Office/professional 	35,000 gross leasable square feet 
Hospital and medical/dental 	40,000 gross leasable square feet 
Industrial (excluding warehouses) 	50,000 gross leasable square feet 
Commercial 	50,000 gross leasable square feet 
Hotel/motel 	125 hotel rooms 
Resort hotel 	84 hotel rooms 
Warehouse 	100,000 gross leasable square feet 
Mixed or multiple use 	The employment projection for a development of mixed or multiple uses shall be calculated on a case-by-case basis upon the proportion of development devoted to each type of use. 
 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-426. - TDM facility provisions. 
(a)  Development projects subject to the provisions of this division shall, during project review and City action, incorporate consideration of TDM facility design opportunities, which shall be identified on project plans. 
(b)  It is the intent of this section to provide a menu of mandatory and optional facility standards that can be incorporated into project design to encourage increased ridesharing and alternative transportation modes. In conjunction with project action by the project approval body, the approval body shall identify TDM facility standards that shall be applied to project design as conditions of approval, based upon review of the proposed use, project design characteristics, and other project considerations. 
(c)  Nothing in this division shall prevent a project applicant from incorporating additional TDM facility strategies into the project proposal to encourage and facilitate TDM opportunities or related air quality requirements. 
(1)  Carpool/vanpool parking. 
a.  A percentage of parking spaces, located as close as is practical to the entrance of the use or at other preferential locations within the employee parking area, shall be reserved for use by carpool and vanpool vehicles, as determined by the approval body reviewing the development project. 
b.  These spaces shall be reserved and designated for carpool/vanpool parking by marking such spaces "carpool only." 
(2)  Bicycle parking. The site shall provide bicycle racks in a designated area for use by employees and tenants who commute to the site by bicycle. The bicycle parking area shall be established in a secure location and be in close proximity to employee entrances. 
(3)  Transit waiting shelters. Transit waiting shelters, including bus pullouts, bus pads and right-of-way for bus shelters, may be required by the City in consultation with the Orange County Transportation Authority for development projects located along high traffic volume streets and established or proposed bus routes. The applicability of this provision shall be determined in conformance with standard traffic engineering principals including, the frequency and relative impact of blocked traffic due to stopped buses and the level of transit ridership at the location. 
(4)  Pedestrian access. 
a.  Sidewalks and other paved pathways shall be provided onsite to connect off site pedestrian circulation systems (planned or existing) to the building site. 
b.  Sidewalk locations shall connect existing and planned transit waiting shelters with building entrances. 
(5)  Bicycle access. Implementation of the City's master plan of bike trails shall be integrated with project review to provide continuity and transition of bike trail access from the development site to existing and planned on-street and off-street bike trails. 
(6)  Joint access and shared parking. For multi-building developments designed as a "worksite" as defined in this division, provision of joint access and shared parking across multiple parcels shall be incorporated into project design to facilitate integration of TDM facility strategies. 
(7)  Additional TDM mechanisms. It is the intent of this subsection to identify additional TDM mechanisms that the project applicant may elect to consider with project design, taking into consideration project use, size, and building site layout: 
a.  A commuter information area, located within the central building, to provide employees with information on alternative transportation modes. This area shall be centrally located and accessible to all employees or tenants and shall be of sufficient size to provide and display information on alternative transportation modes, such as current maps, routes, and schedules for public transit. 
b.  Shower and locker facilities onsite for use by employees or tenants who commute to the site by bicycling or walking. 
c.  Rideshare vehicle passenger loading and unloading areas to provide employees who vanpool or carpool a location to embark and disembark from rideshare vehicles to and from the building site. The design and location of such loading areas shall consider onsite circulation characteristics, pedestrian access, and building site entrances to provide for employee access. 
d.  Onsite day care facilities. 
e.  Onsite lunch rooms/cafeterias. 
f.  Onsite commercial services such as banks, restaurants, and small retail uses. 
g.  Parking spaces designated for park-and-ride users. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-427. - Enforcement and appeals. 
Policies and procedures set forth in this division are enforceable under the provisions of Article IV, Division 6. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-428—44-452. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 44-453—44-474. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 44-460. - Applicability. 
This division shall apply to all areas identified as flood-prone within the jurisdiction of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 5, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-461. - Basis for establishing flood-prone areas. 
The Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood data available from other Federal or state agencies or other source to identify flood-prone areas within the jurisdiction of the City. This data will be on file with the Community Development Department, Planning Division, at La Palma City Hall. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 5, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-462. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the term of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the City from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 5, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-463. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This division is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this division, and an easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 5, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-464. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this division, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the City; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 5, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-465. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this division is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This division does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This division shall not create liability on the part of the City, any officer or employee thereof, the State of California, or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this division or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 5, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-466. - Precise plan required. 
A precise plan or precise plan amendment shall be obtained for all proposed construction or other development in the City, including the placement of manufactured homes, so that it may be determined whether such construction or other development is within a flood-prone area. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 5, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-467. - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
The Community Development Director is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this division by processing precise plan permits for development in accord with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 5, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-468. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Permit review. Review all development permit applications to determine whether: 
a.  Permit requirements of this division have been satisfied; 
b.  All other required state and federal permits have been obtained; and 
c.  The site is reasonably safe from flooding. 
(2)  Review and use of any other base flood data. The Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood data available from other Federal or state agency or other source. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 5, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-469. - Standards of construction. 
If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new construction and substantial improvements, including manufactured homes, shall: 
(1)  Be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
(2)  Be constructed: 
a.  With materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
b.  Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
c.  With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 5, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-470. - Standards for subdivisions or other new development. 
If a subdivision proposal or other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, is in a flood-prone area, any such proposals shall be reviewed to assure that: 
(1)  All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood prone area; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 5, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-471. - Standards for utilities. 
(a)  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate: 
(1)  Infiltration of flood waters into the systems, and 
(2)  Discharge from the systems into flood waters. 
(b)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 2016-01, § 5, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-472—44-474. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES  
DIVISION 1. - ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITY 
 
Sec. 44-475. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to describe the authority and responsibilities of the City staff and officials in the administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-476. - Planning agency defined. 
As provided by State law (Government Code § 65100), the City Council, Development Committee, and the Community Development Director shall perform the functions of the planning agency. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 18, 5-3-2016) 
State Law reference— Local planning agencies, Government Code § 65100 et seq.  
Sec. 44-477. - Review authorities. 
The following review authorities shall make decisions on the procedures authorized by this Development Code, and as identified in Table IV-1: 
(1)  City Council. 
(2)  Development Committee. 
(3)  Special Permit Committee. 
(4)  Special Permit Subcommittee. 
(5)  City Manager. 
(6)  Community Development Director. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 19, 5-3-2016)  
Sec. 44-478. - City council duties and authority. 
The City Council shall perform the duties and functions prescribed in this chapter, including reviewing, or making determinations on applications for development projects in compliance with Table IV-1. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-479. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-06, § 20, adopted May 3, 2016, repealed § 44-479 in its entirety. Former § 44-479 pertained to "Planning commission," and was derived from Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, adopted May 5, 2015.  
Sec. 44-480. - Development and circulation committee. 
The Development and Circulation Committee is an advisory committee consisting of citizens-at-large appointed by the City Council. It shall be the duty of the Development and Circulation Committee: 
(1)  To review proposed projects for consistency with the Circulation and Infrastructure Element of the General Plan; and 
(2)  To recommend to the City Council ways and means for improving transportation, transit, and circulation conditions and matters in Chapter 40 "Vehicles and Traffic"; and 
(3)  To advise the City Council on matters affecting the review, study, evaluation, design, and installation of traffic control devices in compliance with the Guidelines and Warrants of the CAMUTCD. 
(4)  To advise the City Council on matters affecting accessibility, parking, and transportation modes, including pedestrian, bicycle, and automobiles on all public rights-of-way and paths within the City limits; and 
(5)  To perform the duties and functions prescribed in Chapter 44, including reviewing, making recommendations, or making determinations on applications for development projects in compliance with Table IV-1; 
(6)  To advise the City Council and perform such advisory duties and functions relating to planning, land use, transportation and circulation issues as the City Council may direct; and 
(7)  The Development and Circulation Committee shall also serve as the board of appeals related to disputes concerning the building standards code. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 2017-01, § 4, 3-7-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-01, § 4, adopted March 7, 2017, amended § 44-480 to read as set out herein. Previously § 44-480 was titled "Development committee."  
Sec. 44-481. - Special permit committee. 
(a)  Membership. A representative of each City department shall comprise a Special Permit Committee to investigate, conduct meetings to issue certain special permits, and consider the revocation or extension of special permits. 
(b)  Duties and authority. The Special Permit Committee shall perform the duties and functions prescribed in this chapter, including making determinations on applications for special permits in compliance with Table IV-1. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-482. - Special permit subcommittee. 
(a)  Membership. The Special Permit Committee Subcommittee shall be composed of three members. The members shall include the City Manager, the Community Development Director, and a representative from the Police Department. 
(b)  Duties and authority. The Special Permit Subcommittee shall perform the duties and functions prescribed in this chapter, including making determinations on applications for special permits in compliance with Table IV-1. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-483. - City manager. 
The City Manager shall perform the duties and functions prescribed in this chapter, including reviewing, making recommendations, or making determinations on applications for development projects in compliance with Table IV-1. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-484. - Community development director. 
The Community Development Director shall perform the duties and functions prescribed in this chapter, including reviewing, making recommendations, or making determinations on applications for development projects in compliance with Table IV-1. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-485. - Authority for land use and zoning decisions. 
Table IV-1 identifies the City official or authority responsible for reviewing and making decisions on each type of application or land use entitlement required by this chapter. 
TABLE IV-1. REVIEW AUTHORITY 
Type of Entitlement 
or Decision 	Section of 
Development 
Code 	Community 
Development 
Director 	Development 
Committee 	City Council 	Special Permit 
Committee 
Artificial Turf Permit 	44-335 	Decision 	Appeal 	N/A 	N/A 
Conditional Use Permits 	44-849 	Recommend 	N/A 	Decision/ 
Appeal 	N/A 
Development Agreements 	N/A 	Recommend 	N/A 	Decision 	N/A 
Development Code Amendments 	44-666 	Recommend 	N/A 	Decision/ 
Appeal 	N/A 
General Plan Amendments 	44-666 	Recommend 	N/A 	Decision/ 
Appeal 	N/A 
Interpretations 	44-4 	Decision 	N/A 	Appeal 	N/A 
Outdoor Display and Seating Permit 	44-1137 	Decision 	Appeal 	Appeal 	N/A 
Precise Plan, Residential New 	44-784 	Recommend 	Recommend 	Decision/ 
Appeal 	N/A 
Amendment 	44-824 	Recommend 	Decision 	Appeal 	N/A 
Precise Plan, Nonresidential New 	44-784 	Recommend 	Recommend 	Decision/ 
Appeal 	N/A 
Amendment 	44-784 	Recommend 	Recommend 	Decision/ 
Appeal 	N/A 
Single-family 
Residential Remodels 	44-824 	Decision for 
Level A 
and B and 
Recommend for 
Level C 	Appeal for 
Level B 
Decision for 
Level C 	Appeal for 
Level C 	N/A 
Specific Plans 	44-1071 	Recommend 	Recommend 	Decision/ 
Appeal 	N/A 
Temporary Use Permits 	44-1006 	Decision 	N/A 	Appeal 	N/A 
Variances 	44-1038 	Recommend 	Recommend 	Decision/ 
Appeal 	N/A 
Minor Exceptions 	44-1038 	Decision 	Appeal 	N/A 	N/A 
Zoning Map Amendments 	44-666 	Recommend 	N/A 	Decision/ 
Appeal 	N/A 
Sign Permits and Master Sign Plan 	44-875 	Refer to 44-487 (Sign review authority) 
Reasonable Accommodation 	44-1157 	Decision 	N/A 	Appeal 	N/A 
 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 21, 5-3-2016)  
Sec. 44-486. - Special permit review authority. 
Table IV-2 identifies the City official or authority responsible for reviewing and making decisions on each type of special permit application as required by this chapter. 
TABLE IV-2. SPECIAL PERMIT REVIEW AUTHORITY 
Type of Special Permit 	Special Permit Committee 	Special Permit Subcommittee 	City Manager 	City Council 
Block Parties 	N/A 	N/A 	Decision 	Appeal 
Community Events 	Decision 	N/A 	N/A 	Appeal 
Filming 	Decision 	N/A 	N/A 	Appeal 
Special Business 	N/A 	Decision 	N/A 	Appeal 
 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-487. - Sign review authority. 
Table IV-3 identifies the City official or authority responsible for reviewing and making decisions on each type of sign application as required by this chapter. 
TABLE IV-3. SIGN REVIEW AUTHORITY 
Type of Sign 	Approval 	Appeal 
Building-Mounted 	Community Development Director 	Development Committee 
Monument (1) 	Development Committee 	City Council 
On-Site Directional 	Community Development Director 	Development Committee 
Window 	Community Development Director 	Development Committee 
Real Estate Sign—Residential 	Exempted 	Exempted 
Real Estate Sign—Nonresidential 	Community Development Director 	Development Committee 
Construction Sign 	Community Development Director 	Development Committee 
Flag Poles 	Community Development Director 	Development Committee 
Future Development Sign 	Community Development Director 	Development Committee 
Garage Sales 	Exempted 	Exempted 
Master Sign Plan 	Development Committee 	City Council 
Temporary Sign 	Community Development Director 	Development Committee 
 
* N/A—Not Applicable 
(1)  Electronic monument signs are allowed in the public/institutional zoning district subject to a conditional use permit. The bodies with decision making and appeal authority for a conditional use permit are identified in Table IV-1 in Section 44-485, and the decision making body will consider applications based upon recommendations of both the Community Development Director and the Development Committee. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 22, 5-3-2016)  
Sec. 44-488. - Public hearings required. 
(a)  The Development Committee and City Council, where identified as having review or appeal authority in Table IV-1, shall hold a public hearing prior to considering, reviewing, and/or taking action on any of the following entitlements: 
(1)  Conditional use permits. 
(2)  Precise plans and precise plan amendments. 
(3)  Variances. 
(4)  Specific plans. 
(b)  All public hearings shall comply with the notification and procedural requirements in Section 44-518. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 23, 5-3-2016)  
Sec. 44-489. - Specific plan initiation. 
Adoption of a new specific plan or an amendment to an existing specific plan may be initiated in the following manner: 
(1)  Council. The City Council may initiate the preparation of a specific plan. 
(2)  Property owner. The property owner or the authorized agent, or an affected party, may file an application for a specific plan. If the property for which a specific plan or specific plan amendment is proposed has more than one owner, all of the owners or their authorized agents shall join in filing the application. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-490—44-516. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - HEARINGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Public notice of public hearings for planning and zoning matters, Government Code §§ 65090, 65091; planning commission public hearing on proposed zoning ordinance or amendment to zoning ordinance, Government Code § 65854. 
 
Sec. 44-517. - Purpose. 
This division provides procedures for scheduling and conducting public hearings before the Development Committee and City Council. When a public hearing is required by this Development Code, public notice shall be given and the hearing shall be conducted in compliance with this division. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 24, 5-3-2016)  
Sec. 44-518. - Notice of public hearing. 
Notice of the time and place of public hearings shall be given in accordance with State law. 
(1)  Notice of a public hearing shall be posted at City hall, the public library, Community Center, and when applicable in front of the subject property. 
(2)  Additional requirements for drive-through facilities. In accordance with Government Code § 65090, whenever a local agency considers the adoption or amendment of policies or ordinances affecting drive-through facilities, the local agency shall incorporate, where necessary, notice procedures to the blind, aged, and disabled communities in order to facilitate their participation. Access restrictions to commercial establishments affecting the blind, aged, and disabled is a critical statewide problem. 
(3)  Additional requirements for subdivision approvals. In accordance with Government Code § 65091, any notice relating to an approval governed by the Subdivision Map Act, Government Code § 66410 et seq., or Article VI of this chapter shall also be given to any owner of a mineral right pertaining to the subject real property who has recorded a notice of intent to preserve the mineral right pursuant to Civil Code § 883.230. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-519. - Content of notice. 
Notices shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The required description of the property under consideration, which shall use either a street address, a legal description, or other method that substantially identifies the property. 
(2)  The purpose or nature of the application or public hearing. 
(3)  The time, place, and the review body for the public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-520. - Continuance. 
If for any reason the public hearing is to be continued beyond the day set, the public hearing may be continued; such continuance shall not be subject to the notice requirements set forth in Section 44-518. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-521. - Summary of testimony. 
A summary of all pertinent testimony offered at a public hearing and the names of persons testifying shall be condensed in writing and made a part of the permanent files of the case. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-522. - Notice of decision. 
Following the rendering of a decision on an application, a copy of the decision shall be mailed to the applicant and any other person who has made a written request for a copy of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-523—44-552. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - APPEALS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of local government to provide by ordinance procedures for appeals from zoning decisions, Government Code § 65903. 
 
Sec. 44-553. - Authority. 
Any decision made by an approval authority designated in Section 44-485, Table IV-1, Section 44-486, Table IV-2, or Section 44-487, Table IV-3 may be appealed pursuant to the procedures established in this division. The appeal authority shall be that person or body designated in the appropriate review authority table referenced herein. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-554. - Form and content. 
The appellant shall state in writing the specific reasons for the basis of the appeal. Only those items raised in the written appeal shall be considered by the appeal authority. Appeal applications shall include the required fee. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-555. - Status of original decision. 
From the time that the appeal is filed until such time that the appeal is decided upon by the appeal authority, the entire original decision shall be suspended and no action on the application or permit shall be taken by the applicant or the City until such time that the appeal is resolved. Once the appeal is resolved, all elements of the original decision, excluding those items raised in the appeal, shall be in effect. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-556. - Time period for appeal. 
The appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within 15 calendar days following the date of the decision by the appropriate review authority. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-557. - Progression of appeals. 
(a)  When more than one body is designated as having appeal authority in a subject review authority table, the appeal shall be presented to the bodies in the following order: 
(1)  Community Development Director. 
(2)  Development Committee. 
(3)  City Council. 
(b)  The appeal process may continue until the matter is resolved or is abandoned by the appellant or until all appeal options have been exhausted. Only those appeal bodies listed in a subject review authority table for a given action shall be included in the appeal progression for that action. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 25, 5-3-2016)  
Secs. 44-558—44-577. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - EXPIRATION AND EXTENSION 
 
Sec. 44-578. - Purpose. 
This division provides requirements for the implementation of the permits and entitlements specified by this chapter, including time limits and procedures for granting extensions of time. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-579. - Expiration of permit/entitlement. 
Unless otherwise specified, permits and entitlements not subject to the Subdivision Map Act shall comply with the following provisions: 
(1)  The applicant for a permit shall file a written acceptance of the terms and conditions imposed by the permit with the Community Development Director within 15 days of the issuance of the permit. 
(2)  The applicant must agree to indemnify the City for all costs, including any legal fees and court costs, which may result from a challenge to the issuance of the permit/entitlement. 
(3)  The permit/entitlement shall expire and be of no further force or effect if: 
a.  The permit is not established within 180 days of the permit's effective date or such other time period designated by the permit's approval, by State law or by this Code. 
b.  After establishment, the use or activity for which the permit was approved is discontinued or abandoned for a period of one year. 
(4)  If the application for the permit/entitlement also involves the approval of a tentative map, the date of construction shall be consistent with the tentative map and the permit/entitlement shall be exercised before the expiration of the companion tentative map. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-580. - Time extensions. 
An extension of a permit or entitlement shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Written request. The applicant shall file a written request for an extension of time prior to the expiration of the permit/entitlement, together with the filing fee required. 
(2)  Decision on request for extension. Upon showing good cause, the request for a time extension may be approved, approved with modifications, or disapproved by the original approval authority. This decision may be appealed to the City Council. 
(3)  Limits on extensions. The maximum number of years that a permit/entitlement may be extended may not exceed a total of three additional years beyond the expiration date of the original approval. Extensions shall be limited to one-year increments. 
(4)  Criteria for granting an extension. An extension of the approval of a permit/entitlement may be granted only if it is found that there have been no significant changes in the general plan, applicable specific plans, this chapter, this Code, or the character of the area surrounding the subject property that would cause the approved permit/entitlement to be injurious to the public convenience, health, safety, or general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-581—44-608. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - REVOCATION AND MODIFICATION 
 
Sec. 44-609. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide a process for revoking or modifying permits, in order to protect the public convenience, health, safety, and general welfare, as well as the rights to due process of permit holders within the City. In order to ensure the protection of the greater public interest and to enforce the provisions of this chapter, it may become necessary to revoke or modify a previously approved permit or entitlement. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-610. - Authority. 
The original approval body is authorized to revoke or modify a permit or the entitlement following a public hearing in compliance with Division 2 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-611. - Initiation. 
Revocation or modification of a permit may be initiated by a vote of the City Council, or the original approval authority based on reasonable evidence demonstrating one of the findings listed in Section 44-612. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-612. - Findings. 
A permit or entitlement may be revoked or modified if any one of the following findings of fact can be made: 
(1)  The use for which the approval was granted has been exercised so as to be detrimental to the public health or safety, or to constitute a nuisance. 
(2)  The approval was obtained by fraud. 
(3)  The use for which such approval is granted is not being exercised within the time specified. 
(4)  The use for which approval was granted has ceased to exist or has been suspended for one year or more. 
(5)  The permit as granted is being or recently has been exercised contrary to the terms and conditions of approval or in violation of a statute, ordinance, law, or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-613. - Actions. 
At the conclusion of the public hearing, the original approval body may revoke or modify the subject permit. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-614. - Appeal. 
The decision to revoke or modify a permit may be appealed to the City Council, subject to Division 3 of this article. The subsequent decision by the City Council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-615—44-631. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER 
 
Sec. 44-632. - Purpose. 
This division provides procedures to ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Enforcement of these provisions and any approvals granted by the City shall be diligently pursued in order to provide for effective administration, ensure compliance with any conditions of approval, promote the City's planning efforts, and protect the public convenience, health, safety, and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-633. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
The Community Development Director shall be responsible for monitoring and enforcing the conditions and standards imposed on all land use permits, entitlements, licenses, maps, and approvals granted by the City. The enforcement shall include the right to inspect properties and structures to ensure adequate compliance with the standards of this chapter. The Police Department, a peace officer, or code enforcement officials may issue citations to enforce this section. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-634. - Violations. 
(a)  Any use, structure, or property which is altered, enlarged, erected, established, maintained, moved, or operated, contrary to the provisions of this chapter and/or other related ordinances of the City, or any applicable condition of approval, is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and shall be subject to the remedies and penalties specified in this Code, including this division. The term "public nuisance" does not include legal nonconforming uses provided under Section 44-706. 
(b)  A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to enforcement under Article XI. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-635. - Remedies are cumulative. 
(a)  Cumulative, not exclusive. All remedies contained in this chapter for the handling of violations or enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and other related ordinances of the City shall be cumulative and not exclusive of any other applicable provisions of City, County, State, or federal law. 
(b)  Other remedies. If a person is found guilty and convicted of an infraction or misdemeanor for the violation of any provision of this Code, the conviction shall not prevent the City from pursuing any other available remedies to correct the violation. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-636. - Initial enforcement action. 
This section describes the procedures for initiating enforcement action in cases where it has been determined that property within the City is being used, maintained, or allowed to exist in violation of the provisions of this chapter or other related ordinances of the City. 
(1)  Notice to responsible parties. The City shall provide the record owner of the subject site and any person in possession or control of the site (referred to as the responsible party) with a written notice. The Community Development Director shall send a notice by either personal delivery or United States mail to the last known address of the responsible party, specifying the existence of the violation. The notice shall include the following information: 
a.  A description of the property by street address, parcel number, or other reference sufficient to identify the property. 
b.  A description of the violations that exist on the property. 
c.  Reference to the specific legal authority under which the enforcement action is being taken. 
d.  A time limit for correcting the violation, in compliance with subsection (2). 
e.  A statement outlining the penalties for violating the provisions of this Code. 
f.  A statement that the City intends to charge the property owner for all enforcement and administrative costs associated with the abatement of the violation, in compliance with Section 44-638 and/or initiate legal action as described in Section 44-637. 
g.  A statement that the property owner may request and be provided a meeting with City representatives to discuss possible methods and time limits for the correction of the violations. 
h.  Other information that the City deems pertinent to obtain compliance. 
(2)  Time limit for correction. 
a.  The specific time period for correcting the violations shall be determined by the Community Development Director and shall be based on the severity of its impact upon the community and surrounding properties and the amount of time and expense estimated to be necessary to correct the violation. 
b.  The written notice shall state that the violation shall be corrected within the specified number of days from the date of the notice to avoid further enforcement action by the City, unless the responsible party contacts the Community Development Director within the specified time to arrange for a longer period for correction. 
c.  The Community Development Director may approve a time extension where it is determined that the responsible party would likely correct the violation within a reasonable time. 
d.  If the Community Development Director determines that the violation constitutes a hazard to public health or safety, or if deemed appropriate, the Community Development Director may require immediate corrective action. 
(3)  Use of other enforcement procedures. The enforcement procedures of Section 44-637 may be employed by the Community Development Director after or instead of the provisions of this section where the Community Development Director determines that this section would be ineffective in securing the correction of the condition/violation within a designated/reasonable period of time. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-637. - Legal remedies. 
In order to enforce the regulations and standards of this chapter, the City may choose to undertake legal actions as prescribed in Section 2-350 through 2-352. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-638. - Recovery of costs. 
This section establishes procedures for the recovery of administrative costs (e.g., staff, legal, etc.), including staff time expended in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and other related ordinances of the City, in cases where no entitlements are required to correct a violation. The intent of this section is to recover City administrative and legal costs reasonably related to the required enforcement actions. 
(1)  Record of costs. 
a.  The Community Development Director shall maintain records of all administrative costs, incurred by responsible City departments, associated with the processing of violations and enforcement of the Code, and shall recover the costs from the property owner, in compliance with this section. 
b.  Staff time shall be calculated at an hourly rate as established and revised from time to time by resolution of the City Council. 
(2)  Summary of costs and notice. 
a.  At the conclusion of the case, the Community Development Director shall send a summary of costs associated with enforcement to the responsible party by United States mail. The summary shall include a notice, in a form approved by the City Attorney, advising the responsible party of their right to request a hearing on the charges for City cost recovery within ten days of the date of the notice, and that if no request for hearing is filed, the responsible party shall be liable for the charges. 
b.  In the event that no request for hearing is filed or, after a hearing, the responsible party shall be liable to the City in the amount stated in the summary or any lesser amount determined by the City Manager. 
(3)  Request for hearing on costs. A responsible party who receives a summary of the costs shall have the right to a hearing before the City Council on any objections to the charges. 
a.  A request for hearing shall be filed with the City within ten days following the date of mailing the summary of costs. 
b.  Within 30 days of the filing of the request, and on ten days' written notice to the responsible party, the City Council shall hold a hearing on the party's objections and determine their validity. 
c.  In determining the validity of the costs, the City Council shall consider whether total costs are reasonable and necessary in the circumstances of the case. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-639—44-664. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - AMENDMENTS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Procedure for amending a general plan, Government Code § 65350; procedure for amendment to zoning ordinance, Government Code § 65853. 
 
Sec. 44-665. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide procedures for the amendment of the general plan, the zoning map, and this chapter, whenever required by public convenience, health, safety, and general welfare. In addition, State law (Government Code § 65400 et seq.) requires that the general plan be periodically updated. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015) 
State Law reference— Duties of local planning agency to periodically update general plan, Government Code § 65400 et seq.  
Sec. 44-666. - Authority. 
Authority for the approval of amendments to the general plan, the zoning map, and this Development Code shall be vested in the City Council. The Community Development Director shall provide written recommendations to the City Council regarding the amendments. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 26, 5-3-2016)  
Sec. 44-667. - Hearing required. 
A public hearing in compliance with Division 2 of this article shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-668. - Amendments requiring general plan amendment. 
Amendments to zoning district designations or text of this chapter that are not consistent with the adopted general plan shall be accompanied by a general plan amendment application. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-669. - Method of adoption. 
(a)  General plan. Amendments to the general plan shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council. 
(b)  Zoning map and this chapter. Amendments to the zoning map or this chapter shall be adopted by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-670. - General plan consistency. 
The City Council may amend all or part of the general plan, or any element thereof. Zoning districts, specific plans, and other plans of the City that are applicable to the same area or matter affected by the general plan amendment shall be reviewed and amended concurrently as necessary to ensure consistency with the general plan. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-671. - City council action on amendments. 
Upon receipt of the Community Development Director's recommendation, the City Council shall approve, approve in modified form, or disapprove the proposed amendment based on the findings contained in section 44-672. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 27, 5-3-2016) 
State Law reference— Procedure for modification of proposal or amendment to zoning ordinance by legislative body not previously considered by the Planning Commission, Government Code § 65857.  
Sec. 44-672. - Findings for amendments. 
An amendment to the general plan, zoning map, or this chapter may be approved only if all the following findings can be made. It is the responsibility of the applicant to establish evidence in support of the required findings. 
(1)  Mandatory required findings for all amendments. The following shall be required for all amendments to the general plan, zoning map, and this chapter: 
a.  The proposed amendment is consistent with all of the applicable objectives, policies, general land uses, programs, and actions of all applicable elements in the general plan. 
b.  The proposed amendment shall not be detrimental to the public convenience, health, safety, or general welfare of the City. 
c.  The proposed amendment is in compliance with the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). 
(2)  Additional required finding for zoning map amendments. The site is physically suitable, including access, provision of utilities, compatibility with adjoining land uses, and absence of physical constraints, for the requested zoning designation and anticipated land use development. 
(3)  Additional required finding for this chapter amendments. The proposed amendment is internally consistent with other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-673. - Limits on general plan amendments. 
Except as otherwise provided in State law, no mandatory element of the general plan shall be amended more frequently than four times during a calendar year. Each amendment may include more than one change to the general plan. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-674—44-704. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - NONCONFORMING LOTS, BUILDINGS, AND USES 
 
Sec. 44-705. - Purpose. 
Within the zoning districts established by this chapter, there exist land uses, structures, and lots that were lawful and in compliance with existing standards at the time they were established, constructed, or formed, but that are now prohibited, regulated, or restricted differently under the requirements of this chapter. This division establishes uniform provisions for the regulation of these legal nonconforming land uses, structures, and lots. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-706. - Restrictions on nonconforming uses and structures. 
(a)  Nonconforming uses of land. A nonconforming use of land may be continued, transferred, or sold, provided that the use shall not be enlarged or intensified, nor be extended to occupy a greater area than it lawfully occupied before becoming a nonconforming use. 
(b)  Nonconforming structures. A nonconforming structure may undergo normal/necessary maintenance and repairs, provided no additions or structural alterations are made. The term "maintenance and repairs" as used in this section shall include roof repair and replacement, removal of a non-bearing wall, window replacement/repair, painting, garage door replacement, and other types of similar activities. 
(c)  Except for the activity described in subsection (b), an alteration and/or expansion of a nonconforming structure or use may only be undertaken if the alteration / expansion is performed in compliance with all applicable land use regulations and procedures in existence at the time of the alteration or expansion. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-707. - Loss of nonconforming status. 
(a)  Termination by discontinuance. If a nonconforming use of land or a nonconforming use of a conforming structure is discontinued for a period of at least 180 consecutive days or a total of 12 nonconsecutive months, rights to a legal nonconforming status shall be terminated, regardless of the owner's intention to abandon. 
(b)  Termination by destruction. 
(1)  If a nonconforming structure or a conforming structure used for a nonconforming use is damaged, destroyed, or demolished, the right to continue occupancy of the nonconforming structure or to continue the nonconforming use shall cease. 
(2)  If the cost of repairing or replacing the damaged portion of the structure does not exceed 50 percent of the current appraised value of the structure, as shown in the County Assessor's records or established by a State licensed appraiser, the structure may be restored and the use continued if the restoration is started within six months of the date of damage or destruction and is diligently pursued to completion. 
(c)  Residential unit exemptions. Nonconforming single-family and multiple-family residential dwelling units damaged or destroyed due to a catastrophic event, including damage by fire, may be reconstructed or replaced with a new structure using the same development standards applied to the damaged or destroyed structure and at the same densities that existed prior to the catastrophic event. The new construction shall comply with the current building and fire code requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-708—44-729. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PERMITS, PLANS AND CERTIFICATES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Applications for development projects, Government Code § 65943. 
 
Sec. 44-730. - Application required. 
Requests for permits, licenses, appeals, amendments, approvals, and other discretionary actions required or allowed by this chapter shall require that a City application form be filled out in its entirety and submitted to the Community Development Director. In addition, other materials, reports, dimensioned plans, or other information required to take an action on the application, as identified in this division and the application guidelines, shall be submitted with the application. The application guidelines, which include a list of required items for each type of application, are available as a handout in the Community Development Department. It is the responsibility of the applicant to ensure that all required information is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-731. - Completed application. 
A completed application shall consist of the following: 
(1)  The application form with all applicable information included on, or attached to, the form. 
(2)  Other information or forms required for implementation of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) (Public Resources Code § 21000 et seq.) in compliance with City and State guidelines for the implementation of CEQA. 
(3)  A statement indicating that the applicant is the owner of the property or is the legal representative of the property owner. 
(4)  Payment in full of the required fees and/or deposit for processing the application, in compliance with the City Council's fee resolution (application fees). 
(5)  Address and legal description of the property under consideration. 
(6)  Current title report for the property under consideration. 
(7)  Other information required by the Community Development Director. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-732. - Applicant notification. 
(a)  Notification to applicant. Within 30 days of the filing of the application, the applicant shall be informed by a letter, in compliance with State law (Government Code § 65943), either that the application is complete and has been accepted for processing or that the application is incomplete and that additional information, as specified in the letter, shall be provided. 
(b)  Additional information. The planning division may notify the applicant that additional information is required for the environmental review of the project in compliance with Section 44-736. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-733. - Application fees. 
The City Council shall establish by resolution, and from time to time amend by resolution, a schedule of fees and costs for applications for permits, licenses, appeals, amendments, and approvals required or allowed by this chapter in order to reimburse the City for all costs reasonably and necessarily incurred as the result of processing the application. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-734. - Concurrent applications. 
Where review authority rests with the Development Committee, and the review authority on one or more related cases being processed concurrently rests with the City Council, the review authority for all permits, licenses, and approvals shall rest with the City Council. The Development Committee's review shall be in the form of a written recommendation to the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 28, 5-3-2016)  
Sec. 44-735. - Conflicting permits. 
All departments, officials, and public employees vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses, when required by law or any of the provisions of this chapter, shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. No license or permit for uses, buildings, or purposes shall be issued when the same would be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter. Any license or permit, if issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, shall be null and void. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-736. - Environmental review. 
Permits, licenses, or approvals shall not be granted in compliance with this chapter before the completion and/or certification of applicable environmental documentation in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) (Public Resources Code § 21000 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-737—44-755. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE 
 
Sec. 44-756. - Applicability. 
To ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, a certificate of compliance shall be obtained from the Community Development Department before the following may occur: 
(1)  A building permit is issued. 
(2)  A change in use of improved or unimproved premises is made. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-757. - Procedure. 
(a)  Community Development Department's action. A certificate of compliance may be issued by the Community Development Department only after determining that the request complies with all of the applicable standards and provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Inspection. An application for a certificate of compliance may require that the Community Development Director performs an onsite inspection of the subject parcel before determining/verifying that the request complies with all of the applicable standards and provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-758—44-782. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PRECISE PLANS AND AMENDMENTS 
 
Sec. 44-783. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide a process for reviewing applications for any new construction or exterior revisions for existing approved precise plans. The precise plan application process allows for the review of the design of the development, an identification of potential impacts on the surrounding properties, and an assurance that the proposed project complies with the provisions of this Code and the general plan. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-784. - Authority. 
The approval authority designated in Section 44-485, Table IV-1 may grant approval of precise plans and amendments to precise plans. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-785. - Pre-application conference. 
Before submitting an application for a precise plan, the applicant or prospective developer is strongly encouraged to request a pre-application conference with the Community Development Department to obtain information and guidance before preparing plans, surveys, and other data. Coordination of the preparation of the environmental documentation should also be discussed. Neither the pre-application review nor the provision of available information and/or pertinent policies shall be construed as a recommendation for approval or disapproval of a future precise plan proposal. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-786. - Application. 
Applications for precise plans or amendments shall be filed in compliance with Division 1 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-787. - Findings. 
The review authority may approve a precise plan or an amendment to precise plan only if all of the following findings of fact can be made: 
(1)  The proposed use is allowed within the subject zoning district and complies with all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  The proposed use would be consistent with the objectives, policies, general land uses, and programs of the general plan and any applicable specific plan and is in compliance with all City, State, and federal laws and regulations. 
(3)  The approval of the precise plan or an amendment to precise plan for the proposed use is in compliance with the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) (Public Resources Code § 21000 et seq.). 
(4)  The location, size, design, and operating characteristics of the proposed use would be compatible with existing land uses within the general area in which the proposed use is to be located. 
(5)  The subject site is physically suitable for the type and density/intensity of the use being proposed. 
(6)  The proposed project will have no adverse effect on abutting or adjacent properties and is compatible with those properties. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-788. - Additional required findings for PND zoning district. 
In addition, in approving precise plans, conditional use permits or other development plan applications under the Planned Neighborhood Development (PND) zoning regulations, the review authority shall find all of the following: 
(1)  The precise plan, conditional use permit, and any development plan for the site are consistent with the general plan and objectives of this division; 
(2)  The proposed development will create an economically viable commercial environment of sustained desirability and stability, and it will complement and harmonize with the character of the surrounding neighborhood and community; 
(3)  The location, design, and proposed uses are compatible with the character of existing development in the vicinity and will be well integrated into its setting; 
(4)  The proposed rezoning will help enhance necessary sales tax revenues needed to support general fund City services; 
(5)  That provision is made for common area use and maintenance; and 
(6)  The proposed development integrates elements such as the location of structures, circulation pattern, parking, open space, utilities and other amenities, together with a program for provision, operation and maintenance of all areas, improvements, facilities and services provided for the common use. 
(7)  The proposed development is consistent with the adopted PND design guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-789. - Conditions. 
In approving a precise plan or an amendment to a precise plan, the review authority may impose specific development conditions relating to both on- and off-site improvements (e.g., dedications, easements, public improvements, etc.), as it finds are reasonable and necessary to ensure that the approval would be in compliance with the findings required by Section 44-787, and to carry out the purpose and requirements of the respective zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-790. - Change in ownership. 
A precise plan that is valid and in effect shall run with the land and continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the land or any lawfully existing structure on the land. The applicant shall indicate in writing agreement to the conditions of approval prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-791. - Revocation and modification. 
A precise plan may be revoked or modified in compliance with article IV, division 5 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-792. - Expiration of precise plan and amendments. 
A precise plan is subject to the expiration provisions in Article IV, Division 4. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-793—44-822. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - RESIDENTIAL REMODEL 
 
Sec. 44-823. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide a process for the review and approval of residential remodels, namely additions to single-family residences. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-824. - Authority. 
(a)  Procedure A, minor modifications to rear portion of the property. The approval authority designated in Section 44-485, Table IV-1, may grant approval of additions or modifications to single-family residences when the project meets the following conditions: 
(1)  The addition or modification shall be located in a rear or side yard and not readily visible from the street. 
(2)  The addition or modification shall match the existing structure in terms of roof slope, roof materials, roof design, eave dimensions, siding materials, color, and general design. 
(3)  The addition or modification shall be single-story. 
(4)  The addition or modification shall maintain a 15-foot rear yard setback, or a ten-foot rear yard setback provided the rear yard backs up to an arterial roadway, railroad right-of-way, Southern California Edison right-of-way, flood control channel, industrial zoned property, or commercial zoned property and maintain a minimum rear yard area of 1,000 square feet. The addition or modification shall comply with all other applicable setbacks and other Development Code requirements. 
(5)  The addition or modification does not include the construction of a balcony. 
(b)  Procedure B, minor modifications requiring neighborhood notification. The approval authority designated in Table IV-1 of Section 44-485 may approve a single-family residential remodel upon meeting the notification requirements set forth in this subsection. Adjacent neighbors affected by the addition or modification shall be notified of the proposed action and offered the opportunity to sign the plans in support of the addition or modification or offered a 15-day period to respond with any objections or concerns. Should the objections or concerns be unresolved, the matter shall be referred to the appeal body designated in Table IV-1 of Section 44-485 for determination after conducting a public hearing. No fee shall be required for the referral to the appeal body. If there are no unresolved objections, the approval authority designated in Table IV-1 of Section 44-485 may consider and approve the application for a residential room addition which complies with all of the following conditions: 
(1)  The project is a minor addition or modification to the front of the house. 
(2)  The addition or modification shall match the existing structure in terms of roof slope, roof materials, roof design, eave dimensions, siding materials, color, and general design. 
(3)  The addition or modification may be a single- or two-story room addition. 
(4)  The addition or modification shall maintain a 15-foot rear yard setback, or a ten-foot rear yard setback provided the rear yard backs up to an arterial roadway, railroad right-of-way, Southern California Edison right-of-way, flood control channel, industrial zoned property, or commercial zoned property and maintain a minimum rear yard area of 1,000 square feet. The addition or modification shall comply with all other applicable setbacks and other Development Code requirements. 
(5)  The addition or modification does not include the construction of a balcony. 
(c)  Procedure C, other residential remodels. A single-family residential remodel that does not comply with the conditions of a procedure A residential remodel or a procedure B residential remodel as provided in this section shall require an amendment to the precise plan. 
(d)  Discretionary authority. Notwithstanding the provisions identified in this section, the Community Development Director shall have the authority to request neighborhood notification or amendment to precise plan approval on projects that may meet the conditions established in this section, but which have certain unique characteristics that may require additional notification or review. In addition, the Development Committee shall have the authority to request City Council approval on projects that may have certain unique characteristics that may require additional review. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 29, 5-3-2016)  
Sec. 44-825. - Application. 
Applications for residential remodels shall be filed in compliance with Division 1 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-826. - Findings. 
The review authority may approve a residential remodel only if all of the following findings of fact can be made: 
(1)  The proposed use is allowed within the subject zoning district and complies with all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  The proposed use would be consistent with the objectives, policies, general land uses, and programs of the general plan and any applicable specific plan. 
(3)  The location, size, design, and operating characteristics of the proposed use would be compatible with existing land uses within the general area in which the proposed use is to be located. 
(4)  The subject site is physically suitable for the type and density/intensity of the use being proposed. 
(5)  The proposed project will have no adverse effect on abutting or adjacent properties and is compatible with those properties. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-827. - Expiration of a residential remodel approval. 
A residential remodel is subject to the expiration provisions in Article IV, Division 4. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-828—44-847. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS AND AMENDMENTS 
 
Sec. 44-848. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide a process for reviewing conditional use permit applications and amendments to existing permits, which are intended to allow the establishment of uses that are deemed to have special impact, uniqueness, or affect on the properties or neighborhood surrounding the subject site. The permit application process allows for the review of the location and potential impacts on the surrounding properties and community in order to ensure that the uses in each zoning district maintain the integrity of that district. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-849. - Authority. 
The approval authority designated in Section 44-485, Table IV-1 may grant approval of conditional use permits and amendments to conditional use permits. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-850. - Application. 
Applications for conditional use permits and amendments to conditional use permits shall be filed in compliance with Division 1 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-851. - Findings. 
Following a review of the application and a public hearing in compliance with Article IV, Division 2, the approval authority shall act to approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the conditional use permit or amendment. The approval authority may approve a conditional use permit only if all of the following findings of fact can be made: 
(1)  The proposed use is conditionally allowed within the subject zoning district, would not impair the integrity and character of the district, and complies with all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  The proposed use is consistent with the goals, policies, general land uses, and programs of the general plan, and any applicable specific plan and is in compliance with all City, State, and federal laws and regulations. 
(3)  The approval of the conditional use permit, or amendment, for the proposed use is in compliance with the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) (Public Resources Code § 21000 et seq.). 
(4)  The site is suitable for the type and intensity of use or development that is proposed. 
(5)  The proposed project will have no adverse effect on abutting or adjacent properties and is compatible with those properties. 
(6)  The proposed use will not be adverse to the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-852. - Conditions. 
In approving a conditional use permit or amendment, the approval authority may impose specific conditions concerning location, development, and operation relating to both on-site and off-site improvements (e.g., dedications, easements, public improvements, etc.), as it finds are reasonable and necessary to ensure that the use and development of the property conform with the site plan, architectural drawings, and statements submitted in support of the application. The approval authority may also make modifications to the proposed project that are deemed necessary to protect the public convenience, health, safety, and general welfare. In addition, conditions shall be imposed to ensure compliance with the objectives of the general plan, any applicable specific plans, this chapter, and the findings required by Section 44-851. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-853. - Revocation and modification. 
A conditional use permit may be revoked or modified in compliance with Article IV, Division 5. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-854. - Change in ownership. 
A conditional use permit that is valid and in effect shall run with the land and continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the land or any lawfully existing structure on the land. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-855. - Expiration of conditional use permit. 
A conditional use permit is subject to the expiration provisions in Article IV, Division 4. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-856—44-873. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - SIGN PERMITS 
 
Sec. 44-874. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide a process for the review and approval of signs. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-875. - Authority. 
The approval authority designated in Section 44-487, Table IV-3, the sign review authority, may grant approval of sign permits. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-876. - Applications for sign permits. 
Applications for sign permits shall be filed in compliance with Division 1 of this article. In addition, the sign permit application shall include three copies of: 
(1)  A site plan; 
(2)  Appropriate building elevations indicating the street frontage; 
(3)  Dimensions of the building; 
(4)  Photographs of the building and any freestanding signs; and 
(5)  Sign plans drawn to scale indicating the following: 
a.  Overall sign dimensions. 
b.  Sign location. 
c.  Letter colors. 
d.  Background colors. 
e.  Trim cap color. 
f.  Letter styles. 
g.  Method of illumination. 
h.  Method of attachment 
i.  Typical cross section. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-877. - Expiration of a sign permit. 
Sign permits are subject to the expiration provisions in Article IV, Division 4. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-878. - Modification of sign permits. 
A sign permit may be revoked or modified in compliance with Article IV, Division 5. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-879—44-904. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - MASTER SIGN PLANS 
 
Sec. 44-905. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide a process for the review and approval of master sign plans. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-906. - Authority. 
The approval authority designated in Section 44-487, Table IV-3 may grant approval of master sign plans. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-907. - Applications for master sign plans. 
(a)  Applications for master sign plans shall be filed in compliance with Division 1 of this article. All tenants included in a master sign plan shall obtain a sign permit in accordance with Division 6 of this article and comply with the approved master sign plan. The master sign permit application shall include provisions for the following: 
(1)  Applicable signs. 
(2)  Prohibited signs. 
(3)  Permitted locations for all tenant signs. 
(b)  The following standards shall be included in master sign plans: 
(1)  Letter colors. 
(2)  Background colors. 
(3)  Trim cap color. 
(4)  Letter styles. 
(5)  Overall permitted sign area and dimensions. 
(6)  Method of illumination. 
(7)  Method of attachment. 
(8)  Typical cross-section. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-908. - Findings for a master sign plan. 
In approving a master sign plan, the review authority shall find that the plan's contribution to the design quality of the site and the surrounding area will be superior to the quality that would result under the regulations of this Code. In order to approve a master sign plan, the following findings shall be made: 
(1)  The master sign plan complies with the purpose of this Code, including any design guidelines. 
(2)  Proposed signs enhance the overall development and are in harmony with other signs included in the plan with the structures they identify and with surrounding development. 
(3)  The master sign plan contains provisions to accommodate future revisions that may be required because of changes in use or tenants. 
(4)  The master sign plan complies with the standards of this Code, except that flexibility is allowed with regard to sign area, number, location, and/or height to the extent that the master sign plan will enhance the overall development, achieve superior quality design, and more fully accomplish the purposes of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-909. - Revisions to master sign plans. 
Revisions to master sign plans may be approved by the Community Development Director if the intent of the original approval is not affected. Revisions that would substantially deviate from the original approval shall require the approval of a new master sign plan by the review authority. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-910—44-936. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - SPECIAL PERMITS 
 
Sec. 44-937. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide a process for governing the issuance of special permits for certain events, businesses and related activities, as deemed necessary by the City Council, to protect the health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-938. - Authority. 
The approval authority designated in Section 44-486, Table IV-2, may grant approval of special permits. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-939. - Exemptions. 
Applicants claiming to be entitled to exemption from the requirement of obtaining any special permit provided for under this article shall file a verified statement with the City Clerk disclosing the nature of the business and the basis upon which such an exemption is claimed. All such claims shall be referred to the review authority for investigation and recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-940. - Applications. 
A permit application shall be filed in compliance with Division 1 of this article. A public hearing shall not be required for the issuance of a special permit. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-941. - Period of validity. 
Issuance of special permits, unless otherwise provided by the review or appeal authority, or any other ordinance of the City, shall be valid one year from the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-942. - Display. 
The special permit, or copies thereof, shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the site where the activity for which the permit was issued is conducted. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-943. - Transferability. 
Special permits under the provisions of this division shall not be transferable except with the consent of the review authority, which may require the desired transferee to file an original application in accordance with this division. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-944. - Renewal. 
Any special permit issued under this division, which has not been previously revoked, may be renewed by filing a request for renewal accompanied by payment of the renewal fee. This request shall be filed with the City Manager at least 15 days prior to the date of expiration. 
(1)  Reissuance. If, in the judgment of the review authority, the continued operation of the activity under the terms and conditions of the existing special permit will conform with the peace, health, safety, convenience, good morals, and general welfare of the public and all land use regulations and other applicable municipal ordinances and regulations thereunder have been complied with, the review authority shall reissue the special permit for an additional period of one year or other term if a different period of validity was specified in the original special permit. 
(2)  Reconsideration by City Council. If the request for renewal is filed later than 15 days prior to the date of expiration or if the review authority determines that the continued operation of activity under the terms and conditions of the existing special permit will not comport with the peace, health, safety, convenience, good morals, and general welfare of the public or will not comply with the ordinances or regulations of the City, the review authority shall deny the extension; such denial is subject to the right of the applicant to appeal as provided by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-945. - Violations; revocations. 
(a)  Permits required by all employees and operators. Every person, except those persons who are specifically exempted by this division, must obtain a valid special permit from the City. This includes one acting as an individual, owner, employee of the owner, operator, or employee of the operator; or one acting as a helper for the owner, employee, or operator; or one acting as a participant or worker in any way, who does or practices any of the other things or acts mentioned in this division for which a special permit is required. Any person that engages in an activity which requires a special permit without first obtaining a valid special permit from the City shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Activities that constitute a public nuisance. Any establishment regulated by this article, operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this division or not in compliance with all City, State, and federal laws and regulations shall be declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The City Attorney may prosecute a criminal action hereunder. The City Attorney may, in lieu of prosecution, commence an action, proceeding for the abatement, removal, and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law, and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such establishments and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting, or maintaining an establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Employment of persons without a valid permit. Any owner, operator, manager, or permittee in charge or in control of an establishment that requires a special permit and who knowingly employs a person performing an action regulated by this Code who is not in possession of a valid special permit, or who allows such an employee to perform, operate, or practice within such a place of business, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(d)  Revocation; conditions or compliance standards. The review authority may at any time revoke or temporarily suspend such special permits where the holder thereof or any person responsible for the management or supervision of the activity in question violates or permits any infraction of any law of the State or of any ordinance or regulation of the City, including any condition or restriction imposed upon issuance of the special permit or where the permittee obtained the special permit by misrepresentation or where the review authority becomes satisfied for any reason that the conduct of the activity under the existing conditions or restrictions imposed under the terms of the special permit does not or will not comport with the peace, health, safety, convenience, good morals, and general welfare of the public or comply with the ordinances or regulations of the City. Special permits shall not be revoked under the provisions of this division unless a public hearing is conducted in compliance with Article IV, Division 2. 
(e)  Process for revocation. Any special permit may be temporarily suspended by the review authority prior to notice of public hearings. Adequate notice of a public hearing at which the revocation of a special permit is to be considered shall be deemed to be given if a certified letter, addressed to the permittee at the address given in the application, is deposited in the mail by the City Clerk at least ten days before the hearing. At such public hearing, the permittee shall be given the opportunity to submit written statements, appear in person, and present witnesses. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-946. - Types of special permits. 
The following types of special permits may be issued: 
(1)  Block party permit. 
(2)  Community event permit. 
(3)  Film permit. 
(4)  Special business permit. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-947. - Block party permit. 
The purpose of this section is to provide a process for reviewing applications for block parties. 
(1)  Content of permit application. An application for a block party permit must be submitted at least two weeks prior to the event. The following information is required at the time a block party permit is submitted to the City: 
a.  Name, address and telephone number of responsible party; 
b.  A complete description of the community event, including the: 
1.  Purpose of the event; 
2.  Date and hours of the event; 
3.  Location of the event; 
4.  Description of any equipment that will be used at the event; 
c.  Description of proposed closure of public rights-of-way; 
d.  Signatures of at least 90 percent of the residents that will be affected by the closure of the public right-of-way. 
(2)  Issuance of permit. The review authority shall review a block party permit within five business days of receipt of a completed application and shall approve the requested permit if the following findings can be made: 
a.  All statements made in the application are factually correct. 
b.  The applicant has complied with all the provisions of this Code. 
c.  The conduct of the block party is in compliance with State and federal law and will not interfere with the preservation of the public peace, health, safety or welfare. 
d.  The proposed date and location will not conflict with planned City projects or events. 
(3)  Refusal to issue permit. If the review authority deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this Code, the application shall be denied and the review authority shall notify the applicant of such denial. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-948. - Community event permit. 
The purpose of this section is to provide a process for reviewing applications for community events which require special consideration due to an increase in traffic, parking, noise, glare, odor, impact on public parkland/facilities, visual impact, or other effects incidental to the operation of a community event. 
(1)  Exceptions. The following activities are exempt from the community event permit requirement: 
a.  Demonstrations that do not involve the use of vehicles, animals, fireworks, pyrotechnics, or equipment; 
b.  Lawful picketing; 
c.  Funeral processions by a licensed mortuary; 
d.  Civic dances; 
e.  Block parties; 
f.  City-sponsored events. 
(2)  Content of permit application. The review authority shall review a community event permit application within 30 days of receipt of a completed application. The review authority will receive the investigation report from the Police Chief and the Community Development Director. The following information is required at the time a community event permit is submitted to the City: 
a.  Name, address and telephone number of sponsoring business or organization. 
b.  Name and telephone number of an individual representing sponsoring business or organization. 
c.  A complete description of the community event, including: 
1.  Purpose of the event. 
2.  Date and hours of the event. 
3.  Location of the event. 
4.  The anticipated number of people who will attend the event. 
5.  List of all employees, vendors and contractors involved with the event. 
6.  A description of any food, beverages or merchandise that will be sold or dispensed at the event. 
7.  Description of any equipment (including vehicles) that will be used at the event. 
d.  List of communities where the event has been previously conducted by the operator or operators of the proposed event. 
e.  Description of proposed closure of public streets. 
f.  A plot plan showing the property, placement of temporary buildings, placement of equipment, parking, and on site circulation. 
(3)  Permit processing. An application for a community event permit must be submitted in accordance with Table V-1: 
TABLE V-1. COMMUNITY EVENT PERMIT PROCESSING 
Event Type 	Application Submittal/Processing Time 
Parade/Run/Walk/Auto Procession 	45 days prior to event 
Carnival/Festival/Concert 	45 days prior to event 
Exhibition/Car Show/Auto Sale 	45 days prior to event 
Small Athletic 	45 days prior to event 
Large Athletic 	45 days prior to event 
Private Party/Health Fair 	45 days prior to event 
 
(4)  Findings. The review authority shall approve the requested permit if the following findings can be made: 
a.  All statements made in the application are factually correct. 
b.  The applicant has complied with all the provisions of this Code and is in compliance with all City, State, and federal laws and regulations. 
c.  The time, route, or size of the community event will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic contiguous to the event site or route, or disrupt the use of a street at a time when it is usually subject to traffic congestion. 
d.  Adequate temporary parking to accommodate vehicular traffic generated by the use will be available either on site or at alternate locations. 
e.  The community event shall not impact the normal operations of the Police Department or Community Services Department. 
f.  The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at the site of the event will not prevent proper police, fire, or ambulance services to areas contiguous to the event. 
g.  Proof of insurance required by this Code as a prerequisite to the holding of the community event has been filed with the City. 
h.  The conduct of the community event is in compliance with State and federal law and will not interfere with the preservation of the public peace, health, safety or welfare. 
(5)  Refusal to issue permit. If the review authority, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this Code, the application shall be denied. The review authority shall notify the applicant of such denial within 30 days of a completed application. 
(6)  Permit conditions. The review authority may condition the issuance of a community event permit by imposing reasonable requirements as necessary to protect the safety of persons and property, and the control of traffic, provided such conditions shall not unreasonably restrict individual rights as guaranteed under the United States Constitution. Such conditions include: 
a.  Alteration of the date, time, route, or location of the event proposed. 
b.  Requirement of security. 
c.  Requirements for the provision of first aid or sanitary facilities. 
d.  Notification of affected property owners. 
e.  Restrictions on the use of amplified sound. 
f.  Requirements for the use of traffic cones, delineators, or barricades. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-949. - Film permit. 
The purpose of this section is to provide a process for reviewing applications for filming in the City. Applications shall be required for filming that may affect normal traffic patterns, may impact adjacent properties, may produce additional light, noise, or glare, and/or may result in other similar impacts. 
(1)  Content of permit application. An application for a film permit must be submitted two weeks prior to the event. The following information is required at the time a film permit is submitted to the City: 
a.  Name, address and telephone number of responsible party. 
b.  A complete description of the filming, including: 
1.  Date and hours of the filming. 
2.  Location of the filming. 
3.  Description of any equipment that will be used at the filmings. 
c.  Description of proposed closure of public rights-of-way. 
(2)  Issuance of permit. The review authority shall review a film permit application within five business days of receipt of a completed application and shall approve the requested permit if the following findings can be made: 
a.  All statements made in the application are factually correct. 
b.  The applicant has complied with all the provisions of this Code and is in compliance with all City, State, and federal laws and regulations. 
c.  The filming is in compliance with State and federal law and will not interfere with the preservation of the public peace, health, safety, or welfare. 
(3)  Refusal to issue permit. If the review authority deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this Code, the application shall be denied and the review authority shall notify the applicant of such denial within 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-950. - Reserved.  
Sec. 44-951. - Special business permit. 
(a)  Applicability. No individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, estate, trust, or any other entity shall operate, conduct or manage any business falling with the categories enumerated in this section without a special business permit as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  Businesses requiring a permit. The businesses for which a special business permit is required hereunder are as follows: 
(1)  Junk dealer. 
(2)  Junkyard. 
(3)  Pawnbroker. 
(4)  Secondhand store or dealer. 
(5)  Itinerant vendor. 
(6)  Peddler. 
(7)  Fortuneteller. 
(8)  Check cashing services. 
(9)  Tattoo parlors. 
(10)  Body piercing. 
(11)  Permanent make-up. 
(12)  Any business in which any product or commodity is sold at retail from a motor vehicle, truck, or trailer or any business in which a product or commodity is sold at retail from any place except a fixed place of business within the City on which real property and ad valorem taxes are levied and collected. 
(c)  Content of permit application. The following information is required at the time a special business permit application is submitted to the City: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number the business. 
(2)  Name and telephone number of an individual representing sponsoring business or organization. 
(3)  A complete description of the business, including: 
a.  Purpose of the business. 
b.  Dates and hours of operation of the business. 
c.  Description of any equipment (including vehicles) that will be used. 
d.  Plot plan/floor plan showing the property, floor plan, placement of buildings, placement of equipment, parking, and onsite circulation. 
(d)  Issuance of permit. A special business permit application may be approved by the review authority in whole or in part, with or without conditions, only if all of the following findings of fact can be made: 
(1)  The proposed use is allowed within the subject zoning district and complies with all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  All statements made in the application are factually correct. 
(3)  The applicant has complied with all the provisions of this Code and is in compliance with all City, State, and federal laws and regulations. 
(4)  The issuance of the special business permit is in compliance with State and federal law and will not interfere with the preservation of the public peace, health, safety, or welfare. 
(5)  The operation of the activity for which the permit is required comports with the peace, health, safety, convenience, good morals, and general welfare of the public. 
(6)  The applicant, the applicant's employees, or associates of the person or persons who would be responsible for the management or supervision of the activity has not, within the previous five years, been convicted of any violation of this chapter or any law relating to dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude. 
(e)  Refusal to issue permit. If the review authority, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this chapter, the application shall be denied and the review authority shall notify the applicant of such denial, within 30 days of a completed application. 
(f)  Conditions. In approving an application for a special business permit, the review authority may impose conditions that are deemed essential to ensure that the use shall be operated in compliance with this Code. These conditions may address any pertinent factors affecting the operation of the use. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-952—44-975. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS PERMIT[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Local authority to regulate the time, place, and manner of operation of sexually oriented businesses, Government Code § 65850.4, Penal Code §§ 318.5, 318.6. 
 
Sec. 44-976. - Purpose. 
(a)  The intent of this division is to regulate adult oriented businesses which, because of their very nature, are believed to have many recognized significant secondary effects on the community which include, but are not limited to: depreciated property values and increased vacancies in residential areas in the vicinity of the adult oriented businesses; higher crime rates, noise, debris, or vandalism in the vicinity of adult oriented businesses; and blighting conditions such as low level maintenance of commercial premises and parking lots which thereby have a deleterious effect upon adjacent areas. Special regulation of these uses is necessary to ensure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the neighborhoods in the vicinity of the adult oriented businesses. It is neither the intent nor effect of this section to impose limitations or restrictions on the content of any communicative material. Similarly, it is neither the intent, nor effect of this section to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials or merchandise protected by the first amendment, or to deny access by the distributors or exhibitors of adult oriented business to their intended market. 
(b)  Nothing in this section is intended to authorize, legalize, or permit the establishment, operation, or maintenance of any business, building, or use which violates any City ordinance or any statute of the State of California regarding public nuisances, unlawful exposure, sexual conduct, lewdness, or obscene or harmful matter or the exhibition or public display thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-977. - Application requirements. 
(a)  The property owner, or authorized agent of the property owner, is eligible to request an adult oriented business permit. A single adult oriented business permit shall suffice for the operation of any single adult oriented business on any particular site or in any particular structure within the City. 
(b)  The following information is required at the time an adult oriented business permit application is submitted to the Community Development Director: 
(1)  A completed adult oriented business permit application signed by the property owner or authorized representative. 
(2)  A nonrefundable deposit and/or fee as set forth by resolution of the City Council. 
(3)  A letter of justification describing the proposed project and explaining how it will comply with the findings/requirements contained in this chapter. 
(4)  All other information is required by the City adult oriented business permit information sheet. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-978. - Issuance of permit; investigation. 
(a)  Determination of completeness. The City Manager shall determine whether the application contains all of the information required by the provisions of this section. If it is determined that the application is not complete, the applicant shall be notified in writing within ten business days of the date of receipt of the application that the application is not complete and the reasons therefor, including any additional information necessary to render the application complete. The applicant shall have 30 calendar days to submit additional information to render the application complete. Failure to do so within the 30-day period shall render the application null and void. Within five business days following the receipt of an amended application or supplemental information, the City Manager shall again determine whether the application is complete in accordance with the procedures set forth above. Evaluation and notification shall occur as provided above until such time as the application is found to be complete. Once the application is found to be complete, the applicant shall be notified within five business days of that fact. All notices required by this chapter shall be deemed given upon the date they are either deposited in the United States mail, or the date upon which personal service of such notice is provided. 
(b)  Issuance of permit. The City Manager shall issue an adult oriented business permit within 15 calendar days of receipt of a completed application if he or she finds that the application fully complies with the findings/locational and operational requirements contained in Section 44-197. The applicant shall be notified within five business days of the date the City Manager issues the adult oriented business permit in the manner provided above. The decision of the City Manager to issue or deny a permit shall be final. If the City Manager does not issue or deny the permit within 15 calendar days of the date the application is complete pursuant to this chapter, the application shall be deemed issued by operation of law. 
(c)  Prompt judicial review. Any applicant whose permit has been denied pursuant to this chapter shall be afforded prompt judicial review of that decision as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-979. - Permits non-transferable; use specific. 
No adult oriented business permit may be sold, transferred, or assigned by any permittee or by operation of law, to any other person, group, partnership, corporation, or any other entity. Any such sale, transfer, or assignment or attempted sale, transfer, or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of the permit and the permit shall be thereafter null and void. An adult oriented business permit held by a corporation or partnership is subject to the same rules of transferability as contained above. Any change in the nature or composition of the adult oriented business from one element of an adult oriented business to another element of an adult oriented business shall also render the permit null and void. An adult oriented business permit shall only be valid for the exact location specified on the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-980. - Revocation. 
(a)  Revocation grounds. The City Manager may revoke an adult oriented business permit when he or she discovers that any of the following have occurred: 
(1)  Any of the findings/operational and locational requirements contained in Article II are violated. A permit shall not be revoked for a violation if the accused can show, by clear and convincing evidence, that he or she did not know, and could not have reasonably learned, that the person on the premises was under the required age. 
(2)  The application contains incorrect or false information. 
(3)  The applicant is convicted of any felony or misdemeanor which is classified as a sex or sex-related offense, including, Penal Code §§ 220, 261, 262, 264, 264.1, 265, 266 (including 266(a) through 266(k)), 267, 286.5, 288, 288(a), 289, 647, 647(b), 647(d), and 647.6 or any violation of the City's massage ordinance, or any violation of any other adult oriented business ordinance of any other City, County, or State. 
(4)  Any person who has been convicted of a sex-related offense including, those offenses listed in subsection (a)(3) as a result of his or her activity on the premises of the adult oriented business. 
(5)  Any person has engaged in any active obscenity on the premises; or 
(6)  Any person has engaged in any act of public nudity. 
(b)  Revocation notice. Upon determining that the grounds for permit revocation exist, the Community Development Director shall furnish written notice of the proposed revocation to the permittee. Such notice shall summarize the principal reasons for the proposed revocation, shall state that the permittee may appeal the decision within 15 calendar days of the posting or the postmark date on the notice. The notice shall be delivered both by posting the notice at the location of the adult oriented business and by sending the same, certified mail, return receipt requested and postage prepaid, to the permittee as the permittee's name and address appear on the permit. Not later than 15 calendar days after the latter of the mailing or posting of the notice, the permittee may file an appeal of the Community Development Director's determination with the City Clerk. The appeal shall state the specific basis for the appeal. If the appeal is filed within 15 calendar days of the mailing or posting of the notice referenced above, the appeal hearing shall be provided as contained in subsection (c). 
(c)  Hearing on appeal. Upon receipt of a written request for an appeal hearing, the City Manager shall provide the applicant with a list of five potential hearing officers. The applicant shall pick one of the names from the list to act as the hearing officer. The applicant shall have the opportunity, but not the obligation, to pay 50 percent of the cost of the hearing officer. Unless jointly agreed to by the City and the permittee, the hearing officer shall conduct the hearing within 45 days of receipt of the notice of appeal. Written notice of the time, date, and place of the hearing shall be provided to the appellant/permittee no later than 15 calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the appellant/permittee and the City shall be given the opportunity to present relevant evidence and call witnesses. The hearing officer shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence in conducting the hearing. 
(d)  Reapplication after revocation. No person, corporation, partnership, or member thereof or any other entity may obtain an adult oriented business permit for a business for a two-year period once its permit has been revoked. 
(e)  Maintenance of status quo. The status quo shall be maintained pending conclusion of the revocation hearing. If a judicial action is commenced challenging the revocation, the status quo shall be maintained until such time as a judicial decision is rendered from the court in which the action is filed. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-981. - Violation and penalty. 
(a)  Every person, whether acting as an individual owner, employee of the owner, permittee, or operator or employee of the permittee, or whether acting as a mere helper for the owner, permittee, employer, or operator, or whether acting as a participant or worker in any way, who operates or conducts or who participates in the operation of an unpermitted adult oriented business, or who operates an adult oriented business without having within the establishment a valid adult oriented business permit issued by the City shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished according to the general penalties described in Section 2-350 (Misdemeanor penalty). Each day the violation continues shall be regarded as a separate offense for which the full penalty may be imposed. Except as expressly provided in this subdivision or the Penal Code, no other violations of the provision of this section shall be criminally prosecuted. 
(b)  Any establishment operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter is unlawful and a public nuisance, and the City Attorney may commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal, and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law, and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult oriented business and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting, or maintaining such an establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-982—44-1005. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - TEMPORARY USE PERMITS 
 
Sec. 44-1006. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide appropriate regulations for short-term activities on privately or publicly owned property, so that the activities will be compatible with adjacent and surrounding uses. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1007. - Types of temporary uses. 
The following qualify as temporary uses, which are allowed in compliance with Article II, subject to the issuance of a temporary use permit: 
(1)  Construction trailers and guard offices. Mobile trailers on active construction sites, for use as a construction office or temporary quarters for security personnel. 
(2)  Temporary structures. The temporary use of buildings without a permanent foundation that can be relocated. 
(3)  Environmental remediation units. The temporary use of remediation equipment to treat contamination. 
(4)  Christmas tree sales. The temporary display of Christmas trees for sale, on private or publicly owned land. 
(5)  Halloween pumpkin sales. The temporary display of Halloween pumpkins for sale, on private or publicly owned land. 
(6)  Outdoor sales. The temporary display of goods and merchandise for sale, outside a building, on private or publicly owned land. 
(7)  Modification of construction hours. The modification of the permitted hours for construction activities as referenced in Table III-3. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1008. - Application. 
A permit application shall be filed in compliance with Division 1 of this article. A public hearing shall not be required for the issuance of a temporary use permit. Temporary uses may be subject to additional permits, other City department approvals, licenses, and inspections as required by any applicable laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1009. - Findings. 
The Community Development Director may approve a temporary use permit application in whole or in part, with or without conditions, only if all of the following findings of fact can be made: 
(1)  The operation of the requested temporary use at the location proposed within the time period specified will not jeopardize, endanger, or otherwise constitute a hazard to the public convenience, health, safety, or general welfare and is not for a use that is not in compliance with all City, State, and federal laws and regulations. 
(2)  The proposed site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the temporary use without material detriment to the use and enjoyment of other properties located adjacent to and in the vicinity of the site. 
(3)  The proposed site is adequately served by streets or highways having sufficient width and improvements to accommodate the kind and quantity of traffic that the temporary use would or could reasonably be expected to generate. 
(4)  Adequate temporary parking to accommodate vehicular traffic generated by the use will be available either on site or at alternate locations. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1010. - Conditions. 
In approving an application for a temporary use permit, the Community Development Director may impose conditions that are deemed essential to ensure that the temporary use shall be operated in compliance with the findings required by Section 44-1009. These conditions may address any pertinent factors affecting the operation of the temporary use and may include the following: 
(1)  Nuisance factors. Regulation of nuisance factors, including prevention of glare or direct illumination of adjacent properties, dirt, dust, gases, heat, noise, odors, smoke, trash, or vibration. 
(2)  Operating hours and days. Regulation of operating hours and day, including limitation of the duration of the temporary use to a shorter time period than requested. 
(3)  Parking facilities. Provision of temporary parking facilities, including on site vehicular and pedestrian circulation and vehicular ingress and egress. 
(4)  Performance bond. Submission of a performance bond or other surety device in an amount determined by the Community Development Director to ensure that temporary facilities or structures used for the proposed temporary use will be removed from the site within a reasonable time following the event and that the property will be restored to its former condition. 
(5)  Sanitary and medical facilities. Provision of sanitary and medical facilities, if deemed necessary by the Community Development Director. 
(6)  Security measures. Provision of security and safety measures, if deemed necessary by the Community Development Director. 
(7)  Signs. Regulation of signs. 
(8)  Structures. Regulation of temporary structures and facilities, including placement, height, size, location of equipment, and the provision of open spaces, buffer areas, and other yards. 
(9)  Waste collection. Provision for solid waste collection and disposal. 
(10)  Other. Other conditions that would ensure the operation of the proposed temporary use in an orderly and efficient manner in compliance with the purpose of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1011. - Condition of site following temporary use. 
The site occupied by a temporary use shall be cleaned of debris, litter, or any other evidence of the temporary use upon completion of the temporary use. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1012. - Revocation. 
The Community Development Director may revoke or modify a temporary use permit in compliance with Article IV, Division 5. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-1013—44-1037. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - VARIANCES AND MINOR EXCEPTIONS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Variances from zoning ordinances, Government Code § 65906. 
 
Sec. 44-1038. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose and intent of this division is to provide a process for reviewing variance and minor exceptions applications, which are intended to allow for adjustment in the development standards of this chapter only when the strict application of this Code denies the property owner privileges enjoyed by other property owners in the vicinity and within identical zoning districts. Special circumstances that justify the granting of a variance or minor exception include the location, shape, size, surroundings, or topography of a site. 
(b)  Any variance or minor exception granted shall be subject to conditions that would ensure that the variance does not constitute a granting of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations on other properties in the vicinity and zoning district in which the property is situated, in compliance with State law (Government Code § 65906). The reviewing authority may grant a variance or minor exception from any property development standard (including setbacks, heights, parking requirements, and other numerical standards) in this zoning code, subject to the procedures set forth in this section. Except for the minor exceptions listed below, all requests to deviate from code requirements shall require the approval of a variance. In calculating percentages specified in this section, rounding up of fractions shall not be permitted. The following deviations from code requirements may be processed as minor exceptions: 
(1)  Minor exceptions for up to ten percent of standard. Any deviation of numerical standard contained in this zoning code of ten percent or less of the maximum or minimum standard may be granted. 
(2)  Minor exceptions are not applicable to new construction projects as define in Section 44-10. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1039. - Types of variances. 
The review authority identified in Table IV-1 in Section 44-485 may grant approval of variances from the requirements of this chapter governing only the following development standards: 
(1)  Dimensional standards. Dimensional standards including distance-separation requirements, lot area, fence and wall requirements, landscape and paving requirements, lot dimensions, on site parking areas, and open space. 
(2)  Driveway length. A reduction in the required driveway length. 
(3)  Onsite parking. A reduction in the number of required onsite parking spaces and/or loading spaces. 
(4)  Parcel coverage. An increase in the maximum percent of parcel coverage allowed. 
(5)  Setback/yard area. A reduction in the required setback/yard areas for structures, landscaping, swimming pools/spas, and equipment. 
(6)  Signs. A change related to the number, size, placement, or illumination. 
(7)  Structure height. An increase in the maximum allowed height of a structure. 
(8)  Other standards. Other standards including operational/performance standards relating to dust, hours of operation, landscaping, light, noise, parking, and other controls established by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1040. - Application. 
(a)  Contents. Applications for a variance shall be in compliance with Division 1 of this article. 
(b)  Additional requirements. Applications for a variance shall also contain statements that address the following: 
(1)  The precise nature of the variance requested. 
(2)  The hardship or practical difficulty that would result from the strict interpretation and enforcement of this chapter. 
(3)  Proof that the application meets the findings specified in Section 44-1041. The burden of proof to establish evidence in support of the findings is within the responsibility of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1041. - Findings. 
Following a public hearing held in compliance with Article IV, Division 2, the review authority shall record the decision along with the findings upon which the decision is based, in compliance with State law (Government Code § 65906). The review authority may approve an application, with or without conditions, only if all the following findings of fact can be made: 
(1)  There are special circumstances applicable to the property (e.g., location, shape, size, surroundings, or topography), so that the strict application of this chapter denies the property owner privileges enjoyed by other property owners in the vicinity and under identical zoning districts. 
(2)  Granting the variance would not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations on other properties classified in the same zoning district. 
(3)  Granting the variance would not authorize a use of activity that is not otherwise expressly authorized by the zoning district regulations governing the subject property. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1042. - Conditions. 
In approving a variance, the review authority may impose specific development conditions relating to both on-site and off-site improvements (e.g., dedications, easements, and public improvements), as it finds are reasonable and necessary to ensure that the approval would be in compliance with the findings required by Section 44-1041. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1043. - Precedents. 
Each application is reviewed on a case-by-case basis and the granting of a prior variance is not admissible evidence for the granting of a subsequent variance. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-1044—44-1069. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 12. - SPECIFIC PLANS AND AMENDMENTS 
 
Sec. 44-1070. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide a method for the adoption of specific plans, in order to provide adequate development flexibility for innovation in development concepts, land use mixes, and site design. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1071. - Authority. 
The review authority designated in Section 44-485, Table IV-1 may grant approval of specific plans and specific plan amendments. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1072. - Contents and adoption of specific plan. 
Specific plans must comply with Government Code §§ 65450 to 65457. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1073. - Application contents. 
Applications for a specific plan shall be in compliance with Division 1 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-1074—44-1099. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 13. - ARTIFICIAL TURF PERMITS 
 
Sec. 44-1100. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide a permit process for the review and approval of artificial turf. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1101. - Authority. 
The approval authority designated in Section 44-485, Table IV-1 (review authority) may grant approval of artificial turf permits. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1102. - Applications. 
Applications for artificial turf permits shall be filed in compliance with Division 1 of this article. In addition, the artificial turf permit application shall include a sample of the artificial turf material, a sample of the infill material (if applicable); warranty information; installation details; material specifications (i.e., face weight, pile height, composition, etc.) 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1103. - Expiration of permit. 
Artificial turf permits are subject to the expiration provisions in Article IV, Division 4. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1104. - Time extensions of permits. 
An artificial turf permit may be extended if, in the judgment of the review authority, the proposed installation under the terms and conditions of the existing artificial turf permit will conform with all applicable municipal ordinances and regulations thereunder have been complied with. The review authority may extend the artificial turf permit for an additional period of one year or other term if a different period of validity was specified in the original artificial turf permit. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1105. - Modification of permits. 
An artificial turf permit may be revoked or modified in compliance with Article IV, Division 5. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1106. - Fee amount. 
The artificial turf permit fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council to offset the costs associated with administering the artificial turf regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-1107—44-1135. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 14. - OUTDOOR DISPLAY AND SEATING PERMITS 
 
Sec. 44-1136. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to allow outdoor display and incidental seating as an accessory use in conjunction with a lawfully established business. This division is intended to ensure that outdoor displays and incidental seating furniture enhance the overall appearance of businesses and commercial centers. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1137. - Authority. 
The approval authority designated in Section 44-485, Table IV-1 (review authority) may grant approval of outdoor display and seating permits. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1138. - Applications permits. 
Applications for outdoor display and seating permits shall be filed in compliance with Division 1 of this article, permits, plans, and certificates. The outdoor display and seating permit application shall include the following information: 
(1)  The physical location of the proposed outdoor display or seating area. 
(2)  The type of permitted activity (i.e., outdoor display, seating, or standing sign). 
(3)  A statement of the days and hours the applicant will engage in the permitted activity. 
(4)  Location and size of all existing and proposed display furniture and equipment with photographs or catalogue pictures of such items. 
(5)  The total square footage, exact dimensions, and the proposed occupancy of the incidental outdoor display or seating area (i.e., the number of seats and tables within the incidental outdoor dining area). 
(6)  The existing and proposed on-site vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns. 
(7)  Description and height dimensions of the proposed outdoor furniture to be used. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1139. - Incidental outdoor areas; general requirements. 
All incidental outdoor areas shall conform to the following general requirements: 
(1)  Outdoor areas shall be located on a hard and durable surface in a location so as not to impede pedestrian or vehicular ingress/egress to the establishment, and specifically shall not be located within public rights-of-way or create unsafe conditions. 
(2)  Outdoor areas shall be located at least 25 feet from any residentially used or zoned property. 
(3)  Display items and furniture shall not exceed five feet in height except for accessories providing shade such as canopies and umbrellas. 
(4)  Outdoor areas shall not be allowed in areas set aside, required, or designated for driving aisles, driveways, maneuvering areas, emergency access ways, off-street parking, or unloading/loading. 
(5)  Outdoor areas shall be permitted only on privately owned walkways where a minimum width of five feet is maintained for pedestrian movement. 
(6)  A-frame signs shall not be permitted as part of an outdoor area. 
(7)  Outdoor areas shall only be accessory to businesses that conduct most activities within an enclosed building. 
(8)  An outdoor area shall not extend into a frontage of a neighboring business. 
(9)  Merchandise or accessories shall not be attached to wall surfaces, columns, roofs, or any other part of the building unless approved by the City. 
(10)  The permit holder for the outdoor area shall be responsible for keeping the area clean of all trash and litter. Hosing or pressure washing shall not be permitted along sidewalks and walkways. 
(11)  The permit holder shall not operate any bell, siren, horn, loudspeaker, flashing lights, or any similar device to attract the attention of possible customers or be a nuisance to the general public. 
(12)  All sales shall take place inside of the established business. 
(13)  In the event of an emergency or in a situation where necessary circumstances arise, a permit holder shall remove all articles from the sidewalk when directed to do so by any City employee, law enforcement officer, fire official, or emergency medical personnel. 
(14)  Outdoor seating, display furniture, and signs shall be of high visual quality and shall enhance the aesthetic character of the surrounding commercial area. 
(15)  Chairs and tables shall not be exclusively made of plastic and shall be constructed of a durable material. 
(16)  Any change, alteration, or enlargement of an already permitted outdoor area shall require the permittee to submit a new application and plans to the Community Development Department. 
(17)  An outdoor area shall be an incidental extension of a legally established commercial business. The approval in no way grants or permits a secondary business that is not in conjunction with the already established business at the subject location. 
(18)  Accessories providing shade, such as umbrellas or canopies, shall be of durable fabric and not be composed of nylon taffeta or any other synthetic plastic material unless otherwise approved by the review authority. 
(19)  Shades and umbrellas may not be promotional accessories used to advertise or market a service or product. They shall be of a single color and enhance the appearance of the area unless otherwise approved by the review authority. 
(20)  The incidental outdoor dining area shall comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and Title 24 handicap accessibility requirements of the California Code. 
(21)  The City shall reserve the right to modify or rescind the outdoor display and seating permit at any time and for any circumstances it deems appropriate. 
(22)  Only display materials and signs approved on the officially submitted application shall be permitted in association with the outdoor display or seating area. 
(23)  Outdoor entertainment shall not be allowed in conjunction with an outdoor area. 
(24)  Coin-operated machines, drop off boxes/bins, vending machines, or any other device shall not be permitted as an outdoor display under this division. 
(25)  If deemed necessary, the review authority shall have the right to require the applicant to provide stanchions which enhance the appearance of the outdoor area to delineate between the outdoor area and the walkway. 
(26)  Signs may be six square feet in area or one-half in area for each linear foot of outdoor area, up to a maximum of 12 square feet of aggregate sign area. 
(27)  All outdoor furniture shall be maintained in a high-quality state and remain free of cracks, chips, rips, fading, rust, and other signs of wear. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1140. - Outdoor display areas; additional standards. 
Proposed outdoor merchandise displays and signs shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)  Display areas shall be limited to cover no more than one-half of the total frontage of a retail business and shall not be located within three feet of a business entrance. 
(2)  All display tables shall have a topper and or skirt in order to enhance the appearance of the display furniture. 
(3)  The review authority shall have the right to require additional parking as provided in Article III, Division 4 if necessary. 
(4)  All outdoor merchandise, displays, and signs shall be moved inside the retail building at any time the business is not in operation or in the event of inclement weather. 
(5)  The issuance of a permit for an outdoor display use does not grant or infer vested rights to the use of an incidental outdoor seating area by the permit holder unless explicitly approved by the review authority. 
(6)  Outdoor displays shall not be used exclusively to advertise liquidation merchandise and products. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1141. - Outdoor seating areas; additional standards. 
Incidental outdoor seating and dining areas shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  An incidental outdoor seating area may include, but not be limited to chairs, tables, canopies, and other accessories used for outdoor seating or dining which are specifically indicated on the permit application. 
(2)  Seating areas shall not be located within three feet of a business entrance. 
(3)  An outdoor seating area shall be limited to: 
a.  A maximum of 20 percent of the number of indoor seats or a maximum of 20 seats, whichever is more restrictive; and 
b.  A maximum of five tables. 
(4)  All outdoor seating or signs shall be moved inside a building at any time a business is not in operation unless otherwise permitted by the review authority. 
(5)  The issuance of a permit for an outdoor seating use does not grant or infer vested rights to the use of an outdoor display area by the permit holder unless explicitly approved by the review authority. 
(6)  No sales or consumption of alcohol shall be allowed in an incidental outdoor seating area. 
(7)  No smoking shall be allowed in an incidental outdoor seating area. 
(8)  Outdoor furniture shall not be mismatched or in haphazard assembly. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1142. - Prohibited outdoor display and seating areas. 
Except as a permit may be issued pursuant to Section 44-269, it shall be unlawful for any person to display, exhibit, sell, or offer for sale any food, beverages, goods, or wares of any kind whatsoever, by whatever name called, outdoors within the City. Any person violating this section shall be subject to the enforcement provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1143. - Expiration of permit. 
Outdoor display and permits shall be valid for one year and may be extended in accordance with this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1144. - Time extensions of permits. 
An outdoor display and seating permit may be extended if, in the judgment of the review authority, the proposed installation under the terms and conditions of the existing outdoor display and seating permit conforms to all applicable municipal ordinances and all regulations in this division have been complied with. The review authority may extend the outdoor display and seating permit for an additional period of one year or other term if a different period of validity was specified in the original outdoor display and seating permit. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1145. - Modification of permit. 
An outdoor display and seating permit may be modified with the submittal of a new application to the Community Development Department. The new application shall clearly indicate all relevant details in association with the modified outdoor use and shall require the owner's consent. Once the new application is formally submitted to the community development department it shall be reviewed by the designated review authority and the applicant will be informed of the determination. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1146. - Fee amount. 
The outdoor display and seating permit fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council to offset the costs associated with administering the outdoor display and seating regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-1147—44-1156. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 15. - REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION REQUEST 
 
Sec. 44-1157. - Purpose. 
It is the policy of the City, pursuant to the federal Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (hereafter "fair housing laws"), to provide individuals with the disabilities reasonable accommodation in rules, policies, practices and procedures to ensure equal access to housing and to facilitate the development of housing for individuals with disabilities. This division establishes a procedure for making requests for reasonable accommodation in land use, zoning and building regulations, policies, practices and procedures of the City to comply fully with the intent and purpose of the fair housing laws. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1158. - Review authority. 
Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed by the Community Development Director pursuant to Section 44-485, Table IV-1, and using the criteria set forth in Section 44-1161. 
(1)  The Community Development Director shall issue a written decision on a request for reasonable accommodation within 30 days of the date of the application and may either grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation, in accordance with the required findings set forth in Section 44-1161. 
(2)  If necessary to reach a determination on a request for reasonable accommodation, the Community Development Director may request further information from the applicant, consistent with the fair housing laws, specifying in detail the information that is required. In the event that a request for additional information is made, the 30-day period to issue a decision is stayed until the applicant responds to the request. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1159. - Applicability of division. 
A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any individual with a disability, his or her representative, or a developer or provider of housing for individuals with disabilities, when the application of a City land use, zoning or building regulation, or policy, practice or procedure acts as a barrier to fair housing opportunities for persons with disabilities. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1160. - Application request; required information; compliance procedure. 
In order to make housing available to an individual with a disability, any person to which this division applies as set forth in Section 44-1159 may request a reasonable accommodation in land use, zoning or building regulations, or policies, practices, or procedures in the following manner: 
(1)  Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be made in writing to the Community Development Director and shall provide the following information: 
a.  Name and address of the individual requesting reasonable accommodation; 
b.  Name and address of the property owner; 
c.  Address of the property for which reasonable accommodation is requested; 
d.  Description of the requested accommodation and the regulations, policies and/or procedures for which accommodation is sought; and 
e.  Reason that the requested accommodation may be necessary for the individual with the disability to use and enjoy the housing. 
(2)  Any information identified by an applicant as confidential shall be retained in a manner so as to respect the privacy rights of the applicant and shall not be made available for public inspection unless otherwise required by law or court order. 
(3)  A request for reasonable accommodation in regulations, policies, practices, or procedures may be filed at any time that the accommodation may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing. A reasonable accommodation does not affect an individual's obligation to comply with other applicable regulations not at issue in the requested accommodation. 
(4)  If an individual needs assistance in making the request for reasonable accommodation, the City shall provide assistance, to the extent reasonably feasible, to ensure that the process is accessible. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1161. - Findings. 
The written decision to grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation shall be consistent with fair housing laws and based on the following factors: 
(1)  Whether the housing, which is the subject of the request for reasonable accommodation, will be used by an individual with disabilities protected under the fair housing laws; 
(2)  Whether the requested accommodation is necessary to make housing available to an individual with disabilities protected under the fair housing laws; 
(3)  Whether the requested accommodation would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the City; and 
(4)  Whether the requested accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the nature of the City's land use and zoning and/or building program. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1162. - Decision. 
The Community Development Director shall prepare a written decision in the form of an administrative approval on a request for reasonable accommodation. 
(1)  The written decision on an application for reasonable accommodation shall explain in detail the basis of the decision, including the Community Development Director's findings on the criteria set forth in Section 44-1161. All written decisions shall give notice of the applicant's right to appeal and request reasonable accommodation in the appeals process as set forth in Section 44-1163. The notice of decision shall be sent to the applicant by mail. 
(2)  The written decision of the Community Development Director shall be final unless an applicant appeals it to the City Council in accordance with the procedures set forth in this division. 
(3)  If the Community Development Director fails to render a written decision on an application for reasonable accommodation within the 30-day time period set forth in Section 44-1158, the request shall be deemed granted. 
(4)  While an application for reasonable accommodation is pending, all laws and regulations otherwise applicable to the property that is the subject of the request shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 30, 5-3-2016)  
Sec. 44-1163. - Appeals. 
(a)  Within 30 days of the date of the Community Development Director's written decision, an applicant may appeal an adverse decision to the City Council. Appeals from the adverse decision shall be made in writing and filed with the City Clerk. A decision made by the City Council concerning the appeal shall be final. 
(b)  If an individual needs assistance in filing an appeal on an adverse decision, the City will provide assistance, to the extent reasonably feasible, to ensure that the appeals process is accessible. 
(c)  All appeals shall contain a statement of the grounds for the appeal. Any information identified by an applicant as confidential shall be retained in a manner so as to respect the privacy rights of the applicant and shall not be made available for public inspection unless otherwise required by law or court order. 
(d)  Nothing in this procedure shall preclude an aggrieved individual from seeking any other State or federal remedy available. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 31, 5-3-2016)  
Secs. 44-1164—44-1170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SUBDIVISION[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference— Subdivision Map Act, Government Code § 66410 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 44-1171. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to preserve the aesthetic quality of the City through the regulation and control of the division of land in compliance with the Subdivision Map Act. 
(b)  This article is adopted to implement the Subdivision Map Act, Government Code § 66410 et seq., and may be cited as the City's subdivision ordinance. If the provisions of this article conflict with any provision of the Subdivision Map Act, the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act shall prevail. 
(c)  Land shall not be subdivided and/or developed for any purpose that is not consistent with the General Plan, any applicable specific plan, and this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-1172—44-1190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - REVIEW AUTHORITY 
 
Sec. 44-1191. - Final review authority. 
(a)  City Engineer. The City Engineer shall have final authority in the approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of certificates of compliance, lot line adjustments, and parcel mergers. 
(b)  Council. The City Council shall have final authority in the approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of tentative parcel maps, tentative tract maps, vesting tentative maps, and final maps, and the acceptance by the City of lands and/or improvements proposed for dedication to the City. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015; Ord. No. 2016-06, § 32, 5-3-2016)  
Sec. 44-1192. - City attorney. 
The City Attorney shall be responsible for approving as to form all subdivision improvement documents that affect public rights-of-way related to subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-1193—44-1217. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - MAPS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference— Division of land and tentative and final maps, Government Code § 66426. 
 
Sec. 44-1218. - Division of land—Five or more parcels. 
A tentative and final tract map shall be required for subdivisions creating five or more parcels, in compliance with State law. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1219. - Same—Four or less parcels. 
(a)  Parcel map required. A tentative and final parcel map shall be required for all divisions of land creating four or less parcels, as well as those divisions identified in State law (Government Code § 66426). 
(b)  Parcel map not required. A tentative and final parcel map shall not be required for those divisions outlined in State law (Government Code § 66428), nor for lot line adjustments as provided in Government Code § 66412(d). 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015) 
State Law reference— Authority of local government to waive requirement of tentative and final parcel map, Government Code § 66428.  
Sec. 44-1220. - Correction and amendment of maps. 
After a final tract or parcel map is filed with the County Recorder, it may be amended by a certificate of correction or an amending map, in compliance with State law (Government Code § 66469 et seq.). The certificate of correction or amending map shall be submitted to the City Engineer and processed in compliance with State law (Government Code § 66471). 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1221. - Expiration of tentative map. 
Approved or conditionally approved tentative maps shall expire two years following the actual date of approval or conditional approval, unless an extension is approved in compliance with this division. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1222. - Extension of tentative map. 
A subdivider may request an extension by written application to the Community Development Director. Prior to the expiration of an approved or conditionally approved tentative map, and upon an application by the subdivider to extend that map, the tentative approval of the map shall automatically be extended for 60 days after the expiration date or until the application for the extension is finally approved, conditionally approved, or disapproved, whichever first occurs. The burden of proof is on the subdivider to establish, with substantial evidence, why the tentative map should be extended. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-1223—44-1247. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - REQUIREMENT OF DEDICATION OR FEES IN LIEU 
 
Sec. 44-1248. - Authority. 
State law (Government Code § 66477) provides that cities may require the dedication of land, the payment of fees in lieu, or a combination of both, as a condition of approval of a final subdivision map in order to serve park and recreation purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015) 
State Law reference— City, by ordinance, may require dedication of land or require payment of fees in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, for park or recreational purposes as a condition to approval of a tentative map or parcel map, Government Code § 66477.  
Sec. 44-1249. - Applicability. 
Every subdivider who subdivides land shall dedicate a portion of such land, pay a fee in lieu, or a combination of both, as set forth in this division for the purpose of providing park and recreation facilities to serve the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1250. - Total land required for recreation purposes. 
(a)  The public interest, convenience, health, welfare, and safety require that four acres of property for each 1,000 residents of the City should be devoted to park and recreation purposes. 
(b)  The requirement shall be satisfied in part by cooperative arrangements between the City and the local school districts and local park and recreation districts. This should make available 1½ acres of property for park and recreation purposes for each 1,000 residents of the City. 
(c)  The remainder of the required four acres shall be supplied by the requirements of this division and the recreation program of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1251. - Determination of population density of subdivision. 
In order to calculate the population density of a subdivision in conjunction with determining the land required for recreation purposes, the average number of residents by housing unit type shall be multiplied by the number of each type of dwelling unit in the subdivision. 
(1)  The average number of residents in the City by housing unit type shall be as determined by the latest U.S. Census. 
(2)  The number of dwelling units shall be the number of each type of unit allowed by the City in the subdivision at the time the final tract map is filed for approval. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1252. - Amount of land to be dedicated. 
The amount of land required to be dedicated by a subdivider pursuant to this article shall be based on the gross area included in the subdivision, according to the following Table VI-1: 
TABLE VI-1. AREA OF DEDICATION REQUIRED 
Net Density per Dwelling Unit 	Percentage of gross acre required for dedication 
1 dwelling unit per acre of more 	0.60% 
1 dwelling unit per 0.5 to 1 acre 	1.20% 
1 dwelling unit per 10,000 sq. ft. to 0.5 acres 	1.73% 
1 dwelling unit per 9,000 to 9,999 sq. ft. 	2.70% 
1 dwelling unit per 8,000 to 8,999 sq. ft. 	3.01% 
1 dwelling unit per 7,000 to 7,999 sq. ft. 	3.40% 
1 dwelling unit per 6,000 to 6,999 sq. ft. 	3.90% 
1 dwelling unit per 5,000 to 5,999 sq. ft. 	4.58% 
10 to 19 dwelling units per acre 	5.79% 
20 to 29 dwelling units per acre 	9.30% 
30 to 39 dwelling units per acre 	12.56% 
40 to 49 dwelling units per acre 	15.58% 
50 to 59 dwelling units per acre 	18.40% 
 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1253. - Credit for private open space. 
Where private open space for park and recreational purposes is provided in a proposed subdivision and the space is to be privately owned and maintained, such areas may be credited against the requirement of dedication for park and recreation purposes or against the payment of fees in lieu thereof, provided the City Council finds it is in the public interest to do so, and that the following standards are met: 
(1)  That yards, setbacks, and other open areas required to be provided by the zoning regulations shall not be included in the computation of private open space. 
(2)  That the private ownership and maintenance of the open space is adequately provided for by written agreement. 
(3)  That the use of the private open space is restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenants which run with the land and which cannot be eliminated without the consent of the City Council. 
(4)  That the proposed private open space is adaptable for use for park and recreational purposes, taking into consideration factors of size, shape, topography, geology, access and location of the private open space land. 
(5)  That facilities proposed for the open space area are in substantial compliance with the provisions of the open space element of the general plan and are approved by the City Council. 
(6)  Where a fee is to be paid in lieu of land dedication, the amount of the fee shall be as established by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1254. - Choice of land dedication or fee. 
The procedure for determining whether the subdivider is to dedicate land, pay a fee, or both, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Preference of subdivider. At the time of filing of a tentative tract map for approval, the owner of the property shall as a part of the filing indicate the preference to either dedicate property or to pay a fee in lieu. If the subdivider prefers to dedicate land for this purpose, this area shall be designated on the tentative tract map submitted. 
(2)  Determination of the Council. At the time of the tentative tract approval, the City Council shall determine as a part of the approval whether to require a dedication of land, a payment of a fee in lieu, or a combination of both. The determination of the City Council shall be final and conclusive. This shall be determined through consideration of the following: 
a.  Open space element of the City's general plan. 
b.  Topography, geology, access, and location of land in the subdivision that is available for dedication. 
c.  Size and shape of the land in the subdivision that is available for dedication. 
d.  On subdivisions involving 50 lots or less, only the payment of fees shall be required unless the subdivider prefers to dedicate land and the City Council concurs. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1255. - Prerequisites for approval of final map. 
(a)  When land dedication is required it shall be accomplished in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(b)  When fees are required in lieu, they shall be deposited with the City prior to the approval of the final map. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Sec. 44-1256. - Limitation on use of land and fees. 
The land and fees received under this article shall be used only for the purpose of providing park and recreation facilities to serve the subdivision for which received. The location of the land and amount of the fees shall bear a reasonable relationship to the use of the park and recreation facilities by the future residents of the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015)  
Secs. 44-1257—44-1285. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-03, § 4, adopted January 19, 2016, repealed art. VII, §§ 44-1286—1291, in its entirety and enacted a new art. VII to read as set out herein. Former art. VII pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, adopted May 5, 2015. 
State Law reference— Water Conservation in Landscaping Act, Government Code § 65591 et seq. 
 
Sec. 44-1286. - Water efficient landscaping. 
The regulations and standards set forth in the State Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance, located at California Code of Regulations, Title 23, Division 2, Chapter 2.7, Sections 490-495, as may be amended from time to time, shall apply to all landscape projects in the City that fall into one or more of the landscape project categories specified in the State Model Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, § 4, 1-19-2016)  
Sec. 44-1287. - Delegation. 
The City may delegate to, or into a contract with, a consultant to implement, administer, and/or enforce any of the provisions of this article on behalf of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, § 4, 1-19-2016)  
APPENDIX A. - DEVELOPMENTAL AGREEMENTS REFERENCE TABLE 
At the direction of the city, this table sets out those ordinances which pertain to developmental agreements. Those ordinances are set out herein for reference purposes and have not been included in this Code. 
Ord. No. 	Adoption Date 	Subject 
2012-04 	 6- 5-2012 	Chase Bank 
2016-05 	 3- 1-2016 	Digital Bill Board 
 
EXHIBIT A—ZONING MAP 
  
(Ord. No. 2016-03, § 4, 1-19-2016) 
