Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND ORGANIZATION
Title 3 PERSONNEL
Title 4 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Title 5 BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Title 6 ANIMALS
Title 7 RESERVED
Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE AND WELFARE
Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Title 11 RESERVED
Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Title 13 PUBLIC SERVICES
Title 14 RESERVED
Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Title 16 RESERVED
Title 17 SUBDIVISIONS
Title 18 ZONING

Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION
Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.08 GENERAL PENALTY
Chapter 1.10 PUBLIC RECORDS—FEES
Chapter 1.12 IMPRISONMENT
Chapter 1.16 CITY SEAL
Chapter 1.20 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
Chapter 1.22 CLAIMS REQUIREMENTS


Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION
1.01.010 Adoption.
        Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1—50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code, there is adopted the “La Habra Municipal Code” as published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington, together with those secondary codes adopted by reference as authorized by the California State Legislature, save and except those portions of the secondary codes as are deleted or modified by the provisions of the “La Habra Municipal Code.” (Ord. 1220 § 1, 1984)

 

1.01.020 Title—Citation—Reference.
        This code shall be known as the “La Habra Municipal Code” and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the “La Habra Municipal Code” in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the La Habra Municipal Code. Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the La Habra Municipal Code and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. (Ord. 1220 § 2, 1984)

 

1.01.030 Codification authority.
        This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the city of La Habra, California, codified pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1—50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code. (Ord. 1220 § 3, 1984)

 

1.01.040 Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code.
        The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance No. 1213, passed November 23, 1984. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance No. 1213, but prior to adoption of this code, are adopted and made a part of this code: Ordinance Nos. 1202 (number assigned out of sequence, after codification cutoff date), 1214, 1215, 1216, 1217, 1218, 1219 and 1220. (Ord. 1220 § 4, 1984)

 

1.01.050 Reference applies to all amendments.
        Whenever a reference is made to this code as the La Habra Municipal Code or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of La Habra, California, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 1220 § 5, 1984)

 

1.01.060 Title, chapter and sections headings.
        Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. (Ord. 1220 § 6, 1984)

 

1.01.070 Reference to specific ordinances.
        The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 1220 § 7, 1984)

 

1.01.080 Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
        Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendment hereby of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the city of La Habra shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee, or penalty, or the penal validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 1220 § 8, 1984)

 

1.01.090 Effective date.
        This code shall become effective on the date the ordinance adopting this code as the La Habra Municipal Code shall become effective. (Ord. 1220 § 9, 1984)

 

1.01.100 Constitutionality.
        If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The council declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 1220 § 10, 1984)

 

1.01.120 Purchase of municipal code book.
        A fee may be charged to cover costs to provide a copy of the La Habra Municipal Code in its entirety to those persons requesting a copy thereof. Any additional fee may be charged for each subsequent Municipal Code supplement that is also provided upon request. Said fees shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1409 § 1, 1991)

Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.04.010 Citation of code.
        The ordinances embraced in the following titles and chapters shall constitute and be designated “the code of the city of La Habra, California” and may be so cited. (Ord. 1222, 1984; prior code § 1‑1)

 

1.04.020 Definitions and rules of construction.
        In the construction of this code and of all ordinances of the city, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or the context clearly requires otherwise:

        1.     “The city” or “this city” shall be construed as if followed by the words “of La Habra.”

        2.     “The code” or “this code” shall mean “the code of the city of La Habra, California.”

        3.     Computation of Time. The time in which any act provided by law is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day is a holiday and then it is also excluded.

        4.     “Council” or “city council” means the city council of the city of La Habra.

        5.     “The county” or “this county” means the county of Orange.

        6.     “Day” means the period of time between any midnight and the midnight following.

        7.     “Daytime” means the period of time between sunrise and sunset. “Nighttime” means the period of time between sunset and sunrise.

        8.     Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.

        9.     “In the city” means and includes all territory over which the city now has, or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers.

        10.   Joint Authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers.

        11.   “Month” means a calendar month.

        12.   Number. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.

        13.   “Oath” includes affirmation.

        14.   “Officers,” “departments,” “boards,” “commissions” and “employees” referred to means officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees of the city of La Habra, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.

        15.   “Or” may be read “and,” and “and” may be read “or,” if the sense requires it.

        16.   “Owner,” applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land.

        17.   “Person” includes any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business, trust, corporation or company.

        18.   “Personal property” includes every species of property, except real property, as defined in subsection 22 of this section.

        19.   “Preceding” and “following” means next before and next after, respectively.

        20.   “Process” includes a writ or summons issued in the course of judicial proceedings of either a civil or criminal nature.

        21.   “Property” includes real and personal property.

        22.   “Real property” includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.

        “Shall” is mandatory and “may” is permissive.

        23.   “Signature” or “subscription by mark” includes a mark when the signer or subscriber cannot write, such signer’s or subscriber’s name being written near the mark by a witness who writes his own name near the signer’s or subscriber’s name; but a signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or can serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two witnesses so sign their own names thereto.

        24.   “The state” or “this state” means the state of California.

        25.   “Street” includes all public ways, alleys, lanes, courts and sidewalks and those parts of public squares and places which form traveled parts of highways.

        26.   “Tenant” or “occupant,” applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or an oral lease of or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others.

        27.   Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future includes the present.

        28.   Week. A week consists of seven consecutive days.

        29.   Writing. Writing includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this code, it shall be made in writing in the English language unless it is expressly provided otherwise.

        30.   “Year” means a calendar year, except where otherwise provided. (Ord. 1222, 1984; prior code § 1‑2)

 

1.04.030 Official time.
        Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they shall mean Pacific Standard Time or Daylight Saving Time as may be in current use in the city. (Ord. 1222, 1984; prior code § 1‑6)

 

1.04.040 Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances.
        The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this code or of provisions of any previous code of the city, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. (Ord. 1222, 1984; prior code § 1‑3)

 

1.04.050 Effect of repeal of ordinances.
        A.    The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.

        B.     The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed under the ordinance repealed. (Ord. 1222, 1984; prior code § 1‑4)

 

1.04.060 Catchlines of sections.
        The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (Ord. 1222, 1984; prior code § 1‑7)

 

1.04.070 Severability.
        It is declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code is declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this code. (Ord. 1222, 1984; prior code § 1‑5)

Chapter 1.08 GENERAL PENALTY
1.08.010 Violation—Penalty.
        A.    Any person violating a city ordinance or a provision of this code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, unless, by the terms of the ordinance the violation is made an infraction.

        B.     Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by an ordinance of the city, any person convicted of a misdemeanor for violation of an ordinance of the city is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars and/or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months.

        C.     Any person convicted of an infraction for violation of an ordinance of the city is punishable as set forth in Government Code Section 36900.

        D.    Every day of any violation of this code or any other ordinance of the city constitutes a new and separate offense. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the ordinances of the city is committed, continued or permitted by any such person(s), and he/she shall be punished accordingly. (Ord. 1488 § 1, 1995; Ord. 1204, 1983)

 

1.08.020 Enforcement as misdemeanor or infraction.
        A.    In addition to those violations of this code that are deemed infractions, violations of the following enumerated sections of this code may be deemed to be an infraction and may be punished as such, notwithstanding the fact that at the discretion of the city attorney, the violation of any section contained in this subsection may be filed as a misdemeanor. The complaint charging such violation shall specify whether the violation is a misdemeanor or an infraction:

        1.     Section 5.04.060(A), failure to obtain a business license.

        2.     Section 5.04.100(A), failure to obtain a solicitor’s permit.

        3.     Section 5.04.100(E), soliciting after hours.

        4.     Section 5.12.030, unlawful distribution of handbills.

        5.     Section 5.12.040, unlawful placing of handbills on vehicles.

        6.     Section 5.12.050, unlawful placing of handbills on vacant private property.

        7.     Section 5.12.060, unlawful placing of handbills on private property against request.

        8.     Section 5.28.020(A), operating a massage business without a conditional use permit (CUP).

        9.     Section 5.28.020(B), failure of a massage employee to obtain a valid massage permit.

        10.   Section 5.28.020(C), administering a massage without a valid massage permit.

        11.   Section 5.28.020(D), unlawfully performing or allowing a prohibited act or acts, unless evidence indicates intent to engage in an act of prostitution.

        12.   Section 5.28.090(A), indecent exposure within a massage establishment, unless evidence indicates intent to engage in an act of prostitution.

        13.   Section 5.28.090(B), contacting a client’s genitals during massage, unless evidence indicates intent to engage in an act of prostitution.

        14.   Section 5.28.090(C), administering a massage to an “exposed” client, unless evidence indicates intent to engage in an act of prostitution.

        15.   Section 5.28.090(D), failure to wear an approved smock while administering a massage.

        16.   Section 5.28.090(E), failure to identify a managing employee at a massage establishment.

        17.   Section 5.28.090(F), possessing or consuming alcoholic beverage and/or illegal drugs during hours of operation of a massage establishment.

        18.   Section 5.28.090(G), failure to display permits and licenses at a massage establishment.

        19.   Section 5.28.090(H), failure to display “LHPD Inspection Authority” signs at a massage establishment.

        20.   Section 5.28.090(I), failure of a managing employee of a massage establishment to comply with city requirements.

        21.   Section 5.28.090(K), failure of a managing employee of a massage establishment to assure that massage employees are properly certified.

        22.   Section 5.28.090(L), failure of a massage establishment employee to properly notify police of place of residence.

        23.   Section 5.28.090(M), failure of a massage operator to provide massage employees with proper requirements.

        24.   Section 5.32.101(A), failure to obtain entertainment permit.

        25.   Section 5.32.100, unlawfully allowing billiards after hours.

        26.   Section 5.32.110, unlawfully allowing dancing after hours and/or unlawfully allowing minors on the premises.

        27.   Section 5.36.030, failure to obtain a permit for installing or maintaining an alarm system on business or residential premises.

        28.   Section 5.46.020, failure to obtain a pawnbrokers, and/or secondhand dealers permit.

        29.   Section 5.46.170, failure to operate a pawnbrokers, and/or secondhand dealers business as required.

        30.   Section 8.04.035(B), unlawful collection of rubbish or recyclable at curb.

        31.   Section 8.04.035(C), unlawful collection of rubbish or recyclable from private property.

        32.   Section 8.04.070, unlawful disposition of rubbish.

        33.   Section 8.04.110, collecting rubbish during prohibited hours.

 

        34.   Section 8.12.030, prohibition on deploying, launching or flying drones.

        35.   Section 8.26.020(A), unlawful sale or offer to sell from unauthorized push cart upon public property.

        36.   Section 8.26.020(B), unlawful sale or offer to sell from unauthorized vending container upon public property.

        37.   Section 8.26.020(C), unlawful employing or facilitating unauthorized vending.

        38.   Section 9.04.020, failure to segregate drug paraphernalia.

        39.   Section 9.04.030, unlawfully having a minor in drug paraphernalia sales area.

        40.   Section 9.04.040, unlawfully permitting a minor in drug paraphernalia sales area.

        41.   Section 9.08.020, unlawfully drinking or dispensing alcohol upon unlicensed premises.

        42.   Section 9.08.030, unlawfully drinking alcohol upon public property.

        43.   Section 9.12.030, unlawfully urinating or defecating in a public place open to public view.

        44.   Section 9.16.020, illegal gambling.

        45.   Section 9.22.020, use, discharge, possession, storage or sale of fireworks.

        46.   Section 9.26.010(A), unauthorized trespassing on school grounds, unless evidence indicates involvement of gang-related activity is present.

        47.   Section 9.28.010, curfew violation by a minor.

        48.   Section 9.32.050(B), unlawfully permitting noise in excess of exterior standard.

        49.   Section 9.32.060(B), unlawfully permitting noise in excess of interior standard.

        50.   Section 9.32.080, unlawfully permitting noise in excess of standards near a school, hospital or church, while in use.

        51.   Section 10.32.010, train blocking street in excess of ten minutes.

        52.   Section 12.04.010, unlawful drainage onto public street or property.

        53.   Section 12.12.010, failure to obtain a permit for excavation on public property.

        54.   Section 12.28.010, unauthorized use of park after hours, unless evidence indicates involvement of gang-related activity is present.

        55.   Section 12.28.020, leaving broken glass in a park.

        56.   Section 12.28.030, littering in a park.

        57.   Section 12.28.070, bringing unauthorized animals (horses, cows, sheep, swine, etc.) into a park.

        58.   Section 12.28.080, operating a motor vehicle on park land without permission.

        59.   Section 12.28.120, failure to obtain a permit for overnight camping in a park.

        60.   Section 12.28.130, unlawful golfing in a park.

        61.   Section 15.32.100(C), failure to maintain swimming pool in a sanitary and/or nonhazardous condition after posting of forty-eight-hour notice. (Ord. 1778 § 2, 2017; Ord. 1772 § 3, 2016; Ord. 1488 § 2, 1995; Ord. 1358 § 1, 1989)

Chapter 1.10 PUBLIC RECORDS—FEES
1.10.010 Public records request.
        Fees may be charged to cover costs to retrieve, photocopy, produce and/or mail public records and/or documents upon request. Said fees shall be set by resolution of the city council. In the event that document(s) are requested which require extensive file research time, lengthy copying, and/or involve high mailing costs, the city official who has custody of such document(s) shall charge and collect a fee therefor, which fee shall reasonably reflect the cost to produce such document as determined by that city official with the approval of the city manager. (Ord. 1409 § 2, 1991)

 

 

1.10.020 Police services—Research and duplication of communications twenty-four-hour recording tapes and records.
        Administrative fees may be charged to cover the cost to provide duplicates of portions of twenty-four-hour communications tapes as specified within a bona fide subpoena duces tecum, and/or records related to twenty-four-hour communications. Said fees shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1409 § 2, 1991)

 

1.10.030 Public record certification.
        A fee may be charged for each public record that is certified by the city clerk to be a true and correct copy of the original public record on file in the office of the city clerk. Said certification will bear the city seal and an original signature of the city clerk. Said fee shall be in addition to fees charged for photocopies or mailings of public records. Said fee shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1402 § 2, 1991)

 

1.10.040 Geographic information system generated materials.
        A fee may be charged to cover costs associated with materials produced with the GIS which may include maps, graphs, data, etc. The fee shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1455 § 1, 1993)

Chapter 1.12 IMPRISONMENT
1.12.010 Place of imprisonment for violation of code or ordinance.
        A.    In all cases of conviction for the violation of any provisions of this code or any ordinance of the city or any rule, regulation or order promulgated pursuant thereto, the person so convicted, when the sentence includes imprisonment, shall be imprisoned in the City or County Jail for the period prescribed in the sentence.

        B.     Persons confined in the City Jail under a final judgment of imprisonment for violation of any ordinance or persons confined in accordance with Penal Code Section 4022, with the consent of the city may be required by the chief of police to perform labor on the streets or other public property or works within the city.

        C.     The phrase “streets or other public property or works within the city,” as used in this section, includes, among other things, clerical and menial labor in the City Jail, or in any camp maintained for the labor of such persons on the streets or other public property, or works within the city.

        D.    The city council may prescribe and enforce the rules and regulations under which such labor is to be performed; and may provide clothing of such distinctive character for the persons as the city council in its discretion may deem proper. (Ord. 1204, 1983; Ord. 846, 1972)

Chapter 1.16 CITY SEAL
1.16.010 Designated.
        The common seal of the city of La Habra shall consist of a disk bearing upon its circumference the words “City of La Habra, State of California” and in the center of the disk the words “Incorporated January 20th, 1925.” (Ord. 1 § 3, 1925)

Chapter 1.20 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
1.20.010 Legislative purpose.
        A.    This chapter authorizes the imposition of administrative fines on any person who violates any provision of this code in order to encourage and obtain compliance with the provisions of this code for the benefit and protection of the entire city. This chapter governs the imposition, enforcement, collection and administrative review of all administrative fines imposed under authority of Government Code Section 53069.4 and the police power of the city.

        B.     The issuance of citations imposing administrative fines may be performed at the discretion of the officials of the city authorized hereunder; and the issuance of a citation to any person constitutes but one remedy of the city to redress violations of the code by any person. By adopting this chapter, the city does not intend to limit its authority to employ any other remedy, civil or criminal, to redress any violation of this code by any person, which the city may otherwise pursue.

        C.     Every person who applies for and receives a permit, license, land use approval (e.g., subdivision map, conditional use permit, variance) or any other approval required by the city shall comply with all conditions imposed upon the issuance of such permit, license or approval. A violation of any condition of such permit, license or approval shall be subject to an administrative fine under the provisions of this chapter. Likewise, any person who fails to obtain any permit, license, land use approval or any other approval from the city when such a person is so required by any provision of the code shall be subject to an administrative fine under this chapter.

        D.    Any person in violation of any provision of the municipal code shall be subject to an administrative citation.

        E.     Because of the serious blighting conditions that result from persistent or prolonged failure to comply with the provisions of this code and the effect of such conditions on the desirability and marketability of surrounding properties and on the public health, safety and welfare, this chapter imposes strict civil liability upon the owners of real property for all violations of this code existing on their real property. (Ord. 1687 § 1, 2007)

 

1.20.020 Issuance authority.
        A.    Notwithstanding any other vested authority, duties or functions of any officer of the city, each city official or employee vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses or to administer and enforce certain provisions of this code is authorized and empowered to issue citations for the violation of those sections of this code which such official is authorized to enforce and/or to administer. For the purposes of this section a city official authorized to issue citations shall have the powers of a police officer.

        B.     The issuance of any citation under the provisions of this section is intended to be practiced with discretion and shall be exercised as a procedure for citing violators of this code who have failed to comply only when normal enforcement or administrative procedures have failed or cannot be readily implemented for arresting or stopping an imminent violation.

        C.     For purposes of this section, the term “city official” shall be construed to include duly authorized representatives or appointed assistants.

        D.    Procedural guidelines for the implementation of the issuance of citations as set forth in this section may be adopted from time to time as a policy resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1687 § 1, 2007)

 

1.20.030 Definitions.
        The following definitions apply to the use of these terms for the purposes of this section:

        “Business day” means any day the city of La Habra is open for business.

        “Chief of police” means the police chief of the city or his or her designee.

        “Citation” means an administrative citation issued pursuant to this chapter to remedy any violation.

        “Citee” means any person served with an administrative citation charging him or her as a responsible person for a violation.

        “City” means the city of La Habra, a municipal corporation.

        “City manager” means the city manager of the city or his or her designee.

        “Code” means the La Habra Municipal Code and any code adopted by reference therein.

        “Community preservation inspector” means any employee or agent of the city designated by the city manager or otherwise having the authority to enforce any provision of the code in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

        “Day” means a calendar day.

        “Department” means any department of the city that shall have issued or is authorized to issue an administrative citation in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

        “Enforcement officer” means any employee or agent of the city designated by the chief of police, city manager or otherwise having the authority to enforce any provision of the code in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, including any police officer, code enforcement officer, animal control officer, community preservation inspector, or building inspector.

        “Hearing officer” means the person appointed by the city manager to serve as the hearing officer for administrative hearings hereunder.

        “Issuance,” “issued,” “served” or “service” means one of the following methods of delivery:

        1.     Service in the same manner as personal service of a summons in a civil action in accordance with Article 3 (commencing with Section 415.10) of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, and such service shall be effective on the date of delivery; or

        2.     Mailing by first class United States mail, postage prepaid to the address shown on the official records of the county assessor or other known address of an individual, and such service shall be effective three days after mailing.

        3.     If the enforcement officer does not succeed in personally serving any notice or citation on a person or citee, or in serving such notice or citation by mail, the enforcement officer shall post the notice or citation on any real property within the city, in which the enforcement officer has reasonably verified that the individual or citee to whom the notice or citation is addressed has a legal interest, and such service by posting shall be deemed effective as of the date of posting.

        “Person” means a natural person or a legal entity, including any informal association or group of individuals, partnership, corporation or limited liability company.

        “Police officer” means any sworn peace officer acting on behalf of the city.

        “Responsible person” means a person who causes a code violation to occur, or allows a violation to exist or continue, by his or her action or failure to act, or whose agent, employee, or independent contractor causes a violation to occur, or allows a violation to exist or continue. There is a rebuttable presumption that the record owner of a parcel, as shown on the county’s latest equalized property tax assessment rolls and lessees, tenants, occupants and any others with possession or control over a parcel has notice of, and is therefore responsible for, any violation existing on said property. For the purposes of this chapter, there may be more than one responsible person for a violation.

        “Violation” or “violates” refers to any violation of any provision of the code and also means the failure to comply with any condition or requirement imposed on any permit, license, land use approval, or any other approval issued to a person under or pursuant to this code. (Ord. 1687 § 1, 2007)

 

1.20.040 Administrative citations.
        A.    An administrative citation or citations may be imposed on any responsible person for any violation in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, by the issuance of a citation hereunder as a remedy to enforce compliance with applicable provisions of the code.

        B.     Any enforcement officer may issue an administrative citation to any responsible person pursuant to this chapter.

        C.     A citee shall be liable for and shall pay to the city the fine(s) permitted to be imposed by this chapter, as specified in the citation, unless the citee is relieved of the obligation to pay such fine(s) by a final decision in the citee’s favor after an informal review, administrative hearing and/or appeal pursuant to this chapter. However, the payment of such fine(s) shall not relieve any person from any violation(s) or continuing violation(s) for which such fine(s) has been imposed and paid. Any responsible person shall continue to be subject to the provisions of this chapter as to any violation(s) or continuing violation(s) and shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of the code and correcting any and all violations of the code.

        D.    Each administrative citation issued by an enforcement officer shall contain the following information:

        1.     The name of one or more responsible persons charged with any violation subject to enforcement by this chapter.

        2.     Address of the location of the violation(s).

        3.     Driver’s license number of violator (if available).

        4.     The date or dates on which the responsible person(s) violated the code or the date on which violation(s) were observed.

        5.     The section or sections of the code so violated.

        6.     The amount of the fine to be imposed for each cited violation and a reasonable period of time, but not more than seven days unless the enforcement officer determines that some longer period of time is reasonably warranted and/or necessary under the circumstances, for a citee to correct or otherwise remedy a continuing violation prior to the imposition of administrative fines or penalties, except that a fine may be immediately imposed upon any continuing violation pertaining to building, plumbing, electrical or other similar structural or zoning issues that create an immediate danger to health and safety.

        7.     The date or dates when the fine(s) will be imposed unless the violation(s) are corrected prior to the date(s) specified in the citation.

        8.     A notice of the procedure and time period to request an administrative hearing to contest the citation.

        9.     The name, badge number, and signature of the person who issued the citation.

        10.   The date the citation is issued.

        11.   Any other information deemed necessary by the city manager or chief of police for enforcement or collection purposes. (Ord. 1715 § 1, 2010; Ord. 1687 § 1, 2007)

 

1.20.050 Administrative fines.
        A.    Each citee shall be subject to the imposition and payment of administrative fine(s) as set forth herein.

 

        B.     The administrative fine for a violation shall be in amounts as established from time to time by resolution of the city council.

        C.     All administrative fines imposed hereunder shall be made payable to the city and shall be paid to the city’s director of finance or his or her designee within the time specified in the citation or not later than thirty days after service of the citation, if no time is specified.

        D.    The issuance of a citation or payment of any fine, or both, shall not bar the city from instituting any other enforcement action or remedy to obtain compliance with the provisions of the code so violated including the issuance of additional citations. In the event such other enforcement action includes a court action, and the citation has not been both appealed and resolved in the citee’s favor, said court may include in any order issued by that court, an order or judgment requiring payment of any fines theretofore issued and unpaid. (Ord. 1687 § 1, 2007)

 

1.20.054 Informal review.
        A.    Any citee may contest the citation by filing a written request for an informal review within ten days of the date the citation is issued. To request an informal review, the citee shall sign and file the written request as indicated on the citation. The request form shall state the grounds for contesting the citation. A citee may contest the citation by: (1) denying that the citee owns, possesses, or controls the property where the violation exists; (2) denying that the citee is responsible for the violation described in the citation; or (3) denying that a violation exists or existed.

        B.     To be effective, the request for an informal review must be filed with the city or its designated agent.

        C.     Failure to request an informal review shall not waive a citee’s right to request an administrative review regarding the validity of the citation pursuant to Section 1.20.060 of this chapter. (Ord. 1715 § 2, 2010)

 

1.20.060 Administrative hearing requests.
        A.    Any citee may contest the citation by filing a written request for an administrative hearing within thirty days of the date the citation is issued. To request a hearing, the citee shall sign and file the written request as indicated on the citation. The request form shall state the grounds for contesting the citation. A citee may contest the citation by denying that the citee owns, possesses, or controls the property where the violation exists, denying that the citee is responsible for the violation described in the citation, or denying that a violation exists or existed.

        B.     To be effective, the request for an administrative hearing must be filed with the city or its designated agent. (Ord. 1715 § 3, 2010; Ord. 1687 § 1, 2007)

 

1.20.070 Administrative citation hearing process.
        A.    A citee who has requested an administrative hearing pursuant to Section 1.20.060 must deposit with the city or its designated agent the amount of the proposed fine and applicable administrative hearing fee, which shall be as set from time to time by resolution of the city council, to ensure his or her appearance at the hearing. A request for a hearing shall not be complete and shall not be accepted unless it is accompanied by the deposit. The amount of the fine and the hearing fee shall be immediately refundable upon a final decision in favor of the citee pursuant to Section 1.20.090.

        B.     The hearing shall be set on a date that is no less than ten and no more than sixty business days after the date the administrative hearing request was filed, unless continued at the request or with the agreement of the citee. The citee shall be notified in writing of the hearing date. The failure of the citee to appear at the administrative hearing shall constitute a waiver of the citee’s right to a hearing on the citation and any defenses to the citation that the citee may have asserted. Such failure to appear shall also constitute a failure to exhaust administrative remedies concerning the violation(s) described in the citation shall constitute an admission of the truth of all matters contained in the citation and a validation of the fine(s) imposed in the citation, and shall support a final decision by the hearing officer upholding the citation in its entirety.

        C.     Advance deposit hardship waiver. Any person who intends to request a hearing to contest a citation and who is financially unable to make the advance deposit of the fine and hearing fee as required herein may file a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver. The procedure for filing the waiver is as follows:

        1.     The request shall be filed with the city or its designated agent on a deposit hardship waiver form, available from the community development department. This waiver form must be filed within the same time required for the filing of the request for a hearing.

        2.     The hearing officer may issue the advance deposit hardship waiver only if he or she finds that there is sufficient evidence that the citee has an actual financial inability to deposit with the city the full amount of the fine and/or the hearing fee in advance of the hearing.

        3.     The hearing officer shall issue a written determination listing the reasons for his or her decision to issue or not issue the advance deposit hardship waiver. The written determination of the hearing officer shall be final.

        4.     The requirement of depositing the full amount of the fines and/or the hearing fee shall be stayed until the hearing officer makes a determination not to issue the advance deposit hardship waiver.

        5.     If the hearing officer determines not to issue an advance deposit hardship waiver, the citee shall remit the required deposit and fee for the appeal to the city within ten days of the date of that decision or thirty days from the date of the administrative citation, whichever is later. (Ord. 1715 § 4, 2010; Ord. 1687 § 1, 2007)

 

1.20.080 Conduct of administrative hearings.
        A.    The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer on the date, time and place specified in the notice of hearing, which shall be not less than fifteen nor more than thirty business days from the date that the request for hearing is filed. The hearing shall proceed solely on the issues or defenses presented in the request for a hearing filed by the citee.

        B.     The city shall have the burden to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, the truth of any matter in the citation that has been contested by the citee in the request for hearing. The citation shall be admitted into evidence and shall constitute prima facie evidence of all matters contained therein. In addition, the city may present such other evidence and reports as may be necessary or helpful to the hearing officer to resolve the issues raised by the citee.

        C.     The citee shall be given the opportunity to testify and to present evidence relevant to the matters raised in the request regarding the violation(s) described in the citation. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that the record owner of a parcel, as shown on the county’s latest equalized property tax assessment rolls, and a lessee of a parcel has notice of, and responsibility for, any violation existing on said property. This presumption may be rebutted by the citee proving otherwise by a preponderance of the evidence.

        D.    The citation, and other reports prepared by the enforcement officer issuing the citation, or at his or her request, concerning the violation(s) or its attempted correction shall be accepted by the hearing officer as prima facie evidence of the violation(s).

        E.     The hearing shall be conducted informally and the rules of evidence need not be followed, provided that the decision of the hearing officer on any material issue may not be based upon hearsay evidence alone.

        F.     Neither the enforcement officer nor any other representative of the city shall be required to attend the hearing, nor shall the hearing officer re-

quire that there be submitted any evidence, other than the citation, that may exist among the public records of the city on the violation. However, any such appearance and/or submission may be made at the discretion of the enforcement officer or any city employee or agent having authority over the citation and/or the administrative hearing on behalf of the city.

        G.    If the enforcement officer submits an additional written report concerning the administrative citation to the hearing officer for consideration at the hearing, then a copy of this report also shall be served by mail on the citee at least five days prior to the date of the hearing.

        H.    At least ten days prior to the hearing, the citee shall be provided with copies of the citations, reports, and other documents submitted or to be relied upon by the enforcement officer at the hearing. No other discovery is permitted.

        I.      The hearing officer may continue the hearing on a citation upon the request of the citee, or the citee’s representative, or the representative of the city upon a showing of good cause, unless the parties mutually agree on a continuance. If a continuance is agreed to or granted, a new hearing date shall be set within fifteen days. (Ord. 1687 § 1, 2007)

 

1.20.090 Hearing officer decision.
        After considering all the evidence and testimony submitted before or at the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue his or her written decision on the contested citation within ten business days after the completion of the hearing. The decision of the hearing officer shall either uphold or deny the citation or any portion thereof and state the facts and reasons supporting the decision. The written decision shall be filed with the city and a copy thereof shall be mailed to the citee. The decision of the hearing officer is final. (Ord. 1687 § 1, 2007)

 

1.20.100 Judicial review.
        A.    The citee or the city may seek judicial review of any final decision on a contested citation by filing an appeal pursuant to California Government Code Section 53069.4 with the Superior Court within twenty calendar days after service of the decision in accordance with the provisions of California Government Code Section 53069.4. No appeal shall be permitted from a decision based upon the failure of the citee to appear at the administrative hearing or upon any other waiver of the administrative hearing by the citee, these constituting a material failure of the citee to exercise administrative remedies.

        B.     If an appeal of any decision or order of a hearing officer that ordered the citee to pay any fine(s) to the city is affirmed by the Superior Court, in whole or part, the judicial officer of the Superior Court hearing the appeal may enter an order requiring the citee to pay such fine(s) to the city and said order on appeal shall constitute a money judgment in favor of the city against the citee, which may be collected by the city in the manner provided for herein and as permitted by law. (Ord. 1687 § 1, 2007)

 

1.20.110 Collection of fines.
        A.    Each order of a hearing officer that establishes the amount of any fine(s) payable by a citee to the city shall constitute a money judgment. Each such money judgment shall be enforceable pursuant to the general laws. The city at its discretion may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies to which the city may be entitled for the collection of unpaid fines and penalties. Pursuit of one remedy does not preclude the pursuit of any other remedies.

        B.     The parent or legal guardian of a citee who is a minor shall be liable for any fines imposed upon the minor pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Any such fines may be collected from the minor, parent or guardian. (Ord. 1715 § 5, 2010; Ord. 1687 § 1, 2007)

 

1.20.120 Late payment charges.
        Any person who fails to pay to the city, on or before the due date, any administrative fine imposed pursuant to the provisions of this article, shall be liable for the payment of the applicable late payment charges as follows:

        A.    For payments received within thirty days after the due date, a late fee in the amount of fifty percent of administrative fine due;

        B.     For payments received more than thirty days after the due date, a late fee in the amount of fifty percent of administrative fine due, plus an additional ten percent of the overdue administrative fine for each month the payment is overdue.

        C.     The maximum late fee shall be one hundred percent of the overdue administrative fine. (Ord. 1715 § 6, 2010)

 

1.20.130 Collection of administrative fine.
        The city may collect any past-due administrative fine or late payment charges by use of any available legal means, including the lien procedure set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1715 § 6, 2010)

 

1.20.140 Failure to comply with administrative order or pay administrative fine.
        Failure to comply with an administrative order after it becomes final, or to pay an administrative fine or late payment charges, is a misdemeanor. Filing a criminal misdemeanor action does not preclude the city from using any other legal remedy available to gain compliance with an administrative order, or to collect any past-due administrative fine or late payment charges. (Ord. 1715 § 6, 2010)

 

1.20.150 Collection of administrative fines and costs—Lien procedure.
        A.    If the citee fails to satisfy in full the assessed administrative fines and costs by the time specified in the administrative order, and no timely appeal of the administrative order has been filed with the Orange County Superior Court, the city may recover the outstanding fines and costs by imposing a lien against the real property on which the violation occurred.

        B.     Prior to recording the lien with the Orange County Recorder’s Office, the city council shall conduct a hearing to hear any protest or objection to the lien. The citing official shall serve notice of the hearing upon the owner of record of the real property, based on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current. The notice of hearing shall include the time, date, and place of the hearing, and shall be served upon the owner of record by certified mail return receipt and by first class mail at least ten days before the date of the hearing. If the owner of record, after diligent search, cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten days and by publication of the notice at least ten days prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation published in Orange County and distributed within the city. If there is no such newspaper, then service of the notice may be provided in any manner authorized by law.

        C.     If the city council determines that the lien should be imposed, then the citing official shall prepare and file with the finance department a report stating the amount due and owing.

        D.    After the report is filed with the finance department, the citing official may cause the lien to be recorded with the county recorder. Once recorded, the lien shall have the force and effect and priority of a judgment lien.

        E.     The remedies set forth in this section are not exclusive and may be used in addition to those set forth elsewhere in this code or in state law. The city may collect any past due fines and costs by use of any available legal means. (Ord. 1715 § 6, 2010)

Chapter 1.22 CLAIMS REQUIREMENTS
1.22.010 Claims required.
        Notwithstanding any other provision, requirement, policy, ordinance or resolution of the city of La Habra or the La Habra Municipal Code, no suit for money or damages may be brought against the city on a cause of action for which a claim is required to be presented in accordance with this chapter until a written claim therefor has been presented to the city and has been acted upon by the city council or its designee, or has been deemed rejected. This chapter is intended to supersede and take precedence over any claims procedure or provision related to the time within which claims or actions must be filed set forth in any other chapter, section, provision, ordinance, resolution, or policy of the city of La Habra or the La Habra Municipal Code.

        A.    Any of the following claims against the city for money or damages require a claim to be presented to the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter as a prerequisite to suit thereon, by delivering or mailing such claim to the city clerk:

        1.     Claims under the Revenue and Taxation Code or other statute, including all ordinances of the city of La Habra, prescribing procedures for the refund, rebate, exemption, cancellation, amendment, modification or adjustment of any tax, assessment, fee or charge or any portion thereof, or of any penalties, costs or charges related thereto;

        2.     Claims in connection with which the filing of a notice of lien, statement of claim, or stop notice is required under any provision of law relating to mechanics’, laborers’ or materialmen’s lien;

        3.     Claims by public employees for fees, salaries, wages, mileage or other expenses and allowances;

        4.     Claims for which the workmen’s compensation authorized by Division 4 (commencing with Section 3201) of the Labor Code is the exclusive remedy;

        5.     Applications of claims for any form of public assistance under the Welfare and Institutions Code or other provisions of law relating to public assistance programs, and claims for goods, services, provisions or other assistance rendered for or on behalf of any recipient of any form of public assistance;

        6.     Applications or claims for money or benefits under any public retirement or pension system;

        7.     Claims for principal or interest upon any bonds, notes, warrants, or other evidences of indebtedness;

        8.     Claims which relate to a special assessment constituting a specific lien against the property assessed and which are payable from the proceeds of such an assessment, by offset of a claim for damages against it or by delivery of any warrant or bonds representing it;

        9.     Claims by the state or by a state department or agency or by another local public entity;

        10.   Claims arising under any provision of the Unemployment Insurance Code, including but not limited to claims for money or benefits, or for refunds or credits of employer or worker contributions, penalties, or interest, or for refunds to workers of deductions from wages in excess of the amount prescribed;

        11.   Claims for the recovery of penalties or forfeitures made pursuant to Article 1 (commencing with Section 1720) of Chapter 1 of Part 7 of Division 2 of the Labor Code;

        12.   Claims governed by the Pedestrian Mall Law of 1960, Part 1 (commencing with Section 11000) of Division 13 of the Streets and Highways Code.

        B.     A claim shall be presented by the claimant or by a person acting on his or her behalf on the form provided by the city clerk, or shall be filed in such other format that shows all of the following:

        1.     The name and post office address of the claimant;

        2.     The post office address to which the person presenting the claim desires notices to be sent;

        3.     The date, place and other circumstance of the occurrence or transaction which gave rise to the claim asserted;

        4.     A general description of the indebtedness, obligation, injury, damage or loss incurred so far as it may be known at the time of presentation of the claim;

        5.     The name or names of the public employee or employees causing the injury, damage, or loss, if known;

        6.     The amount claimed if it totals less than ten thousand dollars as of the date of presentation of the claim, including the estimated amount of any prospective injury, damage, or loss, insofar as it may be known at the time of the presentation of the claim, together with the basis of computation of the amount claimed. If the amount claimed exceeds ten thousand dollars, no dollar amount shall be included in the claim;

        However, it shall indicate whether the claim would be a limited civil case.

        C.     The claim shall be signed by the claimant or by some person on his behalf. Claims against local public entities for supplies, materials, equipment or services need not be signed by the claimant or on his behalf if presented on a billhead or invoice regularly used in the conduct of the business of the claimant. (Ord. 1594 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1593 § 1, 2001)

 

1.22.020 Amendment of claim.
        A claim may be amended at any time before the expiration of the period designated in Section 1.22.040 or before final action thereon is taken by the city, whichever is later, if the claim as amended relates to the same transaction or occurrence which gave rise to the original claim. The amendment shall be considered a part of the original claim for all purposes and shall be presented to the city in the same manner as required for the original claim. A failure or refusal to amend a claim, whether or not notice of insufficiency is given, shall not constitute a defense to any action brought upon the cause of action for which the claim was presented if the court finds that the claim as presented complied substantially with this chapter. (Ord. 1594 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1593 § 1, 2001)

 

1.22.030 Notice of insufficiency of claim.
        If in the opinion of the city council, or the person designated by it, a claim as presented fails to comply substantially with the requirements of this chapter, the city council or its designee may, at any time within twenty days after the claim is presented, give written notice of its insufficiency, stating with particularity the defects of omission therein. Such notice shall be personally delivered to the person presenting the claim or shall be mailed to the address stated in the claim. No notice need be given where the claim fails to state an address for the claimant. The city council or its designee may not take action on the claim for a period of fifteen days after such notice is given. (Ord. 1594 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1593 § 1, 2001)

 

1.22.040 Time of presentation of claims.
        A claim under this chapter shall be presented not later than one year of the accrual of the cause of action. For purposes of this chapter, the date of accrual of a cause of action to which a claim relates is the date upon which the cause of action would be deemed to have accrued within the meaning of the statute of limitation which would be applicable thereto if there were no requirement that a claim be presented to and acted upon by the city before an action could be commenced thereon. However, the date upon which a cause of action for equitable indemnity or partial equitable indemnity accrues shall be the date upon which a defendant is served with the complaint giving rise to the defendant’s claim for equitable indemnity or partial equitable indemnity against the city. (Ord. 1594 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1593 § 1, 2001)

 

1.22.060 Time for action.
        A.    The city council or its designee shall act on a claim within forty-five days after the claim has been presented. If a claim is amended, the city council or its designee shall act on the amended claim within forty-five days after the amended claim is presented.

        B.     The claimant and the city council or its designee may extend the period within which an action is required on the claim by written agreement made:

        1.     Before the expiration of such period; or

        2.     After the expiration of such period if an action based on the claim has not been commenced and is not yet barred by the period of limitations provided in this chapter.

        C.     If the city council or its designee fails or refuses to act on a claim within the time prescribed by this section, the claim shall be deemed to have been rejected on the last day of the period within which action was required on the claim, or the last day of the period within which action was required under any agreement to extend pursuant to this section. (Ord. 1594 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1593 § 1, 2001)

 

1.22.070 Action required.
        A. The city council or its designee may act on a claim in one of the following ways:

        1.     If the city council or its designee finds the claim is not a proper charge against the city, it or its designee shall reject the claim.

        2.     If the city council or its designee finds the claim is a proper charge against the city and is for an amount justly due, it or its designee shall allow the claim.

        3.     If the city council or its designee finds the claim is a proper charge against the city but is for an amount greater than is justly due, it shall either reject the claim or allow it in the amount justly due and reject it as to the balance.

        4.     If legal liability of the city or the amount justly due is disputed; the city council or its designee may reject the claim or may compromise the claim.

        B.     If the city council or its designee allows the claim in whole or in part or compromises the claim, it or its designee may require the claimant, if the claimant accepts the amount allowed or offered to settle the claim, to accept it in settlement of the entire claim.

        C.     If the claim is allowed in full and the claimant accepts the amount allowed, no suit may be maintained on any part of the cause of action to which the claim relates.

        D.    If the claim is allowed in part and the claimant accepts the amount allowed, no suit may be maintained on that part of the cause of action which is represented by the allowed portion of the claim.

        E.     If the claim is allowed in part, no suit may be maintained on any portion of the cause of action where, pursuant to a requirement of the city council or its designee to such effect, the claimant has accepted the amount allowed in settlement of the entire claim. (Ord. 1594 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1593 § 1, 2001)

 

1.22.080 Notice of rejection of claim.
        Written notice of the action taken on a claim or amended claim, or the inaction which is deemed rejection, shall be personally delivered to the person presenting the claim or shall be mailed to the address stated in the claim or amended claim, if any. No notice need be given where the claim fails to state an address for the person presenting the claim. Such notice may be in substantially the following form:

 

  Notice is hereby given that the claim which you presented to the City on (indicate date) was (indicate whether rejected, allowed, allowed in the amount of $__________ and rejected as to the balance, rejected by operation of law, or other appropriate language, whichever is applicable) on (indicate date of action or rejection by operation of law).

 

        If the claim is rejected in whole or in part, the notice required shall include a warning in substantially the following form:

 

  WARNING: Subject to certain exceptions, you have only six (6) months from the date this notice was personally delivered or deposited in the mail to file a court action on this claim. La Habra Municipal Code Section 1.22.110. You may seek the advice of an attorney of your choice in connection with this matter. If you desire to consult an attorney, you should do so immediately.

 

(Ord. 1594 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1593 § 1, 2001)

 

1.22.090 Re-examination of rejected claim.
        The city council or its designee, in its or its designee’s discretion, within the time prescribed for commencing an action on the claim, may re-examine a previously rejected claim in order to consider a settlement of the claim. (Ord. 1594 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1593 § 1, 2001)

 

1.22.100 Mailing manner.
        If any claim, notice or other item is required or allowed to be mailed by this chapter, the claim, notice or other item shall be mailed in the manner prescribed in this section. Such claim, notice, or other item shall be deposited in the United States post office, or a mailbox, sub-post office, substation, or mail chute, or other like facility regularly maintained by the government of the United States, in a sealed envelope, properly addressed, with postage paid and shall be deemed to have been presented and received at the time of the deposit. (Ord. 1594 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1593 § 1, 2001)

 

1.22.110 Time limit for filing of action upon claim.
        Any suit brought against the city on a cause of action for which a claim is required under this chapter must be commenced:

        A.    If written notice of rejection of claim is given, not later than six months after the date such notice is personally delivered or deposited in the mail;

        B.     If written notice of rejection of claim is not given, within two years from the accrual of the cause of action. If the period within which the city is required to act is extended, the period of extension is not part of the time limited for the commencement of the action under this paragraph.

        C.     When a person is unable to commence a suit of a cause of action within the time prescribed because he has been sentenced to imprisonment in a state prison, the time limit for the commencement of such suit is extended to six months after the date that the civil right to commence such action is restored to such person, except that the time shall not be extended if the city establishes that the plaintiff failed to make a reasonable effort to commence the suit, or to obtain a restoration of his civil right to do so, before the expiration of the time prescribed herein. (Ord. 1594 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1593 § 1, 2001)

 

1.22.120 Amortization.
        The intent of this chapter is to apply a claims requirement both prospectively to future claims which may accrue and retroactively to claims which have previously accrued. Every claim which accrued nine months or more prior to the effective date of this ordinance but which would be timely under previously existing law at the time of the enactment of this ordinance and which, under the provisions of this chapter, would require a claim to be presented to the city prior to initiation of a legal action against the city, must be filed and must comply with all of the provisions of this chapter within ninety days of the effective date of this ordinance, in order for any legal action to be maintained against the city on such claim. All other provisions of this chapter shall apply to such claims. If no claim is filed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter within the prescribed time, then those claims existing at the time of enactment of this ordinance which accrued nine months or more prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall be barred and no legal action thereon can be maintained in any court. Every claim which accrued less than nine months prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter, including those requiring that claims be filed within one year of the date of accrual of the cause of action and prohibiting any legal action against the city as to claims governed by this chapter which are not filed within one year of the date of accrual. (Ord. 1594 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1593 § 1, 2001)

Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND ORGANIZATION*

Chapter 2.04 CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS
Chapter 2.06 CITY HALL DESIGNATED
Chapter 2.08 COUNCILMEMBERS’ COMPENSATION
Chapter 2.12 MAYOR AND MAYOR PRO TEM
Chapter 2.16 CITY MANAGER
Chapter 2.17 DIRECTOR OF FINANCE
Chapter 2.20 OFFICERS’ BONDS
Chapter 2.24 PLANNING COMMISSION
Chapter 2.28 COMMUNITY SERVICES COMMISSION
Chapter 2.32 TRAFFIC COMMISSION
Chapter 2.44 REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
Chapter 2.52 EMERGENCY SERVICES
Chapter 2.54 HOUSING COMMISSION

Chapter 2.04 CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS
2.04.010 Time and place.
        A.    All regular meetings of the city council shall be held on the first and third Monday of each calendar month at the hour of six thirty p.m. in the City Council Chambers located at 100 E. La Habra Boulevard, La Habra, California, 90631.

        B.     In the event a regular meeting falls on a legally recognized holiday, such regular meeting shall be held on the next succeeding business day at the same hour and location. (Ord. 1782 § 3, 2017; Ord. 1673 § 1, 2007; Ord. 1672 § 1, 2007; Ord. 1552 § 1, 1999; Ord. 1551 § 1, 1999; Ord. 1447 § 1, 1993; Ord. 1377 § 1, 1990; Ord. 1122 § 1, 1980; Ord. 817 § 1, 1971)

 

2.04.020 Meeting agendas.
        A.    At least seventy-two hours before a regular meeting of the city council (hereinafter referred to as “legislative body”) or any board, commission or committee established by the city council and as defined by California Government Code Sections 54952, 54952.2, 54952.3 and 54952.5, the legislative body or its designee shall post an agenda containing a brief general description of each item of business to be transacted or discussed at the meeting. The agenda shall specify the time and location of the regular meeting and shall be posted in a location that is freely accessible to members of the public. No action shall be taken on any item not appearing on the posted agenda.

        B.     Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, the legislative body may take action on items of business not appearing on the posted agenda under any of the following conditions:

        1.     Upon a determination by a majority vote of the legislative body that an emergency situation exists, as defined in California Government Code Section 54956.5;

        2.     Upon a determination by a two-thirds vote of the legislative body, or, if less than two-thirds of the members are present, a unanimous vote of those members present, that the need to take action arose subsequent to the agenda being posted as specified in subsection A of this section;

        3.     The item was posted pursuant to subsection A of this section for a prior meeting of the legislative body occurring not more than five calendar days prior to the date action is taken on the item, and at the prior meeting the item was continued to the meeting at which action is being taken.

        C.     All agendas of the legislative body shall provide within the agenda a time within the meeting of the legislative body for the public to make comment to or to address the legislative body on any item whether it be on the agenda or not.

        D.    This section of the municipal code is not designed to conflict with California state law and any changes or modification of state law which are in conflict shall be interpreted in favor of the state law. (Ord. 1397 § 1, 1990)

Chapter 2.06 CITY HALL DESIGNATED
2.06.010 Official address.
        The official address of City Hall shall be “110 East La Habra Boulevard.” (Ord. 1782 § 3, 2017; Ord. 1204, 1983; Ord. 84 § 2, 1935)

Chapter 2.08 COUNCILMEMBERS’ COMPENSATION
2.08.010 Amount.
        A.    Each member of the city council shall receive as a salary the amount as set forth in an ordinance adopted from time to time by the city council pursuant to the provisions of Section 36516, 36516.2 or other similar provisions of the Government Code, or any other state law hereinafter adopted.

        B.     Pursuant to the authority granted by Government Code Section 36516, each member of the city council shall receive a salary in the sum of five hundred dollars per month. The salary in this amount is payable in the same manner and at the same rate as the salary paid to officers and employees of the city. Except as otherwise provided by statute, an increase in salary may not exceed an amount equal to five percent for each calendar year from the effective date of the last increase as authorized by Government Code Section 36516(c). (Ord. 1562 § 1, 1999; Ord. 1381 § 1, 1990; Ord. 1204, 1983; Ord. 1156 § 1, 1982)

 

2.08.020 Reimbursement for expenses.
        Each member of the city council shall be entitled to reimbursement for actual expenses incurred in connection with the performance of any of their official duties. The reimbursement shall be monthly in arrears and based on an itemized statement and demand by the councilmember enumerating all expenses and providing such additional information as the council may from time to time require by resolution. The council may also, from time to time by resolution adopt additional requirements and conditions to the payment of councilmember expenses. (Ord. 1204, 1983)

Chapter 2.12 MAYOR AND MAYOR PRO TEM
2.12.010 Election.
        A.    The city council shall elect a mayor and a mayor pro tem from its own membership, who will serve a one-year term or until such time as a new mayor or new mayor pro tem is elected; respectively.

        B.     Such election shall occur on the first Monday of each December or in the event of election years, it shall occur at such council meeting as the newly elected council members are sworn in, whichever shall last occur.

        C.     In order to hold such office a second consecutive term, the mayor or mayor pro tem must be elected by four-fifths of the members of the city council. (Ord. 1577 § 1, 2000; Ord. 1461 § 1, 1993; Ord. 1400 § 1, 1990; Ord. 1291, 1987; Ord. 1081, 1979; Ord. 940, 1976; Ord. 906 § 1, 1974; Ord. 837 § 1, 1972)


Chapter 2.16 CITY MANAGER
Article I. General Provisions
2.16.010 Office created—Appointment.
        The office of the city manager is hereby created and established. The city manager shall be appointed by the city council wholly on the basis of his/her administrative and executive ability and qualifications and shall hold office for and at the pleasure of the city council. (Ord. 928 § 1, 1975)

 

2.16.030 Eligibility.
        No member of the city council shall be eligible for appointment as city manager until one year has elapsed after such councilmember shall have ceased to be a member of the council. (Ord. 928 § 3, 1975)

 

2.16.040 Bond requirements.
        The city manager and acting city manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the city council in such sum as may be determined by the city council, and shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the city manager and acting city manager as set forth in this chapter. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the city. (Ord. 928 § 4, 1975)

 

2.16.050 Acting city manager.
        The assistant city manager shall serve as manager pro tempore during any temporary absence or disability of the city manager. In the event there is no assistant city manager, the city manager, by filing a written notice with the city clerk, shall designate a qualified city employee to exercise the powers and perform the duties of city manager during his/her temporary absence or disability. In the event the city manager’s absence or disability extends over a two‑month period, the city council may, after the two‑month period, appoint an acting city manager. (Ord. 928 § 5, 1975)

 

2.16.060 Compensation—Expense reimbursement.
        The city manager shall receive such compensation as the city council shall from time to time determine. In addition, the city manager shall be reimbursed for all actual and necessary expenses incurred by him in the performance of his/her official duties. (Ord. 928 § 6, 1975)

 

Article II. Powers and Duties
2.16.070 Generally.
        The city manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the city under the direction and control of the city council except as otherwise provided in the ordinance codified in this chapter. He/she shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city which are under his/her control. In addition to his/her general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be his/her duty and he/she shall have the powers set forth in Sections 2.16.080 through 2.16.180 and 2.16.200. (Ord. 928 § 7, 1975)

 

2.16.080 Law enforcement.
        It shall be the duty of the city manager to enforce all laws and ordinances of the city and to see that all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the city council are faithfully observed. (Ord. 928 § 7.1, 1975)

 

2.16.090 Authority over other employees.
        It shall be the duty of the city manager, and he/she shall have the authority to control, order and give directions to all heads of departments and to subordinate officers and employees of the city under his/her jurisdiction through their department heads. (Ord. 928 § 7.2, 1975)

 

2.16.100 Power of appointment and removal.
        It shall be the duty of the city manager to, and he/she shall appoint, remove, promote and demote any and all officers and employees of the city, subject to all applicable personnel ordinances, rules and regulations, except the city attorney. (Ord. 928 § 7.3, 1975)

 

2.16.110 Administrative reorganization of officers.
        It shall be the duty and responsibility of the city manager to conduct studies and effect such administrative reorganization of offices, positions or units under his/her direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the city’s business. (Ord. 928 § 7.4, 1975)

 

2.16.120 Ordinances.
        It shall be the duty of the city manager and he/she shall recommend to the city council for adoption of such measures and ordinances as he/she deems necessary. (Ord. 928 § 7.5, 1975)

 

2.16.130 Attendance at council meetings.
        It shall be the duty of the city manager to attend all meetings of the city council unless at his/her request he/she is excused therefrom by the mayor individually or the city council, except when his/her removal is under consideration. (Ord. 928 § 7.6, 1975)

 

2.16.140 Financial reports.
        It shall be the duty of the city manager to keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city. (Ord. 928 § 7.7, 1975)

 

2.16.150 Budget and salary plan preparation.
        It shall be the duty of the city manager to prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to the city council for its approval. (Ord. 928 § 7.8, 1975)

 

2.16.160 Expenditure control and purchasing.
        It shall be the duty of the city manager to see that no expenditures shall be submitted or recommended to the city council except on approval of the city manager or his/her authorized representative. The city manager or his/her authorized representative, shall be responsible for the purchase of all supplies for all the departments or divisions of the city. (Ord. 928 § 7.9, 1975)

 

2.16.170 Investigation of complaints.
        It shall be the duty of the city manager to make investigations into the affairs of the city and any department or division thereof, and any contract or any obligations of the city. Further, it shall be the duty of the city manager to investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the city. (Ord. 928 § 7.10, 1975)

 

2.16.180 Public buildings, parks and property.
        It shall be the duty of the city manager and he/she shall exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks, streets and all other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the city council. (Ord. 928 § 7.11, 1975)

 

2.16.190 City clerk.
        The city manager may also be the city clerk.

(Ord. 928 § 12, 1975)

 

2.16.200 Additional duties.
        It shall be the duty of the city manager to perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other official action of the city council. (Ord. 928 § 7.12, 1975)

 

Article III. Internal Relations
2.16.210 Council—manager relations.
        The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders or instructions to any subordinates of the city manager. The city manager shall take his/her orders and instructions from the city council only when sitting in a duly convened meeting of the city council and no individual councilmember shall give any orders or instructions to the city manager. (Ord. 928 § 8.1, 1975)

 

2.16.220 Department cooperation.
        It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers and the city attorney to assist the city manager in administering the affairs of the city efficiently, economically and harmoniously. (Ord. 928 § 8.2, 1975)

 

2.16.230 Attendance at commission meetings.
        The city manager may attend any and all meetings of the planning commission, community services commission, and any other commissions, boards or committees created by the city council, upon his own volition or upon direction of the city council. At such meetings which the city manager attends, he/she shall be heard by such commissions, boards or committees as to all matters upon which he/she wishes to address the members thereof, and he/she shall inform the members as to the status of any matter being considered by the city council, and he/she shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the members of all commissions, boards or committees appointed by the city council. (Ord. 1204, 1983; Ord. 928 § 8.3, 1975)

 

Article IV. Removal Procedure
2.16.240 Removal of city manager.
        The removal of the city manager shall be effected only by a majority vote of the whole city council as then constituted, convened in a regular city council meeting, subject, however, to the provisions of Sections 2.16.250 through 2.16.280. In case of his/her intended removal by the city council, the city manager shall be furnished with a written notice stating the council’s intention to remove him/her at least thirty days before the effective date of his/her removal. If the city manager so requests, the city council shall provide, in writing, the reasons for the intended removal, which shall be provided the city manager within seven days after the receipt of such request from the city manager, and at least fifteen days prior to the effective date of such removal. (Ord. 928 § 9.1, 1975)

 

2.16.250 Hearing.
        Within seven days after the delivery to the city manager of such notice of intention to remove, he/she may by written notification to the city clerk, request a hearing before the city council. Thereafter the city council shall fix a time for the hearing which shall be held at its usual meeting place, but before the expiration of the thirty‑day period, at which the city manager shall appear and be heard, with or without counsel. (Ord. 928 § 9.2, 1975)

 

2.16.260 Suspension pending hearing.
        After furnishing the city manager with written notice of intended removal, the city council may suspend him/her from duty, but his compensation shall continue until his/her removal by action of the council passed subsequent to the hearing as set forth in Section 2.16.250. (Ord. 928 § 9.3, 1975)

 

2.16.270 Discretion of council—Determination final.
        In removing the city manager, the city council shall use its uncontrolled discretion and its action shall be final and shall not depend upon any particular showing or degree of proof at the hearing, the purpose of which is to allow the city manager to present to the city council his/her grounds of opposition to his/her removal prior to its action. (Ord. 928 § 9.4, 1975)

 

2.16.280 Limitations on removal.
        Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, the city manager shall not be removed from office, other than for misconduct in office, during or within a period of one hundred twenty days next succeeding any general municipal election held in the city at which election a member of the city council is elected or when a new councilmember is appointed; the purpose of this provision is to allow any newly elected or appointed member of the city council or a reorganized city council to observe the actions and ability of the city manager in the performance of the powers and duties of his/her office. After the expiration of the one hundred twenty day period aforementioned, the provisions of this article as to the removal of the city manager shall apply and be effective. (Ord. 928 § 9.5, 1975)

 

Article V. Resignation
2.16.290 Notification of intent required.
        The city manager shall give a minimum of thirty days’ notice of his intention to voluntarily terminate employment with the city, unless such requirement is waived by the city council. (Ord. 928 § 10, 1975)

 

Article VI. Agreements on Employment
2.16.300 Chapter provisions not to limit.
        Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a limitation on the power or authority of the city council to enter into any supplemental agreement with the city manager delineating additional terms and conditions of employment not inconsistent with any provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 928 § 11, 1975)

 

Article VII. Previous Title
2.16.310 Old references to change to city manager.
        Wherever in any ordinance, resolution or motion of the city council, reference is made to “administrative officer,” city administrative officer” and/or “city administrator,” it shall mean “city manager.” (Ord. 928 § 13, 1975)

Chapter 2.17 DIRECTOR OF FINANCE
2.17.010 Office created—Appointment.
        The office of director of finance is created and established. The director of finance shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the city manager, as provided for in Section 2.16.100 of this code. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 2001)

 

2.17.020 Duties.
        The director of finance shall:

        A.    Serve as the chief financial officer of the city of La Habra and be charged with the administration of the financial affairs of the city under the direction of the city manager;

        B.     Perform the financial and accounting duties imposed on the city clerk by the Government Code of the state of California, such duties being transferred to the director of finance and the city clerk being relieved of such duties, in accordance with the provisions of Sections 37209 and 40805.5 of the Government Code of the state of California. In addition, the director of finance shall have all other powers and perform all other duties relating to accounting and finance imposed on the city clerk by this code or any city ordinance or by state law, where not inconsistent with such provisions;

        C.     Concurrently assume the title of and serve as city treasurer, and be authorized to act under the provisions of any law, ordinance or resolution requiring or permitting action by a city treasurer;

        D.    Supervise and be responsible for the audit and approval before payment of bills, invoices, payrolls, demands or charges against the city and, with the advice of the city attorney when necessary, determine the regularity, legality and correctness of all claims, demands and charges;

        E.     Supervise and be responsible for the disbursement of all moneys and for the audit of all expenditures to ensure that budget appropriations are not exceeded;

        F.     Perform such additional duties and functions as may be assigned or delegated from time to time by the city manager, city ordinances and resolutions and state laws governing fiscal administration of the city. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 2001)

 

2.17.030 Bond required.
        The director of finance shall execute a bond to the city, as required of the city treasurer pursuant to Section 2.20.010(B) of this code. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 2001)

 

2.17.040 Payment of demands and payroll obligations.
        The director of finance shall comply with the following provisions with respect to the payment of demands and payroll obligations:

        A.    Preparation, Filing of Demand Prerequisite to Payment. All demands for payment, other than tort claims, but including demands for payment of purchases of materials and goods by the city and payroll obligations, shall be prepared and filed with the city as set forth in this article before payment thereon may be made. All demands for payment must be presented and filed pursuant to state law.

        B.     Form—Required Supporting Documents. A demand for payment against the city shall be in writing on a form to be prescribed by the director of finance or, in his/her discretion, it may consist of receipted invoices, bills or other documents. In either case, all demands for payment must be supported by properly itemized invoices, bills or other documents showing the description of the items, number of individual items, unit costs and totals.

        C.     Filing of Payroll Obligations. Demands for payment of payroll obligations shall be filed with the department of finance on payroll report forms to be prescribed by the director of finance. The payroll report form shall show the names of the employees, the pay period, the hours worked and other information required by the director of finance, and shall be signed by the department head certifying to the correctness of the report.

        D.    Audit of Demands for Payment. A demand for payment against the city shall be audited and approved by the director of finance or his/her designee(s) before it may be paid.

        E.     Director of Finance to Keep Records—Contents of Records. The director of finance shall ensure that a record is maintained of all demands for payment approved by him/herself and/or his/her designee(s). Such records shall show each individual payment, the date, amount, name of payee, and from what account the demand is payable.

        F.     Payment of City Moneys. Whenever a demand is approved as hereinbefore provided, the director of finance shall pay such demand by warrant, check or electronic transfer. No warrant or check shall be drawn or electronic transfer made unless there is sufficient money in the fund upon which it is drawn or made to meet the same. All warrants and checks drawn upon the city treasury for payment of any money shall be signed by the director of finance. The signature of the director of finance may be affixed by a stamped or digital facsimile. (Ord. 1589 § 1, 2001)

Chapter 2.20 OFFICERS’ BONDS
2.20.010 City clerk and city treasurer bond requirements.
        A.    Before entering into their duties, the city clerks shall execute a bond to the city in an amount as determined from time to time by resolution passed by the city council.

        B.     Before entering into their duties, the city treasurers shall execute a bond to the city in an amount as determined from time to time by resolution of the city council.

        C.     The bonds provided for in this section shall guarantee the city against any loss by the principals or their deputies or assistants, and shall be in a form satisfactory to the city and to the provisions of the Government Code relating to bonds required of public officers. (Ord. 1204, 1983)

Chapter 2.24 PLANNING COMMISSION
2.24.010 Establishment—Membership.
        There is created a planning commission for the city which shall be known as the “La Habra Planning Commission.” The planning commission shall consist of five members appointed by the city council. Commissioners shall be residents of the city and appointments shall be made on the basis of interest and qualification of applicants. (Ord. 1351 § 2, 1989; Ord. 138 § 1, 1949)

 

2.24.020 Terms.
        The terms of the five members of the planning commission shall be for a period of four years. All terms shall expire on March 31st and terms shall be staggered so that the terms of no more than two members shall expire each year. Each member shall serve until his or her successor is appointed by the city council. (Ord. 1351 § 2, 1989; Ord. 138 § 2, 1949)

 

2.24.030 Vacancies.
        A.    Vacancies to the planning commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by the city council. The person appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve for the unexpired term of office of the member whose vacancy was filled.

        B.     Members of the planning commission shall be removed from office or their office declared vacant in the following manner and for the following reasons:

        1.     By a majority vote of the council;

        2.     If a member is no longer a permanent resident, his or her removal shall be automatic and no action by the council is necessary;

        3.     If a member is absent from three consecutive regular meetings of the commission, except for good cause as determined by members of the commission, his or her removal shall be automatic and no action by the council is necessary; or

        4.     If a member is absent from four meetings in any twelve‑month period of the commission, except for good cause as determined by members of the commission, in which event his or her removal shall be automatic and no action by the council is necessary. (Ord. 1351 § 2, 1989; Ord. 146 § 1, 1950; Ord. 138 § 3, 1949)

 

2.24.040 Organization—Meetings, minutes, officers.
        A.    Meetings. The planning commission shall hold at least two regular meetings each month for the transaction of its business. The commission shall adopt rules and regulations to govern procedures and shall, by a duly adopted resolution, set a time for regular meetings. Additional adjourned or special meetings may be held from time to time as needed, provided that said meetings are properly called and noticed according to state law.

        B.     Minutes. The city manager, or designee, shall act as secretary to the commission, and shall keep a record of its proceedings and transactions. Minutes of the commission shall be filed with the city clerk for transmittal to the city council.

        C.     Officers. The planning commission shall, during their first regular meeting in April of each year, meet and select a chair and vice‑chair from members of the commission. Their duties shall respectively be such as are usually carried by such officers. Such officers shall hold office for one year, or until their successors are selected. (Ord. 1351 § 2, 1989; Ord. 146 § 2, 1950; Ord. 138 § 4, 1949)

 

2.24.050 Powers and duties.
        The planning commission shall have such powers or duties as may hereafter be granted it by law or ordinance or by the request of the city council or other proper city official. (Ord. 1351 § 2, 1989; Ord. 138 § 5, 1949)

Chapter 2.28 COMMUNITY SERVICES COMMISSION
2.28.010 Establishment—Membership.
        There is hereby created a community services commission for the city which shall be known as “La Habra Community Services Commission.” The community services commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the city council. Commissioners shall be residents of the city and appointments shall be made on the basis of interest and qualification of applicants. (Ord. 1351 § 4, 1989; Ord. 1151 § 1, 1981)

 

2.28.020 Terms.
        The terms of the seven members of the community services commission shall be for a period of three years. All terms shall expire on March 31st and terms shall be staggered so that the terms of no more than three members shall expire each year. Each member shall serve until his or her successor is appointed by the city council. (Ord. 1351 § 4, 1989; Ord. 1151 § 2, 1981)

 

2.28.030 Vacancies.
        A.    Vacancies to the community services commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by the city council. The person appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve for the unexpired term of office of the member whose vacancy was filled.

        B.     Members of the community services commission shall be removed from office or their office declared vacant in the following manner and for the following reasons:

        1.     By a majority vote of the council;

        2.     If a member is no longer a permanent resident, his or her removal shall be automatic and no action by the council is necessary;

        3.     If a member is absent from three consecutive regular meetings of the commission, except for good cause as determined by members of the commission, his or her removal shall be automatic and no action by the council is necessary; or

        4.     If a member is absent from four meetings in any twelve‑month period of the commission, except for good cause as determined by members of the commission, in which event his or her removal shall be automatic and no action by the council is necessary. (Ord. 1351 § 4, 1989; Ord. 1151 § 3, 1981)

 

2.28.040 Organization—Meetings, minutes, officers.
        A.    Meetings. The community services commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each month for the transaction of its business. The commission shall adopt rules and regulations to govern procedures and shall, by a duly adopted resolution, set a time for regular meetings. Additional adjourned or special meetings may be held from time to time as needed, provided that said meetings are properly called and noticed according to state law.

        B.     Minutes. The city manager, or designee, shall act as secretary to the commission, and shall keep a record of its proceedings and transactions. Minutes of the commission shall be filed with the city clerk for transmittal to and approval by the city council.

        C.     Officers. The community services commission shall, during their regular meeting in April of each year, meet and select a chair and vice-chair from members of the commission. Their duties shall respectively be such as are usually carried by such officers. Such officers shall hold office for one year or until their successors are selected. (Ord. 1738 § 1, 2012; Ord. 1351 § 4, 1989; Ord. 1151 § 4, 1981)

 

2.28.050 Powers and duties.
        The duties of the community services commission shall be as follows:

        A.    To advise the city and its officers on all matters referred to it by the city council;

        B.     To act in an advisory capacity to the city council, the city manager, and the direction of community services on all matters pertaining to public recreation, cultural, child development and social services and to coordinate with school districts and other governmental agencies and with civic groups in the advancement of these services;

        C.     To recommend policies on recreation, cultural, child development and social services to the city council, the city manager and the departmental director;

        D.    To serve as the Head Start and Early Head Start sub-board to oversee the responsibilities for program governance and improvement in accordance with federal requirements;

        E.     To make periodic inventories of recreation, cultural, child development and social services that exist or may be needed to interpret the needs of the public to the city council;

        F.     To aid in coordinating the recreation, cultural, child development and social services of the city with the programs of other governmental agencies and voluntary and civic organizations;

        G.    To advise the city and its officers on matters concerning the social needs of the community, including actions deemed appropriate;

        H.    To initiate and enlist the cooperation of community organizations in programs approved by the city council;

        I.      To conduct educational and informational programs to promote the programs approved by the city council;

        J.      To generally advise the city council and the officers of the city on means of progressively improving human conditions throughout the city;

        K.    The commission may hold public hearings concerning the recreation, cultural, child development and social service needs of the community;

        L.     The commission’s powers are advisory only and are not administrative, operational or policy making legislative powers or duties. (Ord. 1738 § 2, 2012; Ord. 1351 § 4, 1989; Ord. 1151 § 5, 1981)

Chapter 2.32 TRAFFIC COMMISSION
2.32.010 Establishment—Membership.
        A.    There is created a traffic commission for the city which shall be known as the “La Habra Traffic Commission.” The traffic commission shall consist of seven members, consisting of the following persons:

        1.     City engineer;

        2.     A representative of the city police department;

        3.     A representative from the La Habra city school district;

        4.     A representative from the Automobile Club of Southern California;

        5.     Three citizen-at-large representatives appointed by the city council.

        B.     Citizen-at-large representatives shall be residents of the city and appointments shall be made on the basis of interest and qualifications of applicants. (Ord. 1494 § 1, 1996; Ord. 1351 § 7, 1989; Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

2.32.020 Terms.
        The terms of the three citizen-at-large members of the traffic commission shall be for a period of four years. The terms shall expire on March 31st and terms shall be staggered so that the terms of no more than one member shall expire each year. Each member shall serve until his or her successor is appointed by the city council. (Ord. 1494 § 2, 1996; Ord. 1351 § 7, 1989; Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

2.32.030 Vacancies.
        A.    Vacancies to the traffic commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by the city council. The person appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve for the unexpired term of the member whose vacancy was filled.

        B.     Members of the traffic commission shall be removed from office or their office declared vacant in the following manner and for the following reasons:

        1.     By a majority vote of the council;

        2.     If a member is no longer a permanent resident, city employee or prominent representative of an educational institution of the city, in which event his or her removal shall be automatic and no action by the council is necessary;

        3.     If a member is absent from three consecutive regular meetings of the commission, except for good cause as determined by members of the commission, his or her removal shall be automatic and no action by the council is necessary; or

        4.     If a member is absent from four meetings in any twelve‑month period of the commission, except for good cause as determined by members of the commission, in which event his or her removal shall be automatic and no action by the council is necessary. (Ord. 1351 § 7, 1989; Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

2.32.040 Organization—Meetings, minutes, officers.
        A.    Meetings. The traffic commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each month for the transaction of its business. The commission shall adopt rules and regulations to govern procedures and shall, by a duly adopted resolution, set a time for regular meetings. Additional adjourned or special meetings may be held from time to time as needed, provided that said meetings are properly called and noticed according to state law.

        B.     Minutes. The city manager, or designee, shall act as secretary to the commission, and shall keep a record of its proceedings and transactions. Minutes of the commission shall be filed with the city clerk for transmittal to the city council.

        C.     Officers. The traffic commission shall, during their regular meeting in April of each year, meet and select a chair and vice‑chair from members of the commission. Their duties shall respectively be such as are usually carried by such officers. Such officers shall hold office for one year, or until their successors are selected. (Ord. 1351 § 7, 1989; Ord. 1109 § 1, 1980; Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

2.32.050 Powers and duties.
        The traffic commission shall have the following powers, duties and responsibilities:

        A.    To recommend the most practical means for coordinating the activities of all officers and agencies of the city having authority with respect to the administration and enforcement of traffic regulations;

        B.     To receive requests, suggestions or complaints involving traffic matters;

        C.     To recommend to the legislative body of the city ways and means of improving traffic conditions and enforcing traffic regulations;

        D.    To carry out the powers and duties imposed upon it by existing ordinances from time to time enacted by the city council. (Ord. 1351 § 7, 1989; Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

Chapter 2.44 REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
2.44.010 Need declared—Authority of agency.
        It is found and declared, pursuant to Section 33101 of the Community Redevelopment Law, that there is a need for the redevelopment agency created by Section 33100 of said law to function in the city, and the agency is authorized to transact business and exercise its powers under the Community Redevelopment Law. (Ord. 922 § 1, 1975)

 

2.44.020 Agency designated—Powers and duties.
        Pursuant to the provisions of Section 33200 of the Community Redevelopment Law, the legislative body of the city declares itself to be the agency provided for in Section 2.44.010, and that all the rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities vested by the Community Redevelopment Law in such agency shall be, and are, vested in this body, except as provided in the ordinance codified in this section or in amendments thereto. (Ord. 922 § 2, 1975)

 

2.44.030 Compensation of members.
        Each member of the redevelopment agency shall receive the sum of thirty dollars for each meeting of the agency attended; provided that the compensation for each member does not exceed sixty dollars per calendar month. Members shall be reimbursed for all actual and necessary reasonable expenses. (Ord. 1365, 1989; Ord. 932 § 1, 1975)

 

2.44.040 Designation of redevelopment project areas.
        The following are designated redevelopment project areas:

        A.    Beta II (Ordinance No. 1177);

        B.     La Habra consolidated redevelopment project (Ordinance 1544). (Ord. 1545 § 1, 1999; Ord. 1503 § 1, 1996; Ord. 1332, 1988; Ord. 1207, 1983)

Chapter 2.52 EMERGENCY SERVICES
2.52.010 Purpose.
        The declared purposes of the ordinance codified in this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this city in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of this city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations and affected private persons. (Ord. 1756 § 1, 2015; Ord. 892 § 1, 1973)

 

2.52.020 Emergency defined.
        As used in this chapter, “emergency” means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of this city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. (Ord. 1756 § 1, 2015; Ord. 892 § 2, 1973)

 

2.52.030 Emergency preparedness council—Membership.
        The La Habra emergency preparedness council is created and shall consist of the following:

        A.    The mayor, who shall be chairperson;

        B.     One additional member of the city council, appointed by the mayor, who shall be the vice chairperson;

        C.     The director of emergency services;

        D.    The assistant director of emergency services;

        E.     The police chief;

        F.     The public works director;

        G.    Three representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the chairperson with the advice and consent of the city council. (Ord. 1756 § 1, 2015; Ord. 892 § 3, 1973)

 

2.52.040 La Habra emergency preparedness council—Powers and duties.
        It shall be the duty of the La Habra emergency preparedness council, and it is empowered to perform the following tasks:

        A.    Promote emergency preparedness throughout the community to include citizens emergency response training (CERT), citizens police academy, neighborhood watch meetings, police department open house, periodic community preparedness meetings and other public outreach opportunities to encourage emergency preparedness as they arise.

        B.     Oversee the development, implementation and maintenance of a volunteer disaster service worker program that will be in compliance with California laws and regulations, and thus assure that the city and its emergency response volunteers enjoy the benefits and protections provided by state law, while engaged in emergency response activities as well as the training and exercises necessary to prepare them for emergency response activities.

        C.     Serve as the approval authority for disaster service worker training and exercise activities, propose and submit, for city council consideration, a budget and expenditure requests to accomplish and support training, exercise and other support activities.

        D.    Identify and recommend, for city council consideration, budget expenditures related to the city’s emergency preparedness and volunteer disaster service worker program.

        E.     Serve as a review and recommendation panel for the maintenance and revisions to the city’s emergency response plan, hazard mitigation plan and continuation of operations plan, mutual aid agreements and other related emergency preparedness, mitigation, planning, response and recovery documents.

        F.     Conduct, review and make recommendations concerning emergency preparedness and service matters referred to it by the city council.

        G.    Meetings. The emergency preparedness council shall meet upon call of the chairperson, or in his or her absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice chairperson. (Ord. 1756 § 1, 2015; Ord. 892 § 4, 1973)

 

2.52.050 Director and assistant director of emergency services—Offices created.
        A.    There is created the office of director of emergency services. The city manager shall be the director of emergency services.

        B.     There is created the office of assistant director of emergency services, who shall be appointed by the director. (Ord. 1756 § 1, 2015; Ord. 892 § 5, 1973)

 

2.52.060 Director and assistant director of emergency services—Powers and duties.
        A.    The director is empowered to:

        1.     Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a “local emergency” if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect;

 

        2.     Request the Governor to proclaim a “state of emergency” when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency;

        3.     Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;

        4.     Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this city; and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them;

        5.     Represent this city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined in Section 2.52.020;

        6.     In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency as provided in subsection (A)(1) of this section, the proclamation of a state of emergency by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a state of war emergency, the director is empowered:

        a.     To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council,

        b.     To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use,

        c.     To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a state of emergency in the county in which this city is located or the existence of a state of war emergency, to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he or she deems necessary in the execution of his or her duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers,

        d.     To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency, and

        e.     To execute all of his or her ordinary power as city manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him or her by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by any statute, all powers conferred upon him or her by any statute, by any agreement approved by the city council, and by any other lawful authority;

        7.     In the event of a situation in which a significant number of persons are without ability to obtain shelter, resulting in a threat to their health and safety, the director of emergency service or the assistant director of emergency services may issue a declaration of a shelter crisis pursuant to Section 8698.2 of the California Government Code, and exercise all authority in accordance with Chapter 7.8 of Division 1 of Title 2 of the California Government Code.

        B.     The director of emergency services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his or her duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the city council.

        C.     The police chief shall, under the supervision of the director, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this city; and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. (Ord. 1756 § 1, 2015; Ord. 892 § 6, 1973)

 

2.52.070 Emergency organization—Members.
        All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of subsection (A)(6)(c) of Section 2.52.060, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this city during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the city. (Ord. 1756 § 1, 2015; Ord. 892 § 7, 1973)

 

 

2.52.080 Emergency plan development responsibility.
        The police chief shall ensure that the city’s emergency plans are developed and maintained. These plans shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services and staff of the emergency organization. The emergency preparedness council shall receive and review the emergency plans and/or proposed revisions to emergency plans, and upon their approval, forward the approved plans to the city council for their consideration. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1756 § 1, 2015; Ord. 892 § 8, 1973)

 

2.52.090 Expenditures.
        Any expenditure made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. (Ord. 1756 § 1, 2015; Ord. 892 § 9, 1973)

2.52.100 Violation—Penalty.
        It is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment for not to exceed six months, or both, for any person, during an emergency to:

        A.    Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or her by virtue of this chapter;

        B.     Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof;

        C.     Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. (Ord. 1756 § 1, 2015; Ord. 892 § 10, 1973)

Chapter 2.54 HOUSING COMMISSION
2.54.010 Establishment—Membership.
        There is created a housing commission for the city which shall be known as the “La Habra Housing Commission.” The housing commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the city council: planning commissioners appointed by the city council pursuant to Chapter 2.24 shall serve as five of the seven members, and the two additional members shall be tenants of the city housing authority, one of which shall be over sixty-two years of age if the housing authority has tenants over that age. Commissioners shall be residents of the city and appointments shall be made on the basis of interest and qualification of applicants. (Ord. 1728 § 2, 2011)

 

2.54.020 Terms.
        The terms of the housing commission members serving simultaneously as planning commissioners shall be as follows: three of the commissioners first appointed shall serve for terms of one, two and three years, respectively, from the date of their appointments; and two of the commissioners first appointed shall serve for terms of four years from the date of their appointments. Successors of housing commission members serving simultaneously as planning commissioners shall serve for terms of four years. The terms of the housing commission members serving as tenant commissioners shall be for two years from the date of their appointments. Successors of housing commission members serving as tenant commissioners shall serve for terms of two years. All terms shall expire on the date of the annual meeting. Each member shall serve until his or her successor is appointed by the city council. (Ord. 1728 § 2, 2011)

 

2.54.030 Vacancies.
        A.    Vacancies to the housing commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by the city council. The person appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve for the unexpired term of office of the member whose vacancy was filled.

        B.     Members of the housing commission shall be removed from office or their office declared vacant in the following manner and for the following reasons:

        1.     By a majority vote of the council;

        2.     If a member is no longer a permanent resident (if the member serves as a planning commissioner) or tenant of the housing authority (if the member serves as a tenant commissioner) his or her removal shall be automatic and no action by the council is necessary;

        3.     If a member is absent from three consecutive meetings of the commission, except for good cause as determined by members of the commission, his or her removal shall be automatic and no action by the council is necessary; or

        4.     If a member is absent from four meetings in any twelve-month period of the commission, except for good cause as determined by members of the commission, in which event his or her removal shall be automatic and no action by the council is necessary. (Ord. 1728 § 2, 2011)

 

2.54.040 Organization—Meetings, minutes, officers.
        A.    Meetings. The housing commission shall meet at least once a year on the first Monday in April or more frequently as workload requires for the transaction of its business. The commission shall adopt rules and regulations to govern procedures. Additional adjourned or special meetings may be held from time to time as needed, provided that said meetings are properly called and noticed according to state law.

        B.     Minutes. The city manager, or designee, shall act as secretary to the commission, and shall keep a record of its proceedings and transactions. Minutes of the commission shall be filed with the city clerk for transmittal to the city council.

        C.     Officers. The housing commission shall, during their annual meeting, meet and select a chairperson and vice-chairperson from members of the commission. Their duties shall respectively be such as are usually carried by such officers. Such officers shall hold office for one year, or until their successors are selected. (Ord. 1728 § 2, 2011)

 

2.54.050 Powers and duties.
        The housing commission shall serve in an advisory capacity to the city housing authority and shall review and make recommendations on matters to come before the housing authority, except emergency matters and matters which the housing commission excludes from its review by resolution. The housing commission shall have such powers or duties as may hereafter be granted it by law or ordinance or by the request of the city council or other proper city official. (Ord. 1728 § 2, 2011)

Title 3 PERSONNEL
Chapter 3.04 PEACE OFFICER STANDARDS AND TRAINING
Chapter 3.08 PERSONNEL MERIT SYSTEM
Chapter 3.12 RETIREMENT SYSTEM
Chapter 3.16 AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
Chapter 3.20 LOYALTY OATHS
Chapter 3.24 HOLIDAYS
Chapter 3.28 NEPOTISM

Chapter 3.04 PEACE OFFICER STANDARDS AND TRAINING
3.04.010 Acceptance of state training requirements.
        A.    The city declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state under the provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4 of the California Penal Code.

        B.     Pursuant to Sections 13510(c) and 13522 of Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4 of the California Penal Code, the city while receiving aid from the state pursuant to said Chapter 1 will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training (POST).

        C.     Pursuant to Section 13512, Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4 of the California Penal Code, the commission and its representatives may make such inquiries as deemed appropriate by the commission to ascertain that the La Habra police department’s public safety dispatcher personnel adhere to standards for selection and training established by the commission on Police Officer Standards and Training. (Ord. 1360 § 1, 1989; Ord. 474 §§ 1, 2, 1961)

Chapter 3.08 PERSONNEL MERIT SYSTEM
3.08.010 Adopted.
        In order to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters, to attract to municipal service the best and most competent persons available, to assure that appointments and promotions of employees will be based on merit and fitness as determined by competitive test, and to provide a reasonable degree of security for qualified employees, the personnel merit system set forth in this chapter is adopted. (Ord. 1025, 1978)

 

3.08.020 Personnel officer designated—Duties—Delegation of duties.
        A.    The city manager shall be the personnel officer. The city manager may delegate any of the powers and duties conferred upon him as personnel officer under this chapter to the personnel administrator, or the city manager may recommend to the city council that such powers and duties be performed under contract as provided in this chapter.

        B.     When the city manager appoints a personnel administrator, the individual shall have the same responsibilities and authority as provided in the ordinance as does the city manager insofar as it affects the administration of the personnel system.

        1.     The city manager or the personnel administrator shall attend all meetings of the grievance hearing board.

        2.     The city manager or personnel administrator shall administer the provisions of this chapter and of the personnel rules. (Ord. 1204, 1983; Ord. 1025, 1978)

 

3.08.030 Grievance hearing board created.
        There is created a grievance hearing board to consist of three members to be appointed and to function as described in the personnel policy manual adopted by resolution of the city council. All decisions of the grievance hearing board are advisory and shall be submitted to the city manager. (Ord. 1025, 1978)

 

3.08.040 Applicability of provisions.
        The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all offices, positions and employees in the service of the city, except:

        A.    Elective officers;

        B.     Members of appointive boards, commissions and committees;

        C.     Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional or technical service for a definite period of time;

        D.    Volunteer personnel, such as volunteer firefighters or reserve police officers;

        E.     City manager;

        F.     City attorney;

        G.    Department heads and certain administrative positions, including, but not limited to, those listed below:

        1.     Assistant city manager;

        2.     Assistant to city manager;

        3.     Assistant to city manager — I;

        4.     Director of public works;

        5.     City treasurer;

        6.     City engineer;

        7.     Public services director;

        8.     Finance director;

        9.     Controller;

        10.   Director of community services;

        11.   Chief of police;

        12.   Fire chief;

        13.   Personnel officer or director;

        14.   Social service administrator;

        15.   Employment/training director;

        16.   Director of planning and community development;

        17.   Chief building inspector;

        18.   Planning director;

        19.   Director of building and safety;

        20.   City clerk;

        21.   Deputy city clerk;

        22.   Deputy social service administrator;

        23.   Deputy employment/training director;

        24.   Assistant chief of police;

        25.   Assistant fire chief;

        26.   Administrative assistants/analysts assigned to any of the positions listed in this subsection;

        27.   Grant funded personnel, until such specially-funded employees become a part of the regular city service.

        Subsection G of this section shall apply only to employees appointed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. It is not intended that subsection G of this section affect the annual salary ordinance for the listed positions as it affects salary or fringe benefits. All employees listed in subsection G of this section shall serve at the discretion of the city manager, and the city manager shall provide for adequate procedures to assure and assess the capabilities of individuals appointed to the listed positions. In the event an employee is discharged by the city manager from a listed position, the individual shall be afforded the opportunity to return to a formerly held position either listed or not listed in subsection G of this section. (Ord. 1204, 1983)

 

3.08.050 Attendance and leave rules—Exempt positions.
        The provisions of the personnel rules relating to attendance and leave shall apply to the incumbents of full-time exempt positions. (Ord. 1204, 1983)

 

3.08.060 Adoption of personnel policy manual.
        Personnel rules and regulations prepared by the personnel officer consistent with this chapter shall be adopted and may be amended from time to time by resolution of the city council. These rules shall establish procedures and regulations governing the following phases of the personnel system:

        A.    Preparation and conduct of tests and the establishment and the use of resulting employment lists containing names of persons eligible for appointment;

        B.     Appointment of persons from employment lists, and temporary and emergency appointments;

        C.     All regular appointments, including promotional appointments, shall be for a probationary period of not less than six months;

        D.    Preparation and maintenance of a position classification plan covering all positions in the competitive service, including employment standards and qualifications for each class;

        E.     Administration of a plan of compensation directly correlated with the position classification plan, providing a rate or range of pay for each class;

        F.     Standardization of hours of work, attendance and leave regulations, working conditions and the development of employees morale, welfare and training;

        G.    Evaluation of employees performance;

        H.    Transfer, promotion, demotion and reinstatement of employees in the competitive service;

        I.      Separation of employees from the city service through layoff, suspension and dismissal;

        J.      Suitable provision for orderly and equitable presentation to the city manager and to the city council by employees relating to general conditions of employment;

        K.    When requested by recognized employee groups, a city management meet-and-confer team will meet and confer with the employees as required by city ordinance and appropriate state law;

        L.     Annually, the personnel officer shall present to the city council a salary resolution covering salaries and fringe benefits for all of the city’s employees. (Ord. 1204, 1983; Ord. 1025, 1978)

 

3.08.070 Power to make appointments subject to chapter provisions.
        The city manager and any other officer in whom is vested the power to appoint, make transfers, promotions, demotions, reinstatements, layoffs, and to suspend or dismiss employees shall retain such power, subject to the provisions of this chapter and the personnel rules. (Ord. 1204, 1983; Ord. 1025, 1978)

 

3.08.080 Abolition of positions.
        A.    Whenever in the judgment of the city council it becomes necessary in the interest of economy or because the necessity for the position or employment involved no longer exists, the city council may abolish any position or employment in the competitive service and the city manager may lay off, demote or transfer an employee holding such position or employment without filing written charges and without the right of appeal.

        B.     Seniority shall be observed in effecting such reduction in personnel and the order of layoff shall be in the reverse order of total cumulative time served in the city service upon the effective date of the layoff.

        C.     The names of employees laid off shall be placed upon reemployment lists for all classes which, in the opinion of the personnel officer, require basically the same qualifications and duties and responsibilities as those of the class of positions from which the layoff was made.

        D.    Names of persons laid off shall remain on such lists for a period of one year. (Ord. 1204, 1983; Ord. 1025, 1978)

 

3.08.090 Political activity.
        Any employee of the city may take part in political activity as enjoyed by any other citizen, except on city time, and shall not be restrained or interfered with in any way. An employee wishing to run for elected office that may in any way create a conflict of interest as a result of his position with the city, shall apply for a leave of absence as described in the personnel policy manual. (Ord. 1025, 1978)

 

3.08.100 City’s right to contract for special services.
        The city manager shall consider and make recommendations to the city council regarding the extent to which the city should contract for the performance of technical services in connection with the establishment or operation of the personnel system. The city council may contract with any qualified person or agency for the performance of all or any of the following responsibilities and duties imposed by this chapter:

        A.    The preparation of personnel rules and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof;

        B.     The preparation of a position classification plan and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof;

        C.     The preparation of a plan of compensation and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof;

        D.    The preparation, conduct and grading of competitive tests;

        E.     Special and technical services of advisory or informational character on matters relating to personnel administration. (Ord. 1025, 1978)

Chapter 3.12 RETIREMENT SYSTEM
3.12.010 State employee’s retirement system—Participation authorized.
        A contract between the city council and the Board of Administration, California State Employee’s Retirement System, as amended pursuant to Ordinance 764, is authorized. A copy of such contract, as amended, may be found in the office of the city clerk. Ordinance No. 881, adopted on July 3, 1973, Ordinance No. 896, adopted December 11, 1973, and Ord. No. 1111, adopted March 4, 1980, amended such contract. (Ord. 1025, 1978)

 

3.12.020 State employee’s retirement system—Mayor directed to execute contract.
        The mayor is authorized, empowered and directed to execute the contract as amended, referred to in Section 3.12.010, for and on behalf of the city. (Ord. 1025, 1978)

 

3.12.030 Normal and mandatory retirement ages.
        A.    The normal retirement age for all members of the retirement system shall be age fifty for safety employees, and age sixty for miscellaneous employees.

        B.     The mandatory retirement age for all employees will be in compliance with the laws of the state governing the Public Employees Retirement System.

        C.     Employees desiring to work beyond the mandatory retirement age may do so by complying with the appropriate section currently in effect with Public Employees Retirement System (current Government Code, Section 20983.6). In addition, the employee shall process a request to the city council to extend employment beyond the mandatory retirement age, and the employee shall be subject to the same rights and liabilities as other active members. (Ord. 1204, 1983; Ord. 1025, 1978)

Chapter 3.16 AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
3.16.010 Affirmative action plan.
        In order to establish an equitable and fair employment program for all of its employees, and specifically for protected classes, the city council will cause an affirmative action plan to be established in compliance with current fair employment laws, and shall adopt and amend such plan by resolution. (Ord. 1025, 1978)

Chapter 3.20 LOYALTY OATHS
3.20.010 Employees required to sign and confirm—Membership in Civil Defense System.
        Employees of the city shall sign and affirm the loyalty oath as required by current state law. Employees shall recognize that as a condition of municipal employment they are a member of the California Civil Defense System as currently in effect. In the event of local disaster, under the Civil Defense System, employees will be required to perform as civil defense workers under the state’s civil defense program. (Ord. 1025, 1978)

Chapter 3.24 HOLIDAYS
3.24.010 Designated.
        A.    Pursuant to Section 6700 of the Government Code and other applicable provisions of law, the days hereinafter set forth are designated and fixed by this section as holidays to be observed by the city, its officers and employees:

        1.     January 1st New Year’s Day;

        2.     Third Monday in January, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Day;

        3.     Third Monday in February, President’s Day;

        4.     Fourth Monday in May, Memorial Day;

        5.     July 4th, Independence Day;

        6.     First Monday in September, Labor Day;

        7.     November 11th, Veteran’s Day;

        8.     Thanksgiving Day, as proclaimed by the State or Governor;

        9.     The day following Thanksgiving Day;

        10.   December 25th, Christmas Day;

        11.   One floating holiday.

        B.     There shall be no other city holidays except those set out in subsection A of this section.

        C.     Floating holidays shall be subject to rules established by resolution of the city council. Rules relating to the taking of holidays falling on Saturday and Sunday shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1796 § 1, 2018)

Chapter 3.28 NEPOTISM
3.28.010 Nepotism.
        A.    No person related to any council member, the city manager, or any department head as spouse or child shall be appointed to any city office or hired for employment with the city while the council member, city manager or department head to whom the person is related is serving in that position.

        B.     This section shall operate prospectively only and shall not affect any individual who is in an appointive city office or employment with the city at the time of the adoption of this prohibition. Nor shall this section affect any person who is an appointive city office or employment with the city when that person’s spouse or child thereafter becomes a council member, the city manager or a department head.

       C.    For purposes of this section, “hire” shall mean any commencement of compensated appoint-ive office or employment, including re-employment or re-appointment of any former city employee or appointee and any change of an employee from part-time to full-time status or position. (Ord. 1646 § 2, 2004)

Title 4 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapter 4.04 TRANSFER OF ASSESSMENT AND TAX COLLECTION DUTIES TO COUNTY
Chapter 4.08 CONSUMER PRICE ADJUSTMENTS
Chapter 4.10 TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
Chapter 4.12 SALES AND USE TAX
Chapter 4.13 VOTER-APPROVED TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
Chapter 4.14 UTILITY USERS TAX
Chapter 4.16 REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
Chapter 4.20 PURCHASING SYSTEM
Chapter 4.24 UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
Chapter 4.28 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
Chapter 4.32 REDEVELOPMENT REVOLVING FUND
Chapter 4.36 REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY ADMINISTRATIVE FUND
Chapter 4.40 BAD CHECKS
Chapter 4.44 FIREMED AND AMBULANCE PROGRAM
Chapter 4.46 CRIMINAL JUSTICE ADMINISTRATION FEE
Chapter 4.48 AIR QUALITY IMPROVEMENT TRUST FUND FOR MOBILE SOURCE AIR POLLUTION REDUCTION
Chapter 4.50 UTILITY PAYMENT PROCEDURE
Chapter 4.52 ASSESSMENT INSTALLMENTS IN LIEU OF PAYMENT OF SEWER SYSTEM CONNECTION FEES

Chapter 4.04 TRANSFER OF ASSESSMENT AND TAX COLLECTION DUTIES TO COUNTY
4.04.010 Transfer of duties.
        It appears for the best interests of the city that taxes be collected by county officials, therefore, the city elects that the duties of assessing property and collecting taxes provided by law to be performed by the assessor and tax collector of the city, shall be performed by the county assessor and tax collector. (Ord. 124 § 1, 1949)

 

4.04.020 Additional authority granted to county officials.
        The county officials are authorized as agents of the city to levy and collect all taxes now unassessed and/or unpaid of the city for which the county officials are not authorized so to do, pursuant to the election as set forth in Section 4.04.010, without liability of any kind or nature to the city except to pay over the funds actually collected less the county charges for such collection. (Ord. 124 § 3, 1949)

Chapter 4.08 CONSUMER PRICE ADJUSTMENTS
4.08.010 Adjustment of taxes, fees and charges required.
        The city manager shall adjust all taxes, fees and charges provided for in this code, or by resolution of the city council, on a fiscal quarter basis, in accordance with the increase or decrease in the cost of living. All such adjustments shall be based on the Bureau of Labor Statistics Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers. The Consumer Price Index on January 1, 1978 equals one hundred. The city manager shall report all such adjustments to the city council and no adjustments shall take effect until the report is ordered filed by the council. The city council may reject but may not modify any one or more of the adjustments in any report before ordering the report filed. (Ord. 1050 § 1, 1978)

Chapter 4.10 TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
4.10.010 Title.
        This chapter shall be known as the city of La Habra transactions and use tax ordinance. The city of La Habra hereinafter shall be called “city.” This chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the city, as it now or may hereafter exist. (Ord. 1700 § 1, 2009)

 

4.10.020 Operative date.
        “Operative date” means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than one hundred ten days after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 1700 § 1, 2009)

 

4.10.030 Purpose.
        This chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

        A.    To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2, which authorizes the city to adopt this tax ordinance which shall be operative if a majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose.

        B.     To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

        C.     To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the state Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the state Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California state sales and use taxes.

        D.    To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1700 § 1, 2009)

 

4.10.040 Contract with state.
        Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the state Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance; provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the state Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. (Ord. 1700 § 1, 2009)

 

4.10.050 Transactions tax rate.
        For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at the rate of one-half of one percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the operative date of this tax. (Ord. 1700 § 1, 2009)

 

4.10.060 Place of sale.
        For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the state Board of Equalization. (Ord. 1700 § 1, 2009)

 

 

4.10.070 Use tax rate.
        An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of this tax for storage, use or other consumption in said territory at the rate of one-half of one percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 1700 § 1, 2009)

 

4.10.080 Adoption of provisions of state law.
        Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 1700 § 1, 2009)

 

4.10.090 Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes.
        In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code:

        A.    Wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefore. However, the substitution shall not be made when:

        1.     The word “state” is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, state Board of Control, state Board of Equalization, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the state of California;

        2.     The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the state Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter.

        3.     In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to:

        a.     Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; or

        b.     Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provision of that code.

        4.     In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

        B.     The word “city” shall be substituted for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 1700 § 1, 2009)

 

4.10.100 Permit not required.
        If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 1700 § 1, 2009)

 

4.10.110 Exemptions and exclusions.
        A.    There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the state of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-administered transactions or use tax.

        B.     There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from:

        1.     Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government.

        2.     Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this paragraph, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied:

        a.     With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and

        b.     With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address.

        3.     The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

        4.     A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

        5.     For the purposes of subsections (B)(3) and (4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.

        C.     There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter, the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property:

        1.     The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax.

        2.     Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California, or any successor provisions.

        3.     If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

        4.     If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

        5.     For the purposes of subsections (C)(3) and (4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.

        6.     Except as provided in subsection (C)(7), a retailer engaged in business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer.

        7.     “A retailer engaged in business in the city” shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the city.

        D.    Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. (Ord. 1700 § 1, 2009)

 

4.10.120 Amendments.
        All amendments subsequent to the effective date of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this chapter, provided however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 1700 § 1, 2009)

 

4.10.130 Enjoining collection forbidden.
        No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 1700 § 1, 2009)

 

4.10.140 Severability.
        Should any section, subsection, clause or provision of this chapter for any reason be held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter, it being hereby expressly declared that this chapter, and each and every section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase hereof would have been prepared, proposed, approved, adopted and/or ratified irrespective of the fact that any one or more section, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this chapter be declared invalid, including, but not limited to, the validation procedures in Section 4.10.150. (Ord. 1700 § 1, 2009)

 

4.10.150 Tax validity—Time to bring action.
        Any legal action to challenge, test, or otherwise determine the validity of this chapter, or any portion thereof; the ordinance enacting this chapter, or any portion thereof; or the tax imposed in this chapter must be brought within sixty days of the effective date of the ordinance adopting this chapter, or any portion thereof, in accordance with the provisions of California Code of Civil Procedure Section 860 et seq., and Sections 860 and 863 in particular, or any successor provisions thereto. (Ord. 1700 § 1, 2009)

 

4.10.160 Termination.
        The tax provided for in this chapter shall terminate in its entirety on December 31, 2028, and shall not be collected thereafter. (Ord. 1700 § 1, 2009)

Chapter 4.12 SALES AND USE TAX
4.12.010 Title.
        The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “uniform local sales and use tax ordinance of the city.” (Ord. 273 § 1, 1956)

 

4.12.020 Purpose.
        The city council declares that the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

        A.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation code of the state;

        B.     To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

        C.     To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a one-percent tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practical to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the state Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes;

        D.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 504 § 1, 1961; Ord. 273 § 2, 1956)

 

4.12.030 Operative date—Contract with state.
        The ordinance codified in this chapter shall become operative on April 1, 1956, and prior thereto this city shall contract with the state Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of the sales and use tax ordinance codified herein; provided, that if this city shall not have contract with the state Board of Equalization as set forth in this section, prior to April 1, 1956, the ordinance codified herein shall not be operative until the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract by the city and by the state Board of Equalization; provided further, that the ordinance codified herein shall not become operative prior to the operative date of the uniform local sales and use tax ordinance of the county. (Ord. 273 § 3, 1956)

 

4.12.040 Sales tax imposed—Place of sale—Adoption of state law—Exemptions.
        A.    1. For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate of one percent of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in the city on and after the operative date of this chapter.

        2.     For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the State Sales and Use Tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the Board of Equalization.

        B. 1. Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of said code, as amended and in force and effect on April 1, 1956, applicable to sales taxes are adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth in herein.

        2.     Wherever, and to the extent that, in Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the city shall be substituted therefor.

 

        Nothing in this subdivision shall be deemed to require the substitution of the name of the city for the word “state” when that word is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, or the name of the State Treasury, or of the Constitution of the State of California; nor shall the name of the city be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; and neither shall the substitution be deemed to have been made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain gross receipts which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while those gross receipts remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; nor to impose this tax with respect to certain gross receipts which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of that code; and, in addition, the name of the city shall not be substituted for that of the state in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 and 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code as adopted.

        3.     If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6068 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by reason of this section.

        4.     There shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the tax is measured:

        a.     The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer;

        b.     The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. (Ord. 1206, 1983; Ord. 1202 § 1, 1983; Ord. 890 §§ 1, 2, 1973; Ord. 504 §§ 2, 3, 4, 1961; Ord. 273 § 4, 1956)

 

*       Editor’s Note: For current sales and use tax regulations, see the full text of Ord. 1202, on file in the office of the city clerk.

 

4.12.050 Use tax imposed—Adoption of state law—Exemptions.
        A.    An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on or after the operative date of this chapter, for storage, use or other consumption in the city at the rate of one percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made.

        B. 1. Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of said code, as amended and in force and effect on April 1, 1956, applicable to use taxes are adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth herein.

        2.     Whenever, and to the extent that, in Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subdivision shall be deemed to require the substitution of the name of this city for the word “state” when that word is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, or the name of the State Treasury, or of the Constitution of the state; nor shall the name of the city be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; and neither shall the substitution be deemed to have been made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such storage, use or other consumption remains subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of that code; and in addition, the name of the city shall not be substituted for that of the state in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 and 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code as adopted, and the name of the city shall not be substituted for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this State” in Section 6203, nor in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203.

        3.     There shall be exempt from the tax due under this section:

        a.     The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer;

        b.     The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which has been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state;

        c.     In addition to the exemptions provided in Section 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. (Ord. 1206, 1983; Ord. 1202 § 2, 1983; Ord. 890 § 3, 1973; Ord. 504 §§ 5, 6, 1961; Ord. 273 § 5, 1956)

 

*       Editor’s Note: For current sales and use tax regulations, see the full text of Ord. 1202, on file in the office of the city clerk.

 

4.12.060 Adoption of amendments to state code.
        All amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code enacted subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. (Ord. 273 § 6, 1956)

 

4.12.070 Enjoining collection forbidden.
        No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 273 § 7, 1956)

 

4.12.080 Suspension of existing ordinances.
        At the time the ordinance codified in this chapter goes into operation, the provisions of Ordinance Nos. 106, 112 and 242 shall be suspended and shall not again be of any force or effect until and unless for any reason the state Board of Equalization ceases to perform the functions incident to the administration and operation of the sales and use tax hereby imposed; provided, however, that if for any reason it is determined that the city is without power to adopt the ordinance codified herein, or that the state Board of Equalization is without power to perform the functions incident to the administration and operation of the taxes imposed by this chapter, the provisions of Ordinance Nos. 106, 112 and 242 shall not be deemed to have been suspended, but shall be deemed to have been in full force and effect at the rate of one percent continuously from and after April 1, 1956. Upon the ceasing of the Board of Equalization to perform the functions incident to the administration and operation of the taxes imposed by this chapter, the provisions of Ordinance Nos. 106, 112 and 242 shall again be in full force and effect at the rate of one percent. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as relieving any person of the obligation to pay to the city any sales or use tax accrued and owing by reason of the provisions of Ordinance Nos. 106, 112 and 242 in force and effect prior to and including March 31, 1956. (Ord. 273 § 8, 1956)

Chapter 4.13 VOTER-APPROVED TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
4.13.010 Annual audit.
        An annual audit relating to any voter-approved transactions and use tax shall be conducted each fiscal year, beginning at the fiscal year-end immediately following approval of the tax by the electorate. Such audit shall include the amount of revenue collected on behalf of, and paid to, the city pursuant to collection of the tax in accordance with its implementing ordinance. The annual audit may be prepared and presented in the form of an audited comprehensive annual financial report. After completion, such audit shall also be made reasonably available to the public for review. (Ord. 1699 § 1, 2008)

 

4.13.020 Limitation on revenue expenditure locally.
        The revenue from any voter-approved transactions and use tax shall be deposited in the general fund for use for any of the city’s expenditures or the city’s governmental purposes. (Ord. 1699 § 2, 2008)

 

4.13.030 Voter approval required.
        Any changes to Section 4.13.010 or 4.13.020 of this chapter must be approved a majority vote of the electorate once the voter-approved transactions and use tax is enacted and takes effect. (Ord. 1699 § 3, 2008)

Chapter 4.14 UTILITY USERS TAX
4.14.010 Short title.
        The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “Utility Users Tax Ordinance.” (Ord. 1445 § 1(a), 1992)

 

4.14.020 Tax imposed.
        There is established and imposed, on December 15, 1992, the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, a utility users tax in the manner and at the rates set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1445 § 1(b), 1992)

 

4.14.030 Purpose of provisions.
        This chapter is enacted solely to raise revenue for the general governmental purposes of the city. All of the proceeds from the tax imposed by this chapter shall be placed in the city’s general fund and used for the usual current expenses of the city. This tax is urgently required for the immediate preservation of public peace, health and safety for the reasons that present revenues to the city are insufficient to maintain the present level of services to the citizens, increased revenues are essential to the implementation and continuation of crime preservation programs, and the utility users tax is more equitable to all citizens of La Habra since every user of telephone, electricity, gas, water and cable television utilities and services will share in the utility users tax, and for the reason that the utility suppliers obligated to collect the tax under this chapter require at least sixty to ninety days to revise their billing procedure. Therefore, the city council declares that the ordinance codified in this chapter shall take effect as, and is adopted as, an emergency measure and is to be enforced from the date of its adoption. (Ord. 1445 § 1(c), 1992)

 

4.14.040 Definitions.
        The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter shall be construed as defined in this section.

        “City” means the city of La Habra.

        “Cogenerator” means any corporation or person employing cogeneration technology for producing power from other than a conventional power source for the generation of electricity for self use or sale to others.

        “Gas” means natural or manufactured gas or any alternate hydrocarbon fuel which may be substituted therefor.

        “Month” means a calendar month.

        “Nonutility supplier” means:

        1.     A service supplier, other than an electrical corporation serving within the city, which generates electrical energy in capacities of at least fifty kilowatts for its own use or for sale to others; or

        2.     A gas supplier other than a gas corporation, that sells or supplies gas to users within the city.  “Persons” means any domestic or foreign corporation, firm association, syndicate, joint stock company, partnership of any kind, joint venture, club, Massachusetts business or common law trust, society, individuals or municipal corporation.

        “Service supplier” means any entity required to collect or self-impose and remit a tax as imposed by this chapter.

        “Service user” means a person required to pay a tax imposed by this chapter.

        “Tax administrator” means the finance director of the city.

        “Telephone corporation,” “electrical corporation,” “gas corporation,” “water corporation” and “cable television corporation” shall, except as provided in this chapter, have the same meaning as defined in Sections 234, 218, 222, 241 and 215.5, respectively, of the Public Utilities Code of the State of California, as said sections existed on January 1, 1992.

        “Water Corporation” means and shall be construed to include any organization or municipality, including but not limited to a mutual water company, engaged in the selling or supplying of water to a service user. “Electrical corporation,” “gas corporation” and “water corporation” mean and shall also be construed to include any municipality or franchised agency engaged in the selling or supplying of electrical power or gas water to a service user. (Ord. 1445 § 2, 1992)

 

4.14.050 Exemptions—Generally.
        A.    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any person when imposition of such tax upon that person would be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or that of the state of California.

        B.     All public agencies are exempt from the utility users tax imposed by this chapter. Such agencies include, but are not limited to: city of La Habra, La Habra city school district, Lowell joint school district, Fullerton joint union high school district, metropolitan water district of Southern California and state and federal government facilities.

        C.     The tax otherwise imposed by this chapter is not applicable to churches.

        D.    The city council may, by order or resolution, establish one or more classes of utility service otherwise subject to payment of a tax imposed by this chapter and provide that such classes of persons or service shall be exempt, in whole or in part from such tax.

        E.     The tax administrator shall prepare a list of the persons exempt from the provisions of this chapter by virtue of this section and furnish a copy thereof to each service supplier. (Ord. 1445 § 3, 1992)

 

4.14.060 Exemption—Seniors and disabled persons and other persons.
        A.    Any service user shall be eligible for an exemption from the taxes imposed by this chapter if:

        1.     He or she is sixty-five years of age or older and he or she is certified as meeting the criteria of disability as established by the United States Social Security Administration for Supplemental Income for the aged;

        2.     He or she is certified as meeting the criteria of disability as established by the United States Social Security Administration for Supplemental Income for a blind or disabled person; or

        3.     He or she or their spouse are age sixty-five or older and their gross total household combined incomes is equal to or less than the limits for “Very Low Family Income” set by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) in its income limits for public housing and Section 8 programs and median family incomes for Orange County.

        B.     By the explicit provisions herein, an application, amended application, or any re-application, only, for exemption under this section shall not be subject to Chapter 1.22 of this code, but shall be made according to the procedures set forth in this section.

        C.     The exemptions granted or authorized by this section shall not eliminate the duty of the service supplier of collecting taxes from such exempt individuals, or the duty of such exempt individuals from paying such taxes to the service supplier, unless an exemption is applied for by the service user and granted in accordance with the provisions of this section.

        D. 1. Any service user who qualifies for an exemption from the taxes imposed by this chapter because of the provisions of subsection (A) of this section may file an application with the tax administrator for an exemption at any time. Such application shall be verified by declaration under penalty of perjury and shall contain such other information as may be required by the tax administrator, including but not limited to:

        a.     Name of applicant;

        b.     Address of the residence for which the exemption is sought;

        c.     Telephone number of the applicant;

        d.     Social security number;

        e.     Age of the applicant applying for the senior citizen exemption;

        f.      Number of people residing at the residence for those residents applying for the exemption;

        g.     Total monthly gross income for all persons residing at the residence for those residents applying for the exemption; and

        h.     Information to demonstrate applicant’s qualifications pursuant to this section.

        2.     The tax administrator is hereby authorized and directed to prepare a standard form on which such an application for exemption may be submitted for consideration.

        E.     The tax administrator shall review all such applications within thirty days following receipt and shall certify the applicant as exempt if the eligibility requirements for subsection (A) are met, except that no exemption shall be granted to an applicant who is receiving service from a service supplier through a master meter, or who is sharing or prorating service with other service users even though such service users qualify under the provisions of subsection (A), and no exemption shall be granted with respect to any tax imposed by this chapter which is or has been paid by a public agency or where the applicant receives funds from a public agency specifically for the payments of such tax.

        F.     If an applicant is certified as exempt, the tax administrator shall promptly transmit the following information to the service supplier:

        1.     Name of the exempt applicant;

        2.     Account number shown on utility bill;

        3.     Address to which exempt service is being supplied; and

        4.     Any other information as may be necessary for the service supplier to remove the exempt service user from its tax billing procedure.

        G.    Upon receipt of such notice as described in subsection (E), the service supplier shall not be required to continue to bill any further tax imposed by this chapter from such exempt service user, until further notice by the tax administrator is given. The service supplier shall eliminate such exempt service user from its tax billing procedure no later than sixty days after receipt of such notice from the tax administrator.

        H.    If the tax administrator determines that an application for exemption is faulty, or that the applicant has failed to truthfully set forth the facts contained therein, application for the exemption shall be denied in writing to the applicant. The applicant shall have ten days thereafter in which to file an amended application for exemption. Upon receipt of such amended application, the tax administrator shall determine whether the requirements for exemption have been met and shall notify the applicant in writing of such determination.

        I.      The tax administrator shall notify the service suppliers of the termination of any person’s right to exemption under the provisions of this section, or the change of any address to which service is supplied to any exempt person.

        J.      Taxes billed by the service supplier to the service user prior to removing the service user from its tax billing procedures shall be collected from the service user, and the service user shall pay such taxes to the service supplier. Taxes billed to and paid by the service user between the time that the application for exemption is filed and the service supplier removes the service user from its taxing procedure will not be refunded to the service user.

        K.    Exemptions certified by the tax administrator shall continue so long as the facts supporting the qualification for exemption shall exist; provided, however, that the exemption shall automatically terminate with any change in the service address or residence of the exempt individual, or assignment of a different account number by the service supplier because of discontinuance or suspension of service at the request of the service user; and provided further, that such individual may nevertheless apply for a new exemption with each change of address or residence.

        L.     The tax administrator shall have the power and right to demand evidence of continued eligibility of a service user for exemption under the provisions of this section. Such evidence may include, but need not be limited to, copies of business records, letters or statement from the Social Security Administration, copies of income tax returns, and such other evidence concerning the service user or other members of his household as may tend to prove or disprove such eligibility. Failure to provide such evidence as is within the control of a service user to so provide, either directly by him/her or by his/her consent or the consent of a member of his/her household when such evidence is requested of the service user in writing by the tax administrator, shall be grounds for the immediate discontinuance of the service user’s eligibility for exemption under the provisions of this section. Evidence provided to the tax administrator upon request, or voluntarily provided by the service user without request, may not be used against such service users evidence of violation of the provisions of this section; such evidence may only be used as grounds for termination of the exemption provided in this section.

        M.    Any service user who has been exempted under this section shall notify the tax administrator within ten days of any change in fact or circumstance which might disqualify said individual from receiving such exemption. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to knowingly receive the benefits of the exemption provided by this section when the basis for such exemption does not exist or may cease to exist.

        N.    Notwithstanding any of the provisions hereof, if the tax administrator is notified from any source that a new or nonexempt service user is receiving service through a meter or connection exempt by virtue of an exemption issued to a previous user or exempt user of the same meter or connection, the tax administrator shall conduct an investigation to ascertain whether or not the provisions of this section have been complied with and, where appropriate, order the service supplier to commence collecting the tax from the nonexempt service user.

        O.    The service supplier is authorized to bill the tax imposed by this chapter to any new user or to any account whose name has been changed, other than by correcting a spelling error or other similar clerical error until the supplier receives notification of exemption as provided in subsection (F). Thereupon, the supplier shall cease billing the exempt user for the tax within sixty days as provided in subsection (G).

        P.     Any applicant may appeal a denial of an application, amended application or re-application for an exemption according to the provisions of Section 4.14.190 of this chapter. Any other claims relating to exemptions or applications, amended applications, or re-applications shall instead be made in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.22 of this code. (Ord. 1596 §§ 1—3, 2001; Ord. 1595 §§ 1—3, 2001; Ord. 1445 § 4, 1992)

 

4.14.070 Telephone users tax.
        A.    Imposed—Amount. There is imposed a tax upon every person in the city, other than a telephone corporation, using intrastate, interstate, international and intercontinental telephone communications services in the city and using any teletypewriter exchange services in the city or mobile or cellular telephone communications when the owner or lessee of the telephone has a billing address in the city. Interstate calls shall be deemed to include calls to the District of Columbia. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of six percent of the charges made for such services and shall be paid by the person paying for such services.

        B.     Exceptions to Certain Terms. As used in this section, the term “charges” shall not include charges for services paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones except that where such coin-operated service is furnished for a guaranteed amount, the amounts paid under such guarantee plus any fixed monthly or other periodic charge shall be included in the base for computing the amount of tax due; nor shall the term “charges” include charges for any type of service or equipment furnished by a service supplied subject to public utility regulations during any period in which the same or similar services or equipment are also available for sale or lease from persons other than a service supplier subject to public utility regulation; nor shall the words “telephone communication services” include land mobile service or maritime mobile services as defined in Section 2.1 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as such section existed on January 11, 1970. The term “telephone communication services” refers to that service which provides access to a telephone system and the privilege of telephone quality communication with substantially all persons having telephone stations which are part of such telephone system. The telephone users tax is intended to, and does, apply to all charges billed to a telephone account having a situs in the city, irrespective of whether a particular communication service originates and/or terminates within the city.

        C.     Collection. The tax imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the person providing the service or the person receiving payment for such services. The amount of the tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the last day of the following month; or, at the option of the person required to collect and remit the tax, an estimated amount of tax collected, measured by the tax bill in the previous month, shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the last day of each month.

        D.    Exemption. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the tax imposed under this section shall not be imposed upon any person for using intrastate telephone communication services to the extent that the amounts paid for such services are exempt from or not subject to tax imposed under Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code as it existed and was interpreted on January 1, 2002. (Ord. 1662 § 2, 2006; Ord. 1661 § 2, 2006; Ord. 1445 § 5, 1992)

 

4.14.080 Electricity users tax.
        A.    Imposed—Amount. There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person, other than an electric or gas corporation, using electrical energy in the city. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of four and one-half percent of the charges made for such energy by an electrical corporation providing service in the city and shall be billed to and paid by the person using the energy. The tax applicable to electrical energy provided by a nonutility supplier shall be determined by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charge the service user would have incurred if the energy used had been provided by the electrical corporation franchised by the city. Rate schedules for this purpose shall be available from the city. Nonutility suppliers shall install, maintain and use an appropriate utility-type metering system which will enable compliance with this section. “Charges,” as used in this section, shall include charges made for metered energy; and minimum charges for service, including customer charges, service charges, demand charges, standby charges and all other annual and monthly charges, fuel or other cost adjustments, authorized by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.

        B.     Exceptions to Certain Terms. As used in this section, the term “using electrical energy” shall not be construed to mean the storage of such energy by a person in a battery owned or possessed by him for use in an automobile or other machinery device apart from the premises upon which the energy was received; provided, however, that the term shall include the receiving of such energy for the purpose of using it in the charging of batteries; nor shall the term include electricity used and consumed by an electric utility supplier in the conduct of its business as an electric public utility; nor shall the term include the mere receiving of such energy by an electric corporation or governmental agency at a point within the city for resale; nor shall the term include the use of such energy in the production or distribution of water by a water utility or a governmental agency; nor shall the term include charges related to late payments.

        C.     Collection. The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier or nonutility supplier. The tax imposed in this section on use supplied by self-generation or from a nonutility supplier not subject to the jurisdiction of this chapter, shall be collected and remitted to the tax administrator in the manner set forth in Section 4.14.100. The amount of tax collected by a service supplier or a nonutility supplier in one month shall be remitted by U.S. mail to the tax administrator, postmarked on or before the last day of the following month; or, at the option of the person required to collect and remit the tax, an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month, or upon the payment pattern of the customer of the service supplier shall be remitted by U.S. mail, to the tax administrator, postmarked on or before the last day of each month. (Ord. 1609 § 2, 2002; Ord. 1445 § 6, 1992)

 

4.14.090 Fuel and gas users tax.
        A.    Imposed—Amount. There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the city other than a gas corporation or electrical corporation, using, in the city, natural gas and other hydrocarbon fuels which are transported through mains or pipes or by mobile transport. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of six percent of the charges made for the gas and shall be billed to and paid by the person using the fuel. The tax applicable to fuel, gas or gas transportation provided by nonutility suppliers shall be determined by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges the service user would have incurred if the gas or gas transportation has been provided by the gas corporation franchised by the city. “Charges” as used in this section shall include:

        1.     Those billed for gas and fuel which is delivered through mains or pipes;

        2.     Gas transportation charges; and

        3.     Demand charges, service charges, customer charges, minimum charges, annual and monthly charges and any other charge authorized by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.

        B.     Exceptions. The tax otherwise imposed by this section is not applicable to:

        1.     Charges made for fuel and gas which is to be resold and delivered through mains and pipes;

        2.     Charges made for natural gas used and consumed by a public utility or governmental agency in the conduct of its business;

        3.     Charges made by a gas public utility or gas used and consumed in the course of its public utility business;

        4.     Charges made for gas used in the propulsion of a motor vehicle, as authorized in the Vehicle Code of the state of California, utilizing natural gas and other natural gas clean-air technology;

        5.     Charges related to late payments and returned checks;

        6.     The use of such energy in the production or distribution of water by a water utility or a governmental agency; or

        7.     Charges made for gas used by a nonutility supplier to generate electrical energy for its own use or for sale to others provided the electricity so generated is subject to the tax in accordance with Section 4.14.080.

        C.     Collection. The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the person selling or transporting the gas. A person selling only transportation services to a user for delivery of gas through mains or pipes shall collect the tax from the service user based on the transportation charges. The person selling or transporting the gas shall, on or before the twentieth of each calendar month, commencing on the twentieth day of the calendar month after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, make a return to the tax administrator stating the amount of taxes billed during the preceding calendar month. At the time such returns are filed, the person selling or transporting the gas shall remit tax payments to the tax administrator in accordance with schedules established or approved by the tax administrator. The tax imposed in this section on use supplied by self-production or a nonutility supplier not subject to the jurisdiction of this chapter, shall be collected and remitted to the tax administrator in the manner set forth in Section 4.14.100. (Ord. 1445 § 7, 1992)

 

4.14.100 Service users receiving direct purchase of gas or electricity.
        A.    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, a service user receiving gas or electricity directly from a nonutility supplier not under the jurisdiction of this chapter, or otherwise not having the full tax due on the use of gas or electricity in the city directly billed and collected by the service supplier, shall report said fact to the tax administrator within thirty days of such use and shall directly remit to the city the amount of tax due.

        B.     The tax administrator may require the service user to provide, subject to audit, filed tax returns or other satisfactory evidence documenting the quantity of gas or electricity used and the price thereof. (Ord. 1445 § 8, 1992)

 

4.14.110 Water users tax.
        A.    Imposed. There is imposed a tax upon every person in the city using water which is delivered through mains or pipes. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of six percent of the charges made for such water and shall be paid by the person paying for such water. “Charges,” as used in this section, shall include charges made for metered water, and minimum charges for services, including customer charges, ready to serve charges, standby charges, and annual and monthly charges.

        B.     Exceptions. There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed in this section is computed charges made for water which is to be resold and delivered through mains or pipes; and charges made by a municipal water department, public utility or a city or municipal water district for water used and consumed by such department, utility or district, and charges related to late payments and returned checks.

        C.     Collection. The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the person supplying the water. The amount collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the last day of the following month. (Ord. 1445 § 9, 1992)

 

4.14.120 Cable television users tax.
        A.    Imposed. There is imposed a tax upon every person in the city using cable television service. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of six percent of the charges made for such cable service and shall be paid by the person paying for such cable service.

        B.     Collection. The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the person furnishing the cable television service. The amount collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the last day of the following month. (Ord. 1445 § 10, 1992)

 

4.14.130 Remittance of tax—Delinquency.
        Taxes collected from a service user which are not remitted to the tax administrator on or before the due dates provided in this chapter are delinquent. Should the due date occur on a weekend or legal holiday, the return may be postmarked on the first regular working day following a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. (Ord. 1445 § 11, 1992)

 

4.14.140 Actions to collect—Service user.
        Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the city. Any such tax collected from a service user which has wilfully been withheld from the tax administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the person required to collect and remit. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. (Ord. 1445 § 12, 1992)

 

4.14.150 Duty to collect—Procedures.
        The duty to collect and remit the taxes imposed by this chapter shall be performed as follows:

        A.    Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 4.14.090, the tax shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same time as and along with the charges made in accordance with the regular billing practices of the service supplier. Where the amount paid by a service user to a service supplier is less than the full amount of the service charge and tax which has accrued for the filling period, such amount and any subsequent payments by a service user shall be applied to the utility charge first until such charge has been fully satisfied. Any remaining balance shall be applied to taxes due. In those cases where a service user has notified the service supplier of his refusal to pay the tax imposed on such energy charges, the provisions set out in Section 4.14.170 will apply.

        B.     The duty to collect tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first full regular billing period applicable to the service user where all charges normally included in such regular billing are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Where a person receives more than one billing, one or more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing. (Ord. 1445 § 13, 1992)

 

4.14.160 Powers and duties of tax administrator.
        A.    The tax administrator shall have the power and duty, and is hereby directed to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter.

        B. 1. The tax administrator shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with provisions of this chapter for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes imposed by the provisions of this chapter.

        2.     A copy of such rules and regulations shall be on file in the tax administrator’s office.

        C.     The tax administrator may make administrative agreements to vary the strict requirements of this chapter so that collection of any tax imposed here may be made in conformance with the billing procedures of particular service supplier so long as such agreements result in collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this chapter. A copy of each such agreement shall be on file in the tax administrator’s office.

        D.    The tax administrator shall determine the eligibility of any person who asserts a right to exemption from the tax imposed by this chapter. The tax administrator shall provide the service supplier with the name of any person who the tax administrator determines is exempt from the tax imposed hereby, together with the address and account number to which service is supplied to any such exempt person. The tax administrator shall notify the service supplier of termination of any person’s right to exemption hereunder, or the change of any address to which service is supplied to any exempt person.

        E.     The tax administrator shall provide notice to all service suppliers, at least ninety days prior to any annexation or other change in the city’s boundaries. Such notice shall set forth the revised boundaries by street and address, along with a copy of the final annexation order from the Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO). (Ord. 1445 § 14, 1992)

 

4.14.170 Assessment—Service user administrative remedy.
        A.    Whenever the tax administrator determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by him from the amounts remitted to a person required to collect the tax, or that a service user has refused to pay the amount of tax, such person may be relieved of the obligation to collect taxes due under this chapter from certain named service users for specified billing periods as set forth in this section.

        B.     The service supplier shall provide the city with amounts refused and/or unpaid along with the names and addresses of the service users neglecting to pay the tax imposed under provisions of this chapter. Whenever the service user has failed to pay the amount of tax for a period of two or more billing periods, the service supplier shall be relieved of the obligation to collect taxes due.

        C.     The tax administrator shall notify the service user that the tax administrator assumed responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes. The notice shall be served on the service user by handing it to him personally or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the person required to collect the tax; or, should the service user’s address change, to the last known address. If a service user fails to remit the tax to the tax administrator within fifteen days from the date of the service of the notice upon him, which shall be the date of mailing if service is not accomplished in person, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax set forth in the notice shall be imposed, but not less than five dollars. The penalty shall become part of the tax required by this chapter to be paid to the city. (Ord. 1445 § 15, 1992)

 

4.14.180 Records—Duty to maintain for three-year period.
        It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and remit to the city any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the remittance to the tax administrator, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (Ord. 1445 § 16, 1992)

 

4.14.190 Appeals.
        A.    If any service user or service supplier is aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator, or with the administration of this chapter, except as may be otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, such person may appeal to the city manager, or his/her duly authorized designee(s), by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten calendar days of the decision which aggrieved the applicant. The city clerk shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing of such appeal. The city clerk shall give notice to such person of the time and place of hearing.

        B.     If the service user or service supplier is aggrieved by any decision of the city manager, or his/her duly authorized designee(s) with respect to the administration of this chapter, he/she may appeal to the city council by council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten calendar days of the decision rendered by the city manager, or his/her duly authorized designee(s). The city clerk shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing such appeal. The city council shall have the authority to determine all questions raised on such appeal. No such determination shall conflict with any substantive provision of this chapter. The city council shall issue a written decision within fifteen days after the hearing on the appeal. The city clerk shall thereafter mail a copy of such written decision to the person appealing, and shall notify the person appealing that such decision is governed by California Government Code Section 1094.5.

        C.     Notwithstanding the provisions in subsection A of this section, if such provisions apply by explicit reference elsewhere in this chapter, in any appeal which has as any part of it a claim for any money refund shall thereafter be subject to the provisions Chapter 1.22. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection B of this section, in any appeal which has as any part of it a claim for any money refund shall instead be subject to the provisions Chapter 1.22. Compliance with Chapter 1.22 shall be an administrative prerequisite to the maintaining of any legal action against the city for any such money refund. (Ord. 1596 § 4, 2001)

 

4.14.200 Refunds.
        A.    Whenever an overpayment of any tax collected or received by the tax administrator under this chapter is claimed, a service user, or service supplier on behalf of the service user, may make written application for a refund of such overpayment to the tax administrator, with appropriate supporting documentation to demonstrate the claimed overpayment, within thirty days of such overpayment. The applicant may appeal a denial of the application for refund of overpayment according to the provisions of Section 4.14.190 of this chapter. If the appeal is denied, any claim for overpayment shall thereafter be subject to the provisions of Chapter 1.22 of this code.

        B.     All other claims for refunds shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.22 of this code. The claims requirements contained in Chapter 1.22 shall be an administrative prerequisite to the maintaining of any legal action against the city relating to those issues for which the claims requirement is mandatory according to this chapter.

        C.     A service supplier may claim a refund for overpayment, or take as credit against taxes remitted the amount overpaid, provided that the amount claimed as overpaid by a service user has been refunded to, or credited to charges subsequently payable by, the service user. A service supplier that has collected any amount of tax in excess of the amount of tax imposed by this chapter and actually due from a service user, may refund such amount to the service user and claim credit for such overpayment against the amount of tax which is due upon any other monthly returns, provided such credit is claimed in a return dated no later than one year from the date of overpayment. D. Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, whenever a service supplier, pursuant to an order of the California Public Utilities Commission or a court of competent jurisdiction, makes a refund to service users of charges for past utility services, the taxes paid pursuant to this chapter on the amount of such refunded charges shall also be refunded to service users, and the service supplier shall be entitled to claim a credit for such refunded taxes against the amount of tax which is due upon the next monthly returns. (Ord. 1596 § 5, 2001)

 

4.14.210 Collection of tax.
        A.    Every service supplier who receives, or is entitled to receive, the payment of charges from a service user, shall collect the amount of tax imposed by this chapter from each such service user.

        B.     The tax shall be collected at the same time, and in the same manner, as the collection of charges made in accordance with regular billing practice of the service supplier.

        C.     The duty to collect tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first regular billing period applicable to that person which starts on or after the effective date specified in this chapter. (Ord. 1445 § 19, 1992)

 

4.14.220 Reporting and remittance of tax collected.
        Each service supplier shall, on or before the twentieth day of each calendar month, commencing on the twentieth day of the calendar month after the effective date of the tax (unless specified otherwise by this chapter), make a return to the tax administrator, on forms approved by the tax administrator, stating the amount of taxes billed by the service supplier during the preceding calendar month. At the time such returns are filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted contemporaneously to the tax administrator. The tax administrator is authorized to require such further information as he deems necessary to properly determine if the tax imposed is being levied and collected in accordance with this chapter. Returns and remittances are due from a service supplier immediately upon cessation of business, by such supplier, for any reason. (Ord. 1445 § 20, 1992)

 

4.14.230 Action to collect—Service supplier.
        Any tax required to be paid by a service user pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a civil debt owed by the service user to the city. Any such tax collected from a service user which has not been remitted to the tax administrator shall be deemed a civil debt owed to the city by the person required to collect and remit the same. Any service supplier or service user who has failed to remit or pay taxes to the city, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall be liable therefor in an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. (Ord. 1445 § 22, 1992)

 

4.14.240 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable thereafter by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1445 § 23, 1992)

 

4.14.250 Tax in addition to other city taxes.
        The tax imposed by this chapter is in addition to any other tax, license or permit fee that may be required of any person by this chapter or any other ordinance of the city. (Ord. 1445 § 24, 1992)

 

4.14.260 Termination or suspension.
        The service supplier shall, upon notification, terminate or suspend any utility users tax commencing with the first full billing period which occurs after the effective date of such action by the city council. (Ord. 1445 § 26, 1992)

 

4.14.270 Effective and operative date.
        The ordinance codified in this chapter, being a measure which provides a tax levy for the usual and current expenses for the city, shall go into effect immediately upon its enactment pursuant to Section 36937 of the Government Code, but shall not become operative until May 1, 1993 or at the beginning of the first regular billing period, on or after May 1, 1993, whichever is later and shall not apply prior to said date of May 1, 1993. (Ord. 1445 § 27, 1992)

 

4.14.280 Penalty.
        A.    Taxes collected by a service supplier which are not remitted to the tax administrator on or before the due dates provided in this chapter are delinquent, and shall be subject to the imposition of penalties as provided in this section.

        B.     Penalties for delinquency in remittance of any tax collected or any deficiency determination, shall attach, and be paid by the person required to collect and remit the same, in an amount equal to fifteen percent of the total tax collected or imposed by this chapter.

        C.     The tax administrator shall have power to impose additional penalties upon persons required to collect and remit taxes under the provisions of this chapter for fraud or negligence in reporting or remitting in the sum of fifteen percent of the amount of the tax collected or as recomputed by the tax administrator.

        D.    In addition to the penalties imposed in this section, any service supplier who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per month on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

        E.     Every penalty imposed under the provisions of this section shall be deemed, for all purposes, a part of the tax required to be remitted and paid to the city. (Ord. 1445 § 21, 1992)

 

4.14.290 Tax validity—Time to bring action.
        Any legal action to challenge, test, or otherwise determine the validity of this chapter, or any portion thereof; the ordinance enacting this chapter, or any portion thereof; or the tax imposed in this chapter must be brought within sixty days of the effective date of the ordinance adopting this section, in accordance with the provisions of California Code of Civil Procedure Section 860 et seq., and Sections 860 and 863 in particular. (Ord. 1596 § 6, 2001; Ord. 1595 § 6, 2001)

 

4.14.300 Annual audit.
        An annual audit relating to the tax imposed by this chapter shall be conducted each fiscal year, beginning with 2002. Such audit shall include the amount of revenue collected on behalf of, and paid to, the city pursuant to this chapter, as well as the expenditures of such revenue. The annual audit may be prepared and presented in the form of an audited comprehensive annual financial report. After completion, such audit shall also be made reasonably available to the public for review. (Ord. 1609 § 3, 2002)

 

4.14.310 Termination of tax.
        The tax provided for in this chapter shall terminate in its entirety on December 31, 2007, and shall not be collected thereafter. (Ord. 1609 § 4, 2002)

Chapter 4.16 REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
4.16.010 Title.
        The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance of the City.” It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. (Ord. 721 § 1, 1967)

 

4.16.020 Imposition of tax.
        There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars, a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents for each five hundred dollars or fractional part thereof. (Ord. 721 § 2, 1967)

 

 

4.16.030 Persons liable.
        Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 4.16.020 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. (Ord. 721 § 3, 1967)

 

4.16.040 Exemption—Securing debts.
        Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. (Ord. 721 § 4, 1967)

 

4.16.050 Exemption—Public agencies.
        Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, is a party shall be exempt from the tax imposed pursuant to this chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title. (Ord. 761 § 1, 1969; Ord. 721 § 5, 1967)

 

4.16.060 Exemption—Court proceedings.
        A.    Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment:

        1.     Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;

        2.     Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended;

        3.     Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or

        4.     Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected.

        Subdivisions 1 through 4, inclusive, of subsection A of this section, shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyance occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. (Ord. 721 § 6, 1967)

 

4.16.070 Exemption—Securities and Exchange Commission.
        Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if:

        A.    The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;

        B.     Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed;

        C.     Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. (Ord. 721 § 7, 1967)

 

4.16.080 Exemption—Partnership.
        A.    In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if:

        1.     Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and

        2.     Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.

        B.     If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon, all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.

        C.     Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of termination described in subsection B of this section, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. (Ord. 721 § 8, 1967)

 

4.16.090 Exemption—Instruments taken in lieu of foreclosure.
        The tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument or writing to a beneficiary or mortgagee which is taken from the mortgagor or trustor as a result of or in lieu of a foreclosure; provided, that such tax shall apply to the extent that the consideration exceeds the unpaid debt, including accrued interest and cost of foreclosure. Consideration, unpaid debt amount and identification of the grantee as beneficiary or mortgagee shall be noted on the deed, instrument or writing or stated in an affidavit or declaration under penalty or perjury for tax purposes. (Ord. 1206, 1983; Ord. 721, 1967)

 

4.16.100 Exemption—Marital property.
        Tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument or writing which purports to transfer or divide or allocate community, quasi-community or quasi-marital property assets between spouses for the purpose of affecting a division of community property, quasi-community property or quasi-marital property which is required by a judgment decreeing a dissolution of marriage or a legal separation, by a judgment of annulty, or by any other judgment or order rendered pursuant to Part 5 commencing with Section 4000, Division 4 of the Civil Code, or by a written agreement between the spouses executed in contemplation of any such judgment or order whether or not the written agreement is incorporated as part of the judgment or order. (Ord. 1206, 1983; Ord. 721, 1967)

 

4.16.110 Administration of chapter.
        The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 721 § 9, 1967)

 

4.16.120 Claims for refunds.
        Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. (Ord. 721 § 10, 1967)

 

4.16.130 Operative date of chapter.
        The ordinance codified in this chapter shall become operative upon the operative date of any ordinance adopted by the county, pursuant to Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state, or upon the effective date of the ordinance codified herein, whichever is the later. (Ord. 721 § 11, 1967)

 

4.16.140 Copies on file.
        Upon its adoption the city clerk shall file two copies of the ordinance codified in this chapter with the county recorder of Orange County. (Ord. 721 § 12, 1967)

Chapter 4.20 PURCHASING SYSTEM
4.20.010 Adoption.
        In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchases of supplies, equipment and services, to obtain these items at the lowest possible cost commensurate with the quality needed, to exercise positive financial control over all purchases, and to clearly define authority for the purchasing function, a purchasing system is adopted. (Ord. 1793 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1740 § 1, 2012)

 

4.20.020 Definitions.
        As used in this chapter, the following words have the following meanings:

        “Competitive proposal” means the procurement method whereby competitors’ qualifications are evaluated and the most qualified competitor is selected, subject to negotiation of fair and reasonable compensation.

        “Informal bid” means solicitation by purchasing agent of at least three written price quotations, of which the bid yielding the lowest ultimate cost shall be accepted.

        “Lowest ultimate cost” means the lowest bid price commensurate with the quality needed and shall include consideration of anticipated operating costs, transportation or packing charges, availability, storage costs, vendor reliability, past experience with the vendor, and supplier responsibility when such factors are relevant. (Ord. 1793 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1740 § 1, 2012)

 

4.20.030 Purchasing agent—Position created—Duties.
        There is created the position of purchasing agent(s). The agent(s) shall be appointed by the city manager. The duties of the purchasing agent(s) may be combined with those of any other office or position. The purchasing agent(s) have the authority and duty to:

        A.    Purchase or contract for supplies, equipment and services in accordance with the purchasing procedures prescribed in this chapter, such administrative regulations, policies or procedures as the director of finance and administrative services adopts with the city manager’s approval, and such other rules and regulations as prescribed by the city council or city manager, at all times endeavoring to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases in a cost effective manner;

        B.     Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products;

        C.     Prepare or revise written standard specifications for purchases of goods, supplies, equipment and services;

        D.    Insure the inspection of all supplies and equipment purchases to guarantee conformance with specifications, and require chemical or physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries if such are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with specifications.

        E.     Negotiate and properly prepare contracts for the procurement of the needed quality and quantity of materials, supplies, services and equipment, required by any department at the least expense to the city and in conformity with the procedures established for that purpose;

        F.     Administer the opening of sealed bids pursuant to Section 4.20.060(E);

        G.    Explore and encourage bulk purchasing when possible in order to take advantage of discounts; to join with the state, county of Orange, or any other public agency in cooperative purchasing on another agency’s bid effort. (Ord. 1793 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1740 § 1, 2012)

 

4.20.040 Duties of director of finance and administrative services.
        The director of finance and administrative services has the authority and duty to:

        A.    Recommend the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments as needed;

        B.     Maintain records needed for the efficient operation of the purchasing function.

        C.     Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary to the purchasing operation. (Ord. 1793 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1740 § 1, 2012)

 

4.20.050 Purchase request procedure.
        Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, or state law, all purchases and contracts for supplies, equipment, commodities and services of any value shall be accomplished either by or through the purchasing agent or the city manager.

        Purchases shall be processed by one of the following:

        A.    Requisitions. Using department shall submit requests for supplies, equipment and services to the purchasing agent by standard requisition forms.

        B.     Purchasing Orders. Purchase of supplies, equipment and services shall be made only by purchase order.

        C.     Encumbrance of Funds. Except in cases of emergency, as determined pursuant to Section 4.20.070, the purchasing agent shall not issue any purchase order for supplies, equipment or services unless there is an encumbered appropriation verified by the director of finance and administrative services in the fund account against which the purchase is to be charged. (Ord. 1793 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1740 § 1, 2012)

 

4.20.060 Bidding requirements for purchase of goods and services.
        A.    Bidding requirements for the purchase of goods and services is as follows:

        1.     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, when the value of any purchase or contract for goods, supplies, equipment or services is more than thirty-five thousand dollars for a single item or bulk purchase of a single item, the purchase shall be by formal bid procedure, competitive proposal procedure, government cooperative pricing, or sole source. In all such cases the purchase of goods or services must be approved by the city council and executed by the city manager.

        2.     When the value of any purchase or contract for goods, supplies, equipment or services is more than fifteen thousand dollars and up to thirty-five thousand dollars for a single item or bulk purchase of a single item, the purchase must be by formal bid procedure, competitive proposal procedure, informal bid procedure, government cooperative pricing, or sole source, as determined by the purchasing agent or city manager. In all such cases, a purchase order, written contract and payment requisition must be approved by the city manager.

        3.     When the value of any purchase or contract for goods, supplies, equipment or services is more than three thousand five hundred dollars and up to fifteen thousand dollars for a single item or bulk purchase of a single item, the purchase may be by formal bid procedure, competitive proposal procedure, informal bid procedure, government cooperative pricing, or sole source as determined by the purchasing agent. In all such cases, a payment requisition must be approved and executed by the purchasing agent.

        4.     When the value of any purchase or contract for goods, supplies, equipment or services is in an amount of up to three thousand five hundred dollars for a single item or bulk purchase of a single item, the purchase may be formal bid procedure, competitive proposal procedure, informal bid procedure, government cooperative pricing, sole source, or no bid as determined by the purchasing agent or designee. In all such cases, a payment requisition must be approved and executed by the purchasing agent or designee.

        B.     Notice Inviting Bids. Notices inviting bids shall include a general description of the articles to be purchased, shall state where bid blanks and specifications may be obtained and the time and place for opening of bids. The purchasing agent shall solicit sealed bids from all responsible prospective suppliers whose names are on the bidders’ list or who have requested their names to be added thereto, and any other source known to the purchasing agent.

        C.     Bidder’s Security. When deemed necessary by the purchasing agent, bidder’s security may be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Bidders shall be entitled to return of bid security; provided that a successful bidder shall forfeit his or her bid security upon refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten days after the notice of award of contract has been mailed, unless the city is responsible for the delay. The city council, city manager, or purchasing agent may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the next lowest responsible bidder. If the city council, city manager or purchasing agent awards the contract to the next lowest bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder’s security shall be applied by the city to the difference between the low and the second lowest bid, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder.

        D.    Performance Bonds. The city council, city manager and purchasing agent shall have authority to require a performance bond before entering a contract in such amount as it shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city. If the city council, city manager or purchasing agent requires a performance bond, the form and amount of the bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids.

        E.     Bid Opening Procedure. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the purchasing agent and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices. A tabulation of all bids received shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of not less than thirty calendar days after the bid opening. No bids shall be accepted after the stated time specified in the notice inviting bids.

        F.     Council Approval. In the event of city council approval set forth in subsection (A)(1), the city council shall approve a contract or purchase order for the lowest responsible bidder, or reject all bids.

        G.    Tie Bids. If two or more bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, the city council, city manager or purchasing agent may accept one of them or accept the lowest bid made by negotiation with the tie bidders at the time of or after the bid opening. (Ord. 1793 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1740 § 1, 2012)

 

4.20.061 Competitive proposal requirements for purchase of services.
        This method of procurement is generally used when conditions are not appropriate for the use of sealed bids. Departments may use competitive proposal procedures for qualifications-based procedures of professional services whereby competitors’ qualifications are evaluated and the most qualified competitor is selected, subject to negotiation of fair and reasonable compensation. If this method is used, the following requirements apply:

        A.    Requests for proposals (RFP) will be publicized. Any response to publicized RFP shall be honored to the maximum extent practical;

        B.     Proposals will be solicited from an adequate number of qualified sources;

        C.     All evaluation factors will be identified and included along with their relative importance in the RFP.

        D.    The evaluation process may include, but is not limited to, review of written proposals, panel interview, and reference checking.

        E.     Awards will be made to the responsible firm whose proposal is most advantageous to the city with all factors identified in the RFP considered. (Ord. 1793 § 1, 2018)

 

4.20.070 Exceptions to bidding requirement for purchase of goods and services.
        Purchases of goods, supplies, equipment and services shall be by bid procedure pursuant to Section 4.20.060(A) except:

        A.    In case of an emergency as determined by the city manager or, in his or her absence, the purchasing agent; provided, that they shall advise the city manager of such emergency purchase as soon as practicable;

        B.     When the goods or service can be obtained from only one vendor;

        C.     When the city can utilize cooperative governmental purchasing contracts or pricing for a given item or service which was established by another governmental agency’s successful bid award for that general or specific type of item or service, and which had been conducted on a negotiated or competitive basis;

        D.    When the city council finds that negotiation shall best serve the city due to the nature of the goods, supplies, equipment or services;

        E.     When the proposed purchase involves the acquisition of information technology, hardware, software, computers, telecommunications equipment, cabling, installation, support or similar electronic equipment or product, which requires the expertise of information technology, computer or telecommunications vendors who are highly and technically skilled, the city council, city manager or purchasing agent may acquire the equipment through formal or informal negotiations rather than competitive bidding. (Ord. 1793 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1740 § 1, 2012)

 

4.20.080 Exceptions to bidding requirements for purchase of services.
        A.    When the city manager or city council authorizes the procurement of services for which standard specifications cannot be drawn due to the nature of the service or because of national association bylaws or professional policies prohibiting competitive bidding, such as, but not limited to, architectural services, consultant services, legal services and engineering services, persons designated by the city manager shall negotiate for the service.

        B.     When a service firm has established such a successful past history of work with the city that it is clearly in the public interest not to negotiate with any other source.

        C.     When it is necessary to hire a consultant to prepare an environmental impact report for private development projects as provided for in the California Environmental Quality Act and applicable state and city regulations. (Ord. 1793 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1740 § 1, 2012)

 

4.20.090 Disposition of surplus supplies and equipment.
        Departments shall submit to their purchasing agent, at such time and in such form as he or she shall prescribe, reports showing all supplies and equipment which are no longer used or which have become obsolete or worn out.

        The purchasing agent shall have authority to sell all supplies and equipment which cannot be used in any agency or department or which have become unsuitable for city use, or to exchange the same for, or trade in same on, new supplies and equipment, with the approval of the city manager.

        Any such sale of such equipment shall be made by the most effective method which may include formal sealed bids, informal bids, internet auction, or negotiation. In addition, the city may hold a public auction when selling city supplies and equipment. In the event the supplies and equipment are offered at public auction, any person, including a city employee, may make an offer to purchase the supplies and equipment, but provided further, that no city employee shall purchase any supplies or equipment sold by means other than a public or internet auction, and provided further that in no event shall the purchasing agent or any other department director conducting the sale, regardless of its form, be a purchaser of the equipment or supplies.

        The city may require cash or a certified check when selling supplies or equipment.

        In the event that certain property, after being designated by a department as surplus, is determined by the purchasing agent or city public safety representative to be potentially dangerous to the public, such potentially dangerous property shall be so designated by the department and a proposed means of disposing of such potentially dangerous property submitted to the city manager for approval. Upon approval by the city manager, such property shall be disposed of in accordance with the plan of disposal approved by the city manager.

Any plan for the disposal of potentially dangerous property shall recognize the need to protect the public health, safety and welfare in the most reasonable means available. (Ord. 1793 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1764 § 1, 2015; Ord. 1740 § 1, 2012)

 

4.20.100 Revolving fund established.
        There is established a “revolving fund” for the prepayment of deposits, cash purchases, expense advances, reimbursements, or for the purchase of goods and services by the city. Such fund may be established as a separate bank account with the signature of the director of finance and administrative services, or as a cash fund payment by the director of finance and administrative services on a voucher approved by the city manager. (Ord. 1793 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1740 § 1, 2012)

Chapter 4.24 UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
4.24.010 Defined.
        “Unclaimed property” means any property found by officers or employees of the city upon the public streets or ways of the city or elsewhere within the city or any property brought to the city by others where the owner of the same is unknown; provided, however, that property held as evidence, dangerous weapons or deadly weapons, narcotics or dangerous drugs, explosives or any property of any kind whatsoever which is prohibited by law as the same are defined or described in state or federal statutes shall not constitute unclaimed property as defined in this section. (Ord. 1005 § 1, 1977)

 

4.24.020 Care—Return to owner—Conditions.
        All unclaimed property shall be kept by the city using ordinary care to keep the same safely. If the owner appears prior to four months in the case of all property other than bicycles, and in the case of bicycles prior to three months, from the date the property came into possession of the city, it shall be returned to the owner subject to the following conditions:

        A.    The owner must produce reasonable proof of ownership;

        B.     The owner must tender to the city an amount sufficient to reimburse city for reasonable cost of storage of the article;

        C.     The owner executes and delivers to the city a proper receipt for the property. (Ord. 1005 § 1, 1977)

 

4.24.030 Disposition—Notification of sale.
        At any time after the expiration of the time periods specified in Section 4.24.020, any unclaimed property may be sold or disposed of in the following manner:

        A.    The chief of police is authorized and empowered to sell or transfer to a nonprofit organization all such unclaimed property. If such unclaimed property is to be sold it shall be sold at public auction to the highest bidder, for cash, or to transfer the property to the city purchasing department for sale or other disposition. In the event the chief of police elects to sell the property, he or she shall give notice of the date and place of the sale at least five days before the time fixed therefor by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county of Orange.

        B.     In the event the chief of police elects to transfer the property to the city purchasing department for sale, or in the case of property coming into the possession of any department other than the police department which property is to be sold, the city manager shall give the notice of sale as provided in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 1404 § 1, 1991; Ord. 1005 § 1, 1977)

 

4.24.040 Retention for public use.
        If the city purchasing department determines that any of such unclaimed property is needed for public use, the property may be retained by the city for its use. (Ord. 1005 § 1, 1977)

 

4.24.050 Disposition of proceeds from sale.
        The net proceeds of such sale shall be paid to the city treasurer and credited by the treasurer to the general fund. (Ord. 1005 § 1, 1977)

 

4.24.060 Disposition of unsold items.
        Property for which no bid is made at such sale may be given to a nonprofit charitable organization, destroyed or otherwise disposed of as the city manager or his authorized representative may direct. (Ord. 1005 § 1, 1977)

Chapter 4.28 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
4.28.010 Created.
        To comply with the provisions of Article 5 of Chapter 1 of Division I of the Streets and Highways Code, with particular reference to the amendments made thereto by Chapter 642, Statutes of 1935, there is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the “special gas tax street improvement fund.” (Ord. 85 § 1, 1935)

 

4.28.020 Source of moneys in fund.
        All moneys received by the city from the state under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein for, or the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways other than state highways shall be paid into the fund. (Ord. 85 § 2, 1935)

 

4.28.030 Expenditures of moneys in fund.
        All moneys in the fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by, and subject to all of the provisions of Article 5, Chapter 1, Division I of the Streets and Highways Code. (Ord. 85 § 3, 1935)

Chapter 4.32 REDEVELOPMENT REVOLVING FUND
4.32.010 Created.
        There is created and established a “redevelopment revolving fund” to be kept and maintained in the city treasury. (Ord. 930 § 1, 1975)

 

4.32.020 Deposits and appropriations.
        All appropriations from the fund and deposits to the fund will be in accordance with the provisions of state law and in accordance with the requirements of the adopted plan for the redevelopment of downtown La Habra. (Ord. 930 § 2, 1975)

Chapter 4.36 REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY ADMINISTRATIVE FUND
4.36.010 Downtown redevelopment project loan repayment—Terms and conditions.
        The sum of three thousand nine hundred three dollars expended by the city on behalf of the agency for the downtown redevelopment project shall be considered as a loan to the agency and shall be repaid on the following terms and conditions:

        A.    Simple interest shall accrue until paid at the rate of eight percent per year.

        B.     The loan, together with accrued interest, shall be repaid by the agency from tax increments accruing to the agency for the downtown redevelopment project pursuant to Sections 33670—33674 of the California Health and Safety Code and Section 19, Article XIII of the California Constitution, or from any other funds which may be legally available to the agency for repayment to the city.

        C.     Repayment need not be made by the agency until all other debts which may be incurred by the agency for project improvements, including the future pledge of tax increments for bonds to finance project improvements, have been satisfied or adequate provisions made for the repayment of such other agency indebtedness.

        D.    If no funds become available for such purposes, then the money loaned and accrued interest need not be repaid. (Ord. 931 § 1, 1975)

 

4.36.020 Appropriation of money for administrative expenses and overhead.
        The city shall from time to time appropriate moneys to be used on behalf of the agency for agency administrative expenses and overhead in connection with the downtown redevelopment project. (Ord. 931 § 2, 1975)

 

4.36.030 Created.
        All moneys appropriated by the city council for such purposes shall be kept in the treasury of the city in a special fund to be known as the “redevelopment agency administrative fund” to meet the administrative expenses. (Ord. 931 § 3, 1975)

 

4.36.040 Expenditures from fund.
        Money shall be drawn from the redevelopment agency administrative fund to meet the administrative expenses of the agency in substantially the same manner as money is drawn by other agencies and departments of the city subject to budgetary control. (Ord. 931 § 4, 1975)

 

4.36.050 Expenditures made on behalf of the agency to be considered a loan—Repayment terms and conditions.
        All funds expended on behalf of the agency from the redevelopment agency administrative fund shall be a loan to the agency to be repaid on the following terms and conditions:

        A.    Simple interest shall accrue until paid at the rate of eight percent per year.

        B.     The loan, together with accrued interest, shall be repaid by the agency from tax increments accruing to the agency for the downtown redevel-

opment agency project pursuant to Sections 33670— 33674 of the California Health and Safety Code and Section 19, Article XIII of the California Constitution, or from any other funds which may be legally available to the agency for repayment to the city.

        C.     Repayment need not be made by the agency until all other debts which may be incurred by the agency for project improvements, including the future pledge of tax increments for bonds issued to finance project improvements, have been satisfied or adequate provisions made for the repayment of such other agency indebtedness.

        D.    If no funds become available for such purposes, then the money loaned and accrued interest need not be repaid. (Ord. 931 § 5, 1975)

4.36.060—4.44.020

4.36.060 Annual budget—Submittal by agency—Adoption by council.
        The agency shall annually submit to the city council a proposed budget of its proposed administrative expenses for the ensuing fiscal year. An annual budget will be adopted by city council for the administrative expenses of the agency with such conditions and restrictions upon the expenditure or encumbrance of the money appropriated pursuant to the budget as the city council deems appropriate. (Ord. 931 § 6, 1975)

 

4.36.070 Report of transactions—Submittal required when requested.
        A detailed report of all transactions made on behalf of the agency, including a statement of all revenues and expenditures shall be submitted to the city council or the agency board upon the request of each such body. (Ord. 931 § 7, 1975)

Chapter 4.40 BAD CHECKS
4.40.010 Fee.
        Whenever the city’s financial institution of record properly notifies the city that it has been refused payment on a check drawn by an individual/corporation purchasing services from the city, the reason for such refusal having been for nonsufficient funds in the individual’s/corporation’s account, the director of finance may levy a fee as set by resolution in each instance to help off-set the city’s added processing and collection costs. (Ord. 1213 §§ 2, 3, 1983; Ord. 1190, 1983)

Chapter 4.44 FIREMED AND AMBULANCE PROGRAM
4.44.010 Title.
        The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “FireMed and Ambulance Program ordinance of the city.” (Ord. 1701 § 2, 2009)

 

4.44.020 Purpose.
        The city council declares that the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

        A.    To reduce life loss and disability by maintaining current service levels for the delivery of EMS and ambulance services;

 

        B.     To establish an ambulance transport service with more local control and to provide additional manpower with a greater level of training and knowledge of EMS procedures;

        C.     To recover emergency supply costs used by EMS personnel during a medical emergency and transport;

        D.    To offer a mechanism for residents and businesses to cap their emergency medical service and ambulance transportation costs through a fee for service and voluntary membership FireMed program. (Ord. 1701 § 2, 2009)

4.44.030—4.44.040

4.44.030 Definitions.
        Unless a different meaning is apparent from the context or is specified in the code, the following definitions shall be used:

        “Advanced life support (ALS)” means any advanced life support medical treatment performed by paramedics (EMT-P) outside of a hospital. This treatment shall follow the current “Policy and Procedures” as specified by the Orange County emergency medical services agency, and as defined in the Health and Safety Code Section 1797.52.

        “Ambulance” means the designated ground ambulance service, licensed by the state of California and the county of Orange, which provide services for the city of La Habra.

        “Basic life support (BLS)” means any basic life support treatment which is authorized by the state of California Department of Health to be performed by emergency medical technicians I (EMT-I) and/or paramedics (EMT-P) at the scene of a medical emergency. This treatment shall follow the current “Policy and Procedures” as specified by the Orange County emergency medical services agency, and as defined in the Health and Safety Code Section 1797.60.

        “Emergency medical assist” means a request for service that does not involve ALS or BLS skills. Examples include; requests to assist residents (who have fallen) back into bed or into a chair.

        “Fee-for-service” means billing that is generated to cover costs of emergency medical care (ALS, BLS, assist), emergency ambulance service and emergency medical supply costs.

        “FireMed program” means a voluntary membership plan in which members shall prepay at a fixed price the uninsured portion of emergency medical care, emergency ambulance services and emergency medical supplies provided by the fire department providing service to the city of La Habra and/or La Habra Ambulance. This prepaid membership fee will assure members that they will not incur the higher direct fee-for-service charge.

        “FireMed services” means those services provided by the fire department providing service to the city of La Habra and/or La Habra Ambulance related to emergency medical care, emergency ambulance service and emergency medical supplies provided during the course of an emergency medical incident.

        “Nonresidence of La Habra” is defined as commercial, industrial, institutional, offices, hotels and similar occupancies.

        “Residence of La Habra” is defined as a single dwelling unit in which one or more related or unrelated persons permanently reside. For purposes of this chapter, a convalescent hospital, rest home and retirement homes, shall each be defined as containing separate residences equal to the number of beds in each facility. Hotels, motels, and temporary residential facilities are not included under this definition unless a person has taken up permanent residence at one of these facilities, and can show proof of residence.

        “Supplies” means disposable medical supplies and drugs that are used for necessary treatment by EMTs during an emergency. (Ord. 1701 § 2, 2009)

 

4.44.040 Administration.
        The police chief or designee shall be responsible for the development of rules, policies and procedures relating to implementation and administration of the FireMed program. The police chief or designee shall exercise reasonable discretion in the interpretation of these regulations, and resolve any dispute arising from the operation of the

FireMed program or conflicts which may arise from the implementation of the various sections of this chapter. The police chief shall report to the city manager and the city council on the status of the FireMed program as directed. (Ord. 1701 § 2, 2009)

4.44.050—4.44.080

4.44.050 Eligibility.
        The FireMed program is only open to La Habra residents and nonresidents, including their employees, as defined by this chapter. Eligibility will be established through: current water billing records; rent receipts; utility bills; or other forms of identification which clearly show the member’s location in the city. (Ord. 1701 § 2, 2009)

 

4.44.060 Enrollment.
        Each residence of La Habra and nonresident of La Habra will have the opportunity to join the FireMed program annually during the enrollment period.

        A.    Those persons of residence and nonresidence in the city of La Habra, as defined in this chapter, who elect to subscribe to the FireMed program may join the FireMed program by submitting a completed application and the payment of the FireMed subscriber fee in a manner to be established by the police chief. Coverage will commence upon acceptance of the required payment. Coverage under the FireMed program will not predate the actual enrollment date. Members who move out of the city prior to the end of the year shall not be eligible for a refund or any portion of the fee and it shall not be transferable.

        B.     Residents and nonresidents who move within the city limits while enrolled as a FireMed subscriber will not be required to pay an additional fee, but must submit a change of address to the police department, FireMed office within thirty days. (Ord. 1701 § 2, 2009)

 

4.44.070 Member benefits.
        FireMed members shall receive the following benefits by joining the voluntary FireMed program:

        A.    Payment of the uninsured portion of:

        1.     ALS charges;

        2.     BLS charges;

        3.     Medical assist charges;

        4.     Emergency ground ambulance transportation charges;

        5.     Emergency medical supply costs.

        B.     Additional member benefits may be determined by the police chief or designee. (Ord. 1701 § 2, 2009)

 

4.44.080 Authorization for fees.
        Advanced life support, basic life support, emergency medical assist, emergency response rate, mileage, oxygen, standby time and emergency medical supplies, are authorized and shall be charged in connection with emergency medical care provided by the fire department providing service to the city of La Habra and/or La Habra Ambulance. The amount of such fees shall be set from time to time by resolution of the city council. There shall be two categories of fees as follows:

        A.    The fee for service shall be a membership fee designed to recover costs associated with the delivery of emergency medical care and ambulance services. Each recipient of the FireMed services shall be liable for all charges incurred on their behalf. In case of multiple accident or injury calls, each person shall only be liable for the cost of services rendered to them. Bills for service are due upon presentation. Such fees shall be charged for:

        1.     Emergencies requiring basic life support (BLS) services;

        2.     Emergencies requiring advanced life support (ALS) services;

        3.     Emergency medical response whether or not transportation was provided; and

        4.     Emergencies requiring ambulance transportation to the nearest medical facility best suited to meet the patient’s emergency medical needs.

        The responding ambulance program personnel shall determine the classification of a call. This determination shall be based on guidelines established in this chapter and which may be adopted from time-to-time by the police chief or designee in conjunction with the paramedics and base station physicians.

        B.     1.     The FireMed program shall be a membership program offered to persons of residence and nonresidence of La Habra on a voluntary basis for the purpose of allowing members to prepay, at a fixed price, the uninsured portion of emergency ambulance service and emergency medical charges for services provided by the fire department providing service to the city of La Habra and/or La Habra Ambulance.

        2.     Payment of the membership fee by residents of La Habra shall entitle membership to all permanent residents of each paying household.

        3.     Fees paid by nonresidents of La Habra entitle employees to membership benefits only while on the job within the city limits.

        Guests, customers, patrons, patients, visitors or others using the facilities of such households and businesses shall be charged directly for all FireMed services. (Ord. 1701 § 2, 2009)

4.44.090—4.46.010

4.44.090 Implementation.
        Implementation of membership fees for FireMed services shall begin September 1, 1995. The police chief or designee shall be authorized to administer the FireMed program beginning upon adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. All residents who are currently enrolled in the paramedic subscription program will enjoy full coverage for any FireMed services which might be used until the next enrollment period. (Ord. 1701 § 2, 2009)

 

4.44.100 Duty to respond.
        Under no circumstances will the delivery and application of available emergency medical services and ambulance transportation be delayed or refused based upon whether or not a person is a FireMed member or can demonstrate an ability to pay. (Ord. 1701 § 2, 2009)

 

4.44.110 Exemptions.
        A.    Determination of eligibility for an exemption from or reduction of fee for services by persons claiming a hardship is available upon application to the police chief or designee for a reduction of charges. The police chief or designee will take into account the availability of insurance, government assistance programs and total household income. Based upon his or her findings he or she may reduce the charges or exempt a user from charges.

        B.     In the event that a third party requests paramedic or emergency medical service for a person who is believed to be experiencing a medical emergency, and that person declines assistance from the paramedics and/or La Habra Ambulance, there shall be no charge made for FireMed service. (Ord. 1701 § 2, 2009)

 

4.44.120 Funding.
        Revenues derived from the FireMed program shall be used to improve and maintain the emergency medical services and/or ambulance services provided by or through the city of La Habra. (Ord. 1701 § 2, 2009)

 

4.44.130 Program termination.
        The FireMed program may be canceled by a majority vote of the La Habra city council. If the council chooses to terminate the FireMed program prior to the new program year, the city may, at its option, refund membership fees back to FireMed members on a prorated basis. The city shall provide thirty days written notice to FireMed members prior to program termination. (Ord. 1701 § 2, 2009)

Chapter 4.46 CRIMINAL JUSTICE ADMINISTRATION FEE
4.46.010 Payment of fee.
        Any person convicted of any criminal offense related to an arrest shall pay to the city any criminal justice administrative fee imposed on the city by the county. (Ord. 1433 § 1, 1992; Ord. 1432 § 1, 1992)

Chapter 4.48 AIR QUALITY IMPROVEMENT TRUST FUND FOR MOBILE SOURCE AIR POLLUTION REDUCTION
4.48.010 Intent.
        The ordinance codified by this chapter is intended to support the California Air Quality Management District’s imposition of the vehicle registration fee and to bring the city into compliance with the requirements set forth in Section 44243 of the Health and Safety Code in order to receive fee revenues for the purpose of implementing programs to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles. (Ord. 1408 § 1, 1991)

 

4.48.020 Definition.
        As applied in this chapter, the following words and terms shall be defined as follows:

        A.    “Fee administrator” means the finance director of the city or designee.

        B.     “Mobile source air pollution programs” means any program or project implemented by the city to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles which it determines will be consistent with the California Clean Air Act of 1988 or the plan proposed pursuant to Article 5 (commencing with Section 40460), of Chapter 5.5 of Part 3 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        C.     “SCAQMD” means the South Coast Air Quality Management District. (Ord. 1408 § 1, 1991)

 

4.48.030 Administration of vehicle registration fee.
        A.    Receipt of Fee. The additional vehicle registration fees disbursed by the SCAQMD and remitted to the city, pursuant to this chapter, codified herein, shall be accepted by the fee administrator.

        B.     Transfer of Funds. Upon receipt of vehicle registration fee, the fee administrator shall deposit such funds into the separate account established pursuant to subsection A of this section. All interest earned by the trust fund account shall be credited only to that account.

        C.     Expenditure of Air Quality Trust Fund Revenues. All revenues received from the SCAQMD and deposited in the trust fund account shall be exclusively expended on mobile source emission reduction programs as defined in subsection B of Section 4.48.020. Such revenues shall be expended within one year of the completion of the programs.

        D.    Audits. The city consents to an audit of all programs and projects funded by vehicle registration fee revenues received from the SCAQMD pursuant to Section 44223 of the Health and Safety Code.

The audit shall be conducted by an independent auditor selected by the SCAQMD as provided in Section 44244 of the Health and Safety Code. The city may audit through the public hearing process designated by Section 44244-1 (c) of the Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 1408 § 1, 1991)

Chapter 4.50 UTILITY PAYMENT PROCEDURE
4.50.010 Purpose.
        It is the purpose of this chapter to establish uniform procedures for the establishment and administration of water, sewer, and/or refuse service customer accounts, submission of billings, collection of monies, and the administration of delinquent accounts. (Ord. 1688, 2007)

 

4.50.020 Rules and regulations adoption.
        The city council reserves the right and power to, and may from time to time, by resolution, adopt rules and regulations for the operation of the utility systems, for furnishing the services, and for setting and/or modifying the rates and charges in compliance with the requirements of Article XIIID, Section 6 of the California Constitution (Prop. 218), deposits, and penalties established and imposed relating to the services enumerated in Section 4.50.010 of this chapter except as specifically provided elsewhere in this code. (Ord. 1688, 2007)

 

4.50.030 Administration and enforcement.
        The director of finance and administrative services (director) and/or his/her designated representative(s) shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The director and/or his/her designated representative(s) may modify the requirements imposed by the provisions of this chapter, using reasonable judgment, in individual cases where sufficient mitigating circumstances exist. (Ord. 1688, 2007)

 

4.50.040 Accounts to be kept.
        The director shall be responsible for maintaining a record of accounts showing the names of persons to whom service is being furnished by the city, the address of the property being served, the amounts due, the disposition of the accounts, and any additional information deemed necessary by the director for the administration and upkeep of said accounts. (Ord. 1688, 2007)

 

4.50.050 Rates for service.
        All rates and fees associated with the commencement, provision, discontinuation and/or recommencement of the services enumerated in Section 4.50.010 of this chapter shall be set forth in the master schedule of fees adopted and/or amended from time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1688, 2007)

 

4.50.060 Application for service.
        Before service is supplied to any premises, the customer shall complete and submit an “Application for New Service” to the department of finance and administrative services, either in person, by mail, by electronic mail, or by facsimile. (Ord. 1688, 2007)

 

4.50.070 Advance deposits.
        Upon application for the commencement or resumption of services a deposit of no less than one hundred dollars for residential customers and no less than three hundred dollars for commercial customers shall be required. The city shall retain such deposit for the maximum period permitted and provided for under the laws of the state of California and shall apply such deposit, or portion thereof as may be necessary, upon any account remaining unpaid at the discontinuance of service. If, thereafter, the same or a different residential or business customer makes a new application for such service at the same address, a new deposit shall be required. Each advance deposit, or portion thereof, not so applied shall be returned to the customer whenever there is a change in occupancy of the premises, change of the account holder of record, or when an account is closed. (Ord. 1688, 2007)

 

4.50.080 Water meter installation.
        The city, as a condition of water service, shall have the right to install water meters on any and all water services, and the charges used through the meter shall be in accordance with the applicable master schedule of fees. The city shall also have the right to inspect said water meter at any time. (Ord. 1688, 2007)

 

4.50.090 Unsafe equipment.
        The city may refuse to establish or may discontinue one or more of the services enumerated in Section 4.50.010 of this chapter to any customer if any part of the plumbing or other equipment, or use thereof, is determined by the city to be unsafe or in violation of applicable laws, ordinances, rules or regulations of public authorities, or any condition existing upon the customer’s premises, or portion thereof, is determined to endanger the city’s service facilities, until it shall have been put in a safe condition or the violation has been remedied. The city does not assume any responsibility for inspecting or repairing the customer’s plumbing or other equipment, or any part thereof and assumes no liability therefor. (Ord. 1688, 2007)

 

4.50.100 Damage caused by failure of equipment by disconnection for failure to pay charges—Disclaimer of liability.
        Should the city fail to furnish one or more of the services enumerated in Section 4.50.010 of this chapter by reason of breakage of any wire, pipe or machinery or from any cause beyond its power or control, and/or if any consumer should fail to pay his or her bill within the time specified in this chapter and any of the employees of the city disconnect or discontinue one or more of the services enumerated in Section 4.50.010 of this chapter in compliance with this chapter and Government Code Section 60372 et seq., the city or its employees shall not be held responsible for any damages that might result from disconnection. If the installation and preventative maintenance of a water pressure regulator is required by the director of public works, the installation and maintenance thereof shall be the sole responsibility of the property-owner and the city will not be liable for losses or property damage as a result of the lack of maintenance of, or the failure of such devices. The property owner shall install the required water pressure regulator within the time specified by the director of public works. (Ord. 1688, 2007)

 

4.50.110 Billing procedure.
        Every owner, tenant or occupant of premises receiving one or more of the services enumerated in Section 4.50.010 of this chapter shall be billed for such service once every month. All charges for service are due and payable when rendered and become delinquent on the twentieth calendar day after the billing date shown on such bill. Each bill shall include a notice that the bill will become delinquent if not paid prior to the delinquency period specified on the bill. (Ord. 1688, 2007)

 

4.50.120 Payment procedures.
        Payments may be made only with currency of the United States of America, either via the United States Postal Service, at a designated utility payment drop box, or directly at the department of finance and administrative services and may be accepted only by the director or by employees under his/her supervision. (Ord. 1688, 2007)

 

4.50.130 Delinquent accounts.
        A.    Whenever payment for a bill which was properly rendered has not been received by the department of finance and administrative services at the close of business on the delinquency date as specified on the bill, the total amount of the bill shall become delinquent. If the delinquency date is a nonbusiness day, the account shall become delinquent at the close of business on the first business day thereafter.

        B.     Delinquent amounts not paid by the time the next bill is prepared shall be separately stated on the next bill rendered to the customer; such amount shall be subject to a late charge, and such statement shall constitute notice of delinquency to the customer. The amount of the late charge shall be ten percent or ten dollars, whichever is greater. The late charge shall be applied monthly against the outstanding delinquent balance (minus any prior late charges) and will not be calculated on a compounded basis. Partial payments will be applied, in priority order, as follows:

        1.     First to the unpaid water charges, then

        2.     To the unpaid sewer charges, then

        3.     To the unpaid refuse charges, then

        4.     To any local taxes, then

        5.     To any outstanding penalties or interest, then

        6.     To any miscellaneous utility fees, charges or assessments, then

        7.     To FireMed program payments (if enrolled), then

        8.     To any other program payments, and finally

        9.     To voluntary donations (if enrolled).

        All unpaid balances will be carried forward as delinquent, with the exception of voluntary donations, which will not be considered collectable or delinquent. The director is authorized to waive delinquency charges one time per year, per account, subject to a review of prior payment patterns for the delinquent account; however, delinquency charges may not be waived more than once in any continuous- twelve month period.

        C.     If the bill for all past due and current amounts prepared pursuant to Section 4.50.130(B) of this chapter is not paid within nineteen days after the notice specified in Section 4.50.130(B) of this chapter, on or after the twentieth day following the date shown on such notice a final notice shall be mailed to the customer advising that service may be discontinued if payment of the entire amount then due is not made within fifteen days.

        D.    If the bill has not been paid by the close of business on the date specified in Section 4.50.130(C) above, the city shall make reasonable attempt to contact an adult person residing at the premises of the customer by telephone or personal contact at least twenty-four hours prior to any termination of service. In the event telephone or personal contact cannot be achieved the city shall give, by mail or by posting in a conspicuous location at the premises, a notice of termination of service, at least forty-eight hours prior to termination.

        E.     After following the procedure set forth in Section 4.50.130(D), service shall be discontinued and a disconnection fee as set forth in the master schedule of fees adopted and/or amended from time to time by resolution of the city council shall be charged and added to the customer’s bill.

        F.     No person who owes delinquent accounts to the city on either a closed or current account may open a new account until all such delinquent accounts have been paid in full.

        G.    The city reserves the right, and the director is authorized, to use a collection agency, establish payment plans, or pursue any and/or all other remedies provided for under the law to pursue the collection of delinquent accounts.

        H.    Failure to receive mail will not be recognized as a valid excuse for failure to pay a bill by the due date. Change in occupancy of property provided service and/or changes in mailing addresses of consumers of service must be filed with the department of finance and administrative services either in person or by telephone. (Ord. 1688, 2007)

 

4.50.140 Write-off of uncollectible accounts.
        A.    The director is authorized to fully or partially write-off as uncollectible any delinquent account provided for under this chapter when the director determines that the delinquent account is:

        1.     Uncollectible; or

        2.     Possibly collectible but collection would not be reasonably cost effective taking into consideration the probable necessary cost to the city in pursuing collection and the likelihood of collection; or

        3.     Under a payment plan established and approved by the director of finance and administrative services that includes a provision to forgive a portion of the delinquency if the account holder meets the terms of the payment plan; or

        4.     Not a valid or enforceable claim of the city.

        B.     A write-off pursuant to this section is authorized solely to facilitate the keeping of the books of account of the city, and under no circumstances shall any such write-off be deemed to constitute a relinquishment or abandonment by the city of any such account or claim, and nothing in these sections shall be deemed or construed to prevent the city from collecting or enforcing payment of any such account or claim at any time. (Ord. 1688, 2007)

Chapter 4.52 ASSESSMENT INSTALLMENTS IN LIEU OF PAYMENT OF SEWER SYSTEM CONNECTION FEES
4.52.010 Purpose.
        This chapter is enacted for the purpose of authorizing and establishing a procedure for levying assessment installments in lieu of payment of sewer main installation fees and sewer lateral installation fees incident to the connection of residential and nonresidential premises to the city sewer system, where such premises are presently served by a private sewer system consisting of a septic tank and leach field which will be abandoned at the time such premises are connected to the city sewer system. (Ord. 1616 § 1, 2002)

 

4.52.020 Findings.
        The city council finds as follows:

        A.    The city council finds that there remains within the city sewer service area a number of residential and nonresidential premises which are still being served by a private sewer system consisting of a septic tank and leach field rather than being connected to the city sewer system;

        B.     The city council finds that it is in the public interest to facilitate connection of such premises to the city sewer system in that by reason of high nitrate levels in the groundwaters underlying the city and its environs, caused in large part by individual septic tanks and leach fields which now serve a significant number of premises located in that part of the city sewer service area within the incorporated territory of the city as well as a large number of premises located in that part of the city sewer service area within the unincorporated territory of the county of Orange;

        C.     The city council finds that one means of facilitating connection of the premises to the city sewer system is to provide the owners of such premises with an alternate means of financing the sewer main installation fees and sewer lateral installation fees which ordinarily become due and payable in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 13.08 of this code at the time of connection of the premises to the city sewer system;

        D.    The intent of this council in enacting this chapter is to provide such financial assistance by allowing payment of such fees over a ten-year period through the levying of assessment installments in lieu of payment of sewer system connection fees in the manner provided for by this chapter. (Ord. 1616 § 1, 2002)

 

4.52.030 Sewer system connection fees defined.
        For purposes of this chapter the term, “sewer system connection fees,” shall mean all sewer main installation fees and sewer lateral installation fees which become due and payable in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 13.08 of this code incident to the connection of premises to the city sewer system. (Ord. 1616 § 1, 2002)

 

4.52.040 Applicability.
        The provisions of this chapter shall apply to and authorize the levy of assessment installments in lieu of payment of sewer system connection fees for the following residential and nonresidential premises within the city sewer service area connecting to the city sewer system:

        A.    Premises Within the Incorporated Territory of the City of La Habra. Where premises connecting to the city sewer system are located in that part of the city sewer service area within the incorporated territory of the city, this chapter shall authorize the levy of assessment installments in lieu of payment of sewer system connection fees if, and only if, such premises are presently being served by a private sewer system consisting of a septic tank and leach field which will be abandoned at the time the premises are connected to the city sewer system.

        B.     Premises Within the Unincorporated Territory of the County of Orange. Where the premises being connected to the city sewer system are located in that part of the city sewer service area within the unincorporated territory of the county of Orange, this chapter shall authorize the levy of assessment installments in lieu of payment of sewer system connection fees if, and only if, such premises are presently being served by a private sewer system consisting of a septic tank and leach field which will be abandoned at the time the premises are connected to the city sewer system and if, in addition, the county of Orange has entered into a joint powers agreement with the city pursuant to Article 1, Chapter 5, Division 7, Title 1 of the Government Code (commencing with Section 6500) which authorizes the city to levy such assessment installments on premises located within the unincorporated territory of the county of Orange. (Ord. 1616 § 1, 2002)

 

4.52.050 Manner of serving notices and documents.
        Any notice or other documents required to be served on the owner of an interest in the fee title to premises pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed served when either personally delivered to such person or when deposited in the United States mail, certified and return receipt requested, addressed to the person at his or her address as it appears on an assessment petition filed in the manner provided by this chapter or, lacking an address on such assessment petition, at his or her address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll or supplement roll of the county of Orange, whichever is more current. Service by mail of a notice or other document in the manner provided for herein shall be effective on the date of mailing and the failure of any person to receive such notice or document shall not affect the validity of such notice or document. (Ord. 1616 § 1, 2002)

 

4.52.060 Petition for levying assessment installments in lieu of payment of sewer system connection fees.
        Proceedings for levying assessment installments in lieu of the payment of sewer system connection fees shall be initiated by a petition filed in the office of the director of public works. Such petition shall describe the premises to be connected to the city sewer system by street address or other method sufficient to enable the director of public works to identify the location and boundaries of such premises, shall include a declaration that the premises are presently being served by a private sewer system consisting of a septic tank and leach field which will be abandoned at the time the premises are connected to the city sewer system, shall set forth the request of the petitioners for the city council to levy an assessment in lieu of payment of sewer system connection fees in the manner provided for by this chapter, and shall be signed by and set forth the mailing address of all persons owning an interest in the fee title to the premises. Such petition shall also be accompanied by a lot book guarantee issued by a title company showing fee title to the premises which are the subject of the petition vested in all persons having signed the petition, such other documents and data as may be required by the director of public works to prepare the report or otherwise carry out the duties of the director of public works provided for by this chapter, and a petition fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council based entirely on the estimated administrative costs incurred by the city for processing such petitions in the manner provided for by this chapter. (Ord. 1616 § 1, 2002)

 

4.52.070 Report of director of public works on assessment petition.
        Following receipt of an assessment petition, the director of public works shall promptly cause a report to be made on the petition, and, following completion of such report, shall cause the petition and the report to be forwarded to the city clerk who shall schedule the petition and report for consideration by the city council at the first regular or adjourned regular meeting of the city council following the twentieth day after receipt of the petition and report. In the report of the director of public works, the following shall be set forth:

        A.    A description of the premises which are the subject of the petition both by legal description and assessor’s parcel number;

        B.     The name and mailing address of all persons owning an interest in the fee title to the such premises;

        C.     A determination as to whether the premises are located in that part of the city sewer service area within the incorporated territory of the city or that part of the city sewer service area within the unincorporated territory of the county of Orange;

        D.    A computation of the total amount of the sewer system connection fees which would become due and payable in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 13.08 of this code at the time of connection of the premises to the city sewer system; and

        E.     A schedule of the assessment installments to be levied against the subject premises in order to pay all such sewer system connection fees, together with interest thereon, in ten annual installments, all at the time, in the amounts, and in the manner hereinafter provided by this chapter. (Ord. 1616 § 1, 2002)

 

4.52.080 Notice of city council meeting on assessment petition.
        At least ten days prior to the scheduled date of the regular or adjourned regular meeting of the city council at which the assessment petition is scheduled for consideration, the director of public works shall cause notice of the time and place of such meeting and a copy of the report of the director of public works on the assessment petition to be served on all owners of an interest in the fee title to the premises which are the subject of the petition. In the notice of the time and place of the city council meeting, the director of public works shall include a statement of the right of each owner of an interest in the fee title to the premises which are the subject of the assessment petition to request the city council to convene a hearing on such assessment petition at the time of the city council meeting on same so that such property owner may be heard on the assessment petition and/or the amount of the assessment installments to be levied in lieu of payment of sewer system connection fees pursuant to the assessment petition, provided such property owner files a written request for such hearing with the city clerk prior to commencement of such city council meeting. (Ord. 1616 § 1, 2002)

 

4.52.090 Consideration of assessment petition by city council.
        On the date and at the time of the city council meeting on the assessment petition, the city council shall consider the assessment petition, the report of the director of public works on the assessment petition and any other relevant matters bearing on the petition and/or the assessment installments to be levied in lieu of payment of sewer system connection fees pursuant to the assessment petition. However, where one or more of the persons owning an interest in the fee title to the premises which are the subject of the assessment petition has filed a written request to be heard on the petition in the manner and within the time provided by this chapter, the city council shall convene a hearing at the meeting at which the assessment petition is being considered for the purpose of considering such property owner’s comments on the assessment petition and/or any objections of the property owner to the amount of the assessment installments to be levied in lieu of payment of sewer system connection fees pursuant to the assessment petition. (Ord. 1616 § 1, 2002)

 

4.52.100 Action on assessment petition by city council.
        After considering an assessment petition and the report of the director of public works on the assessment petition at a city council meeting in the manner provided for by this chapter, the city council may, by resolution, grant the petition and levy assessment installments in lieu of payment of sewer system connection fees as requested therein if the city council finds that all owners of an interest in the fee title to the premises described in the petition have joined in executing the petition, that the premises are presently being served by a private sewer system consisting of a septic tank and leach field which will be abandoned at the time the premises are connected to the city sewer system, that levying assessment installments in lieu of payment of sewer system connection fees for the premises, either individually or in combination with other premises similarly connected to the city sewer system incident to the levy of assessment installments in lieu of payment of sewer system connection fees, will not seriously compromise the city’s ability to fund any anticipated expansion of the city sewer system, and, where the premises are located in that part of the city sewer service area within the unincorporated territory of the county of Orange, that the county of Orange has entered into a joint powers agreement with the city which authorizes the city to levy such assessment installments on premises located within the unincorporated territory of the county of Orange.

        In such resolution the city council shall describe the premises which are the subject of the petition both by legal description and by an assessor’s parcel number, shall set forth the total amount of the sewer system connection fees which will become due and payable in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 13.08 of this code upon connection of such premises to the city sewer system, and shall order such sewer system connection fees, together with interest thereon, to be paid in ten annual assessment installments, as provided for in the report of the director of public works, together with any modifications thereto which are necessary to comply with the provisions of this chapter. Following adoption of such resolution, the city clerk shall cause copies of the resolution to be served on each owner of an interest in the fee title to the premises which are the subject of the resolution, shall execute an affidavit or declaration attesting to such service and shall transmit a certified copy of the resolution with such affidavit or declaration attached to the city manager. In addition, the clerk shall transmit a certified copy of such resolution to the director of finance/city treasurer. (Ord. 1616 § 1, 2002)

 

4.52.110 Recordation of resolution levying assessment installments to establish assessment lien.
        Upon receipt of a certified copy of a resolution of the city council levying assessment installments in lieu of payment of sewer system connection fees, the city manager or his or her designee shall attach the affidavit or declaration of the city clerk attesting to service of the resolution in the manner provided by this chapter to the resolution and shall cause such resolution, with such affidavit or declaration attached, to be recorded in the official records of the county of Orange. After the date of such recordation, the assessments provided for by such resolution shall constitute a lien upon the premises which are the subject of the resolution which shall have the priority and effect of an assessment lien as provided for by Article 13, Chapter 4, Part 1, Division 2, Title 5 of the California Government Code (commencing with Section 53930) or any other law of the state of California applicable to assessment liens levied by a city. (Ord. 1616 § 1, 2002)

 

4.52.120 Posting and collection of assessment installments on county tax rolls.
        Upon receipt of a certified copy of a city council resolution levying assessment installments in lieu of payment of sewer system connection fees, the director of finance/city treasurer shall transmit such resolution to the Orange County auditor/controller with the request that the assessment installments levied by the resolution be added to the county tax rolls at the time and in the manner provided therein. Thereafter, all assessment installments provided for in the resolution of the city council which become due in any year, together with all interest thereon, shall be payable in the same manner and at the same time as general taxes of the county on real property are payable, and such assessment installments and all interest thereon shall become delinquent at the same time and bear the same proportional penalty and interest after delinquency as do the general taxes of the county on real property. (Ord. 1616 § 1, 2002)

 

4.52.130 Determination of the amount and time of payment of assessment installments.
        Assessments in lieu of the payment of sewer system connection fees, including interest thereon, which are levied by resolution of the city council in the manner provided by this chapter, shall be levied in ten equal installments of principal and interest due and payable as follows:

        Once the resolution levying the assessment installments has been adopted by the city council, assessment installments shall be due and payable commencing on November first of the calendar year in which the resolution was adopted and on November first of each year thereafter until all assessment installments have been paid in full, November first being the same date that county property taxes are due and payable under the laws of the state of California. (Ord. 1616 § 1, 2002)

 

4.52.140 Calculation of interest on assessment installments.
        Interest on assessment installments in lieu of payment of sewer system connection fees, which are levied by resolution of the city council in the manner provided by this chapter, shall be computed on the basis of an interest rate equal to three percent of the total amount owed. Interest on each assessment installment shall begin to accrue from the date of the resolution levying the assessment, and shall be computed and collected annually up to the date each assessment installment is paid in full. (Ord. 1616 § 1, 2002)

 

4.52.150 Prepayment of assessment installments.
        Assessment installments in lieu of payment of sewer system connection fees which are levied by resolution of the city council in the manner provided by this chapter may be prepaid at any time between the date of adoption of the city council resolution and the date the last assessment installment is due and payable by depositing with the treasurer-tax collector of the county of Orange a sum equal to the principal, interest and penalties due on any delinquent installments which were payable in a prior tax year, plus a sum equal to the principal and interest due on any assessment installments included on the assessment roll of the county of Orange for the current tax year, and by depositing with the city director of finance/city treasurer a sum equal to the unpaid principal of any remaining assessment installments, exclusive of any interest thereon. Upon prepayment of assessment installments in the manner provided for herein, the city director of finance/city treasurer shall request the Orange County auditor to remove all such assessment installments from the county tax rolls and shall also cause the assessment lien levied by the city council resolution to be released in the manner hereinafter provided by this chapter. (Ord. 1616 § 1, 2002)

 

4.52.160 Foreclosure of assessment lien.
        As a cumulative remedy in the event any assessment installment levied in the manner provided for by this chapter and/or any interest or penalties or other charges accruing thereon are not paid when due, the city council may, not later than four years after the due date of the last such installment, order that the same be collected by an action brought in the superior court to foreclose the lien thereof, all in the manner provided for by the Improvement Bond Act of 1915, as set forth in Part 14, Division 10 of the Streets and Highways Code. (Ord. 1616 § 1, 2002)

 

4.52.170 Release of assessment lien.
        Where all assessment installments levied in the manner provided for by this chapter have been paid in full, either by reason of the prepayment of such assessment installments or otherwise, the director of finance/city treasurer shall execute and record in the official records of the county of Orange a notice stating that the assessment lien levied by the city council resolution is being released. (Ord. 1616 § 1, 2002)

Title 5 BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 5.04 BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY
Chapter 5.08 BINGO
Chapter 5.12 HANDBILLS
Chapter 5.16 NEWSRACKS
Chapter 5.24 CABLE, VIDEO, AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDERS
Chapter 5.28 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
Chapter 5.32 ENTERTAINMENT, AMUSEMENT AND DANCE PERMITS
Chapter 5.36 ALARM SYSTEMS
Chapter 5.40 TOWING SERVICES
Chapter 5.44 FRANCHISES FOR COLLECTION OF COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND RESIDENTIAL REFUSE
Chapter 5.46 PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND DEALERS, AND AUCTIONEERS
Chapter 5.48 GAS, OIL, ELECTRIC, AND WATER PIPELINE FRANCHISES
Chapter 5.54 FILMING PERMITS

Chapter 5.04 BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY
Article I. General Provisions
5.04.010 Definitions.
        As used in the ordinance codified in this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:

        A.    “Business” means and includes professions, trades and occupations and all and every kind of calling whether or not carried on for profit.

        B.     “Employee” means all persons engaged in the operation or conduct of any business, whether as owner, any member of the owner’s family, partner, agent, manager, solicitor and any and all other persons employed or working in the business.

        C.     “Gross receipts” means and includes the total amount of the sale price of all sales and the total amount charged or received for the performance of any act or service, of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such act or service is done as a part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares or merchandise. Included in gross receipts shall be all receipts, cash, credits, and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever. Excluded from gross receipts shall be cash discounts allowed and taken on sales; credit allowed on property accepted as part of the purchase price and which property may later be sold; any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser; such part of the sale price of property returned by purchasers upon rescission of the contract of sale as is refunded either in cash or by credit; amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an agent or trustee to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom collected; that portion of the receipts of a general contractor which represent payments to subcontractors; provided, that such subcontractors are licensed under this chapter, and provided the general contractor furnishes the collector with the names and addresses of the subcontractors and the amounts paid each subcontractor.

        D.    “Person” means and includes all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, Massachusetts, business, or common law trusts, societies, and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the city, other than as an employee.

        E.     “Vehicle” means any receptacle, or means of transport in which some load is carried or conveyed, or travels; to exclude tractor and tractor‑trailer power units. (Ord. 401 § 1, 1959)

 

5.04.020 Purpose of chapter.
        The ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes, and is not intended for regulation. (Ord. 401 § 2, 1959)

 

5.04.030 Chapter not a substitute for other revenue provisions.
        Persons required to pay a license tax for transacting and carrying on any business under this chapter shall not be relieved from the payment of any license tax for the privilege of doing such business required under any other ordinance of the city, and shall remain subject to regulatory provisions of other ordinances. (Ord. 401 § 3, 1959)

 

5.04.040 Effect on past actions and obligations previously accrued.
        Neither the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter nor its superseding of any portion of any other ordinance of the city shall in any manner be construed to affect prosecution for violation of any other ordinance committed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified herein, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or any penal provision applicable to any such violation, nor be construed to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit required by any ordinance to be posted, filed or deposited, and all rights and obligations thereunto appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 401 § 4, 1959)

 

5.04.050 Unexpired licenses heretofore issued.
        Where a license for revenue purposes has been issued to any business by the city and the tax paid therefor under the provisions of any ordinance heretofore enacted and the term of such license has not expired, then the license tax prescribed for the business by this chapter shall not be payable until the expiration of the term of such unexpired license. (Ord. 401 § 16, 1959)

 

5.04.060 License—Required—Exception.
        A.    There are imposed upon the businesses, trades, professions, callings and occupations specified in this chapter, license taxes in the amounts hereinafter prescribed. It is unlawful for any person to transact and carry on any business, trade, profession, calling or occupation in the city without first having procured a license from the city to do so or without complying with any and all applicable provisions of this chapter.

        B.     This section shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city if such requirement conflicts with applicable statutes of the United States or of the state.

        C.     Persons not required to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city because of conflict with applicable statutes of the United States or of the state shall be liable for payment of the tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 401 § 5, 1959)

 

5.04.070 License—Application.
        Every person required to have a license under the provisions of this chapter shall make application for the same to the director of finance. An application fee, in addition to the required license tax as set forth in this chapter, shall be due and payable at the time an initial application is made and at the time of each license renewal. The application fee shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1409 § 4, 1991; Ord. 401 § 8(a), 1959)

 

5.04.080 License application—Investigation.
        The director of finance may require investigation and approval of such application from the police, fire, health, building, planning or public services departments showing the premises and operations therein conform to the regulatory ordinances of the city. (Ord. 1206 § 5, 1983; Ord. 401 § 8(b), 1959)

 

5.04.090 Misrepresentations prohibited.
        No person shall knowingly or intentionally misrepresent to any officer or employee of the city any material fact in procuring the licenses or permits provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 401 § 8(e), 1959)

 

5.04.100 Solicitors and salesmen not having a regular place of business—Additional requirements.
        A.    In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, and regardless of whether or not any person may be exempt from the payment of any license fee under the provisions of this chapter, by reason of being engaged in interstate commence or otherwise, every person not having a regularly established place of business of selling or soliciting orders for sale of goods, wares or merchandise, magazines, papers, periodicals, or any other form of occupation or business involving canvassing and soliciting from house to house or place to place or upon the streets and public places within the city, shall, before engaging in such business or occupation, make application to the administrative officer and upon approval of such application, shall make identification to the police department and receive therefrom a certificate showing that such identification has been made.

        B.     Every such person shall identify himself to the police department by signing and filling out an identification blank which shall contain the following information:

        1.     Name;

        2.     Age;

        3.     Permanent address, if any;

        4.     Local temporary address, if any;

        5.     General description of person, in such further detail as the police department may require, including fingerprints.

        C.     The identification blank shall be accompanied by a fee of ten dollars to defray the costs of conducting an investigation of the contents of the identification form to verify its contents, which shall be conducted by the police department. Any individual, firm or entity exempt from payment of any business license fees under any provision of this chapter shall also be exempt from payment of the fee provided by this subsection. This fee is in addition to any business license tax imposed by this code for nonexempt entities.

        D.    Upon making such applications and identification and complying with the provisions of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the police department to issue to such person a certificate showing that such person has complied with the provisions of this section. Such person shall thereafter retain such certificate and have same upon his person at all times while engaged in any of the activities mentioned in this section, and it shall be the duty of such person to display the same to any party to whom he solicits any business upon request therefor.

        E.     Every person issued a license pursuant to the terms and conditions set forth hereinabove shall not engage in any door‑to‑door or house‑to‑house solicitations or canvassing at residences located within the city between the hours of six p.m. and seven a.m. (Ord. 1327, 1988; Ord. 1045 § 1, 1978; Ord. 401 § 24, 1959)

 

5.04.110 License—Issuance—Contents.
        Upon the payment of the prescribed license tax the director of finance shall issue to such person a license which shall contain:

        A.    The name of the person to whom the license is issued;

        B.     The business licensed;

        C.     The place where such business is to be transacted and carried on; and

        D.    Such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 401 § 8(a), 1959)

 

5.04.120 License does not permit business otherwise prohibited.
        The payment of a license tax required by the provisions of this chapter, and its acceptance by the city and the issuance of such license to any person shall not entitle the holder thereof to carry on any business unless he has complied with all the requirements of this code and all other applicable laws, nor to carry on any business in any building or on any premises designated in such license in the event such building or premises are situated in a zone, or locality in which the conduct of such business is in violation of any law. (Ord. 401 § 8(c), 1959)

 

5.04.130 License—Issuance determination—Appeal.
        Any person aggrieved by any decision of the director of finance with respect to the issuance or refusal to issue such license may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the council. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing such appeal. The clerk of the council shall give notice to such person of the time and place of hearing by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office at La Habra, California, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at his last known address. The council shall have authority to determine all questions raised on such appeal. No such determination shall conflict with any substantive provision of this chapter. (Ord. 401 § 13, 1959)

 

5.04.140 License tax—Due date for annual—Proration.
        Unless otherwise specifically provided, all annual license taxes, under provisions of this chapter, shall be due and payable in advance on January 1st of each year; provided, that license taxes covering new operations, commencing after January 1st may be prorated for the balance of the license period on a quarterly basis. (Ord. 1049 § 1, 1978; Ord. 401 § 19, 1959)

 

5.04.150 License tax—Due date for taxes other than annual.
        Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, license taxes, other than annual, required under this chapter, shall be due and payable as follows:

        A.    Semiannual license taxes, measured by gross receipts, on the first day of January and the first day of July of each year;

        B.     Quarterly license taxes, measured by gross receipts, on the first day of January, April, July and October of each year;

        C.     Monthly license taxes, measured by gross receipts, on the first day of each and every month;

        D.    Weekly flat‑rate license taxes on Monday of each week in advance;

        E.     Daily flat‑rate license taxes each day in advance. (Ord. 401 § 19, 1959)

 

5.04.160 License tax—Failure to pay—Penalty.
        For failure to pay a license tax when due, the director of finance shall add a penalty of ten percent of the license tax on the last day of each month after the due date thereof; providing that the amount of such penalty to be added shall in no event exceed one hundred percent of the amount of the license tax due. (Ord. 401 § 20, 1959)

 

5.04.170 Tax deemed a debt to city.
        The amount of any license tax and penalty imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city. An action may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction, for the amount of any delinquent license tax and penalties. (Ord. 401 § 8(d), 1959)

 

5.04.180 License—Nontransferable—Exception.
        No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable; provided, that where a license is issued authorizing a person to transact and carry on a business at a particular place, such licensee may upon application therefor and paying a fee of two dollars have the license amended to authorize the transacting and carrying on of such business under the license at some other location to which the business is or is to be moved. (Ord. 401 § 15, 1959)

 

5.04.190 Branch establishments—Separate license required.
        A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or separate place of business in which the business, trade, calling or occupation is carried on and each license shall authorize the party obtaining it to carry on, pursue or conduct only such businesses, trades, callings or occupations, described in the license, and which are indicated thereby. Provided, however, that each separate branch may pay a minimum license fee of fifteen dollars per year and, in addition thereto, the appropriate rate on the gross receipts of all branches as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 401 § 6, 1959)

 

5.04.200 License—Duplicate—Fee.
        A duplicate license may be issued by the director of finance to replace any license previously issued under this chapter which has been lost or destroyed upon the licensee filing statement of such fact, and at the time of filing such statement paying to the city a duplicate license fee of two dollars. (Ord. 401 § 17, 1959)

 

5.04.210 License—Posting and keeping.
        All licenses must be kept and posted in the following manner:

        A.    Any licensee transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is carried on.

        B.     Any licensee transacting and carrying on business, but not operating at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license at his fixed place of business. All soliciting representatives shall be identified per Section 5.04.100, and all commercial vehicles shall be identified by tab per subsection C of this section.

        C.     All commercial vehicles engaged in pickup, delivery or performance of services shall display in a conspicuous location on rear of vehicle an identification tab issued by the city yearly as part of the business license. (Ord. 401 § 18, 1959)

 

5.04.220 License tax—Exemptions.
        A.    State and Federal Laws. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person transacting and carrying on any business exempt by virtue of the constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or of the state from payment of such taxes as are prescribed in this chapter.

        B.     Interstate Commerce. None of the license taxes provided for by this chapter shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce. In any case where a license tax is believed by a licensee or applicant for license to place an undue burden upon such commerce, he may apply to the director of finance for an adjustment of the tax so that it shall not be discriminatory or unreasonable as to such commerce. Such application may be made before, at, or within six months after payment of the prescribed license tax. The applicant shall, by affidavit and supporting testimony, show his method of business and the gross volume or estimated gross volume of business and an estimate of, or its actual allocation as between interstate and intrastate business and such other information as the director of finance may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden on such commerce. The director of finance shall then cause an investigation to be made, and after having first obtained the written opinion of the city attorney, shall fix as the license tax for the applicant, an amount that is reasonable and nondiscriminatory, or if the license tax has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above the license tax so fixed. In fixing the license tax to be charged, the director of finance shall have the power to base the license tax upon a percentage of gross receipts, or any measure which will assure that the license tax assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the license tax as prescribed by this chapter. Should the director of finance determine the gross receipts measure of license tax to be the proper basis, he may require the applicant to submit, either at the time of termination of applicant’s business in the city, or at the end of each three‑month period, a sworn statement of the gross receipts and pay the amount of license tax therefor; provided, that no additional license tax during any one calendar year shall be required after the licensee shall have paid an amount equal to the annual license tax as prescribed in this chapter.

        C.     The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to require the payment of a license tax to conduct, manage, or carry on any business, occupation or activity from any institution or organization which is conducted, managed or carried on wholly for the benefit of charitable purposes or from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any individual; nor shall any license tax be required for the conducting of any entertainment, concert, exhibition, or lecture on scientific, historical, literary, religious or moral subjects within the city whenever the receipts of any such entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture are to be appropriated to any church or school or to any religious or benevolent purpose; nor shall any license tax be required for the conducting of any entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture by any religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, military, state, county or municipal organization or association whenever the receipts of any such entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture are to be appropriated for the purpose and objects for which such organization or association was formed and from which profit is not derived either directly or indirectly, by any individual; provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to exempt any such organization or association from complying with any of the provisions of this code requiring a permit to conduct, manage, or carry on any profession, trade, calling or occupation.

        D.    No license tax payable under this chapter shall be payable by any person who has received an honorable discharge or release from active duty in one of the United States armed services, who is physically unable to obtain a livelihood by manual labor, and who is a voter of this state; provided, however, that such disabled veteran shall exhibit his authenticated discharge papers and voter registration certificate to the chief of police, who shall issue an identification certificate to be validated by the director of finance as a license exempt of fee.

        E.     Franchised Utilities. No license tax payable under this chapter shall be payable by any public utility operating in the city under a franchise requiring franchise payments to the city, except for retail merchandising not covered by the franchise.

        F.     Any doctor, lawyer, architect, dentist or other professional person not having a fixed place of business within the city who is called upon to come to the city to render services.

        G.    Any commercial travelers or selling agents, selling their goods to dealers for the purpose of resale; provided, that agents who also make deliveries of goods, shall pay the license fees provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 401 § 7(a)—(g), 1959)

 

5.04.230 License tax exemptions—Regulatory provisions enforced.
        Nothing in Section 5.04.220 or any subsection of this section shall exempt any person from complying with any of the regulatory measures or provisions of this chapter, save and except the payment of license fees required hereby. (Ord. 401 § 7(h)(1), 1959)

 

5.04.240 License tax exemptions—License nontransferable.
        Any license exempt of fee is nontransferable.

(Ord. 401 § 7(h)(2), 1959)

 

5.04.250 License tax exemptions—Filing of verified statement required.
        Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this section shall file a verified statement with the director of finance stating the facts upon which exemption is claimed. (Ord. 401 § 7(h)(3), 1959)

 

5.04.260 License tax exemption—Issuance of license without tax.
        The director of finance shall upon a proper showing contained in the verified statement, issue a license to such person claiming exemption under Section 5.04.220 without payment to the city of the license tax required by this chapter. (Ord. 401 § 7(h)(4), 1959)

 

5.04.270 License tax exemption—Revocation.
        The director of finance, after giving notice and a reasonable opportunity for hearing to a licensee, may revoke any license granted pursuant to the provisions of Section 5.04.220 upon information that the licensee is not entitled to the exemption as provided therein. (Ord. 401 § 7(h)(5), 1959)

 

5.04.280 License inspectors appointed—Duties.
        A.    The director of finance, his deputies, all police officers, and inspectors of the fire and building departments are appointed as business license inspectors in addition to their several other duties, and shall have and exercise the power to enter any place of business for which license is required by this chapter and to demand the exhibition of the license for the current year by any person engaged or employed in the transaction of the business and if such person shall then and there fail to exhibit the license, the licensee shall be liable to the penalty provided in Section 5.04.290 for a violation of this chapter.

        B.     It is made the duty of such officers and inspectors to notify the director of finance, in writing, of any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 401 § 21, 1959)

 

5.04.290 Violation of chapter—License revocation—Appeal.
        A.    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or knowingly or intentionally misrepresenting to any officer or employee of the city any material fact in procuring a license or permit herein provided for, who shall permit any unlawful or unauthorized activity to occur on the premises of a business licensed under this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

        B.     In addition to any other penalty imposed by law, violation of this chapter shall constitute grounds for revocation of any such license or permit and the finance director may revoke the permit or license after giving the applicant reasonable opportunity to be heard and notice of the grounds upon which the revocation is based. The finance director shall establish a procedure for response by licensee to allegations made.

        C.     Any person aggrieved by any decision of the finance director may appeal the decision to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk on a form supplied by the finance director. The notice must be filed within ten days after the finance director sends notice of revocation to licensee by certified or registered mail at address shown on permit or application.

        D.    In the event that any court of competent jurisdiction declares any provision of the ordinance codified in this section void or unenforceable for any reason, the remaining provisions shall continue in full force and effect independent or void of unenforceable provisions to the extent permitted by law. (Ord. 1170 § 1, 1982; Ord. 401 § 25, 1959)

 

Article II. Computation of Tax
5.04.300 Licensee’s statement—New license—Use in determining amount of tax.
        A.    Upon a person making application for a license to be issued under this chapter for a newly established business, such person shall furnish to the director of finance for his guidance in ascertaining the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant, a signed written statement, upon a form provided by the director of finance, setting forth such information as may be therein required and as may be necessary to determine the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant.

        B.     If the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant is measured by gross receipts he shall estimate the gross receipts for a period to be covered by the license to be issued. Such estimate, if accepted by the director of finance as reasonable, shall be used in determining the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant; and the license tax for such period shall be ascertained and paid in the manner provided by this chapter for the ascertaining and paying of renewal license taxes for other businesses, after deducting from the payment found to be due, the amount paid at the time such first license was issued.

        C.     The director of finance shall not issue to any such person another license for the same or any other business, until such person shall have paid the license tax as herein required. (Ord. 401 § 9, 1959)

 

5.04.310 Licensee’s statement—License renewal—Use in determining amount of tax.
        In all cases, the applicant for the renewal of a license shall submit to the director of finance for his guidance in ascertaining the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant, a written statement, upon a form to be provided by the director of finance, setting forth such information concerning the applicant’s business during the preceding year as may be required by the director of finance to enable him to ascertain the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 401 § 10, 1959)

 

5.04.320 Licensee’s statement—Confidentiality.
        Except for the name of the person to whom the license is issued, the business licensed, and the place where such business is to be transacted or carried on, the information furnished or secured pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be confidential. Any unauthorized disclosure or use of such information by any officer or employee of the city shall constitute a misdemeanor and such officer or employee shall be subject to the penalty provisions of this code, in addition to other penalties provided by law. (Ord. 1023 § 1, 1978; Ord. 401 § 11, 1959)

 

5.04.330 Licensee’s statement—Not conclusive upon city.
        No statements shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of the same preclude the city from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable under this chapter. (Ord. 401 § 11, 1959)

 

5.04.340 Licensee’s statement—Failure to file—Assessment determination by director.
        If any person fails to file any required statement within the time prescribed, or if after demand therefor made by director of finance he fails to file a corrected statement, the director of finance may determine the amount of license tax due from such person by means of such information as he may be able to obtain. (Ord. 401 § 12, 1959)

 

5.04.350 Licensee’s statement—Failure to file—Notification of assessment—Hearing.
        If such a determination is made, the director of finance shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office at La Habra, California, postage prepaid, addressed to the person so assessed at his last known address. Such person may, within fifteen days after the mailing or serving of such notice make application in writing to the city clerk for a hearing on the amount of the license tax. If such application is made, the city clerk shall cause the matter to be set for hearing within fifteen days before the city council. The city clerk shall give at least ten days’ notice to such person of the time and place of hearing in the manner prescribed in this section for serving notices of assessment. The council shall consider all evidence produced, and shall make findings thereon, which shall be final. Notice of such findings shall be served upon the applicant in the manner prescribed in this section for serving notices of assessment. (Ord. 401 § 12, 1959)

 

5.04.360 Licensee’s statement—Extension of time limit for filing.
        In addition to all other power conferred upon him, the director of finance shall have the power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing any required sworn statement for a period not exceeding thirty days, and in such case to waive any penalty that would otherwise have accrued; and shall have the further power, with the consent of the council, to compromise any claim as to amount of license tax due. (Ord. 401 § 14, 1959)

 

5.04.370 Two or more businesses.
        In the event that more than one of the businesses required to be licensed are conducted by one person, firm or corporation at the same location and under the same management, the license tax to be paid shall be the full license of whichever business calls for the highest license fee and, in addition, a sum equal to one‑half of the amount of the license ordinarily required for each other business carried on; provided, however, that if the principal business is subject to a gross receipts tax the person operating the several businesses shall have the option of including all receipts from all businesses in the gross receipts of the principal business, and the business license issued therefor shall cover all of the business conducted at that location and the necessary tabs or receipt forms shall be issued upon payment of the appropriate fee. (Ord. 401 § 6, 1959)

 

Article III. License Tax Rates and Classifications—General Provisions
5.04.380 Determination of type or class of business.
        The determination of which business or businesses, or type or class of business or businesses, a licensee or applicant for a license is engaged in, or about to engage in, for computation of the tax to be paid by businesses or persons shall be an administrative function of the director of finance. (Ord. 401 § 23(a), 1959)

 

5.04.390 Application for change of classification—Contents—Investigation.
        In any case where a licensee or an applicant for a license believes that his individual business is not assigned to the proper classification under this chapter because of circumstances peculiar to it, as distinguished from other business of the same kind, he may apply to the director of finance for reclassification. Such application shall contain such information as the director of finance may deem necessary and require in order to determine whether the applicant’s individual business is properly classified. The director of finance shall then conduct an investigation following which he shall assign the applicant’s individual business to the classification shown to be proper on the basis of such investigation. (Ord. 401 § 23(b), 1959)

 

5.04.400 Application for change of classification—Determination—Notification—Appeal.
        The director of finance shall notify the applicant of the action taken on the application for reclassification. Such notice shall be given by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office at La Habra, California, postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at his last‑known address. Such applicant may within fifteen days after the mailing or serving of such notice appeal such action to the city council in the manner provided in Section 15.04.130. (Ord. 401 § 23(c), 1959)

 

Article IV. License Tax Rates and Classifications—Class A—Retail Sales or Services
5.04.410 Rate.
        Each person engaged in a business considered to be of a retail or service nature, and not otherwise specifically classified in this chapter, shall pay a basic minimum license tax of thirty‑five dollars per year plus twenty‑five cents on each one thousand dollars gross annual receipts, or fraction thereof; provided, that the maximum tax payable shall not exceed five hundred dollars per year. (Ord. 1346 § 1, 1988; Ord. 1251, 1985; Ord. 1049 § 2, 1978; Ord. 401 § 22(a)(1), 1959)

 

5.04.420 Vehicle identification tabs.
        Any person or firm paying a license tax under this part who uses vehicles in the conduct of business will be issued a vehicle identification tab for each vehicle, which must be displayed as per Section 15.04.210C. (Ord. 401 § 22(a)(2), 1959)

 

Article V. License Tax Rates and Classifications—Class B—Wholesale and Manufacturing
5.04.430 Rate.
        Each business consisting mainly of manufacturing, packing, processing or selling at wholesale any goods, wares or merchandise, and each business receiving and preparing for shipment or sale of any products, and not otherwise specifically classified in this chapter, shall pay a basic minimum license tax of thirty‑five dollars per year plus seven and one‑half cents on each one thousand dollars, or fraction thereof, of gross annual receipts; provided, that the maximum tax payable shall not exceed five hundred dollars per year. (Ord. 1346 § 1, 1988; Ord. 1251, 1985; Ord. 1049 § 3, 1978; Ord. 401 22(b)(1), 1959)

 

5.04.440 Vehicular identification tabs.
        Any person or firm paying a license tax under this part who uses vehicles in the conduct of their business will be issued a vehicle identification tab for each vehicle, which must be displayed as per Section 5.04.210C. (Ord. 401 § 22(b)(2), 1959)

 

Article VI. License Tax Rates and Classifications—Class C—Profession.
5.04.450 Rate.
        Each person or business considered to be of a professional or consulting nature shall pay a basic minimum license tax of thirty‑five dollars per year for each partner or professional employee in the business, plus five dollars per year for each other employee, plus thirty‑five cents on each one thousand dollars of gross receipts; provided, that the maximum license tax payable shall not exceed five hundred dollars per year. (Ord. 1346 § 1, 1988; Ord. 1251, 1985; Ord. 1049 § 4, 1978; Ord. 401 § 22(c), 1959)

 

Article VII. License Tax Rates and Classifications—Class D—Person Without a Fixed Place of Business in the City
5.04.460 Rate when classified as Class A.
        Persons not having a fixed place of business in the city, which business would be classified as of a retail or service nature (class A), shall be licensed in accordance with Section 5.04.410 plus a fee of ten dollars for each vehicle identification tab as per Section 5.04.210C; provided, that the maximum license tax payable shall not exceed five hundred dollars per year. (Ord. 1346 § 1, 1988; Ord. 1251, 1985; Ord. 1049 § 5, 1978; Ord. 401 § 22(d)(1), 1959)

 

5.04.470 Rate when classified as class B or C.
        Persons not having a fixed place of business in the city, which business would be classified as wholesaling and/or manufacturing (class B) or of a professional or consulting nature (class C), shall pay a vehicle identification tab fee of fifteen dollars per annum per vehicle when performing services within the city as per Section 5.04.210; provided, that the maximum license tax payable shall not exceed five hundred dollars per year. (Ord. 1346 § 1, 1988; Ord. 1251, 1985; Ord. 1049 § 6, 1978; Ord. 401 § 22(d)(2), 1959)

 

Article VIII. License Tax Rates and Classifications—Class E—Other Businesses
5.04.480 Amusements—Generally.
        Every person conducting, managing or carrying on a place of amusement or an amusement business, device or musical devices, including, but not limited to, theaters, golf courses or ranges, archery ranges, skating rinks, dancehalls, pool halls and bowling alleys, shall pay the license fee specified for class A retail business. (Ord. 401 § 22(e)(1), 1959)

 

5.04.490 Amusements—Circuses, carnivals and tent shows.
        A.    Every person conducting, carrying on or managing a circus, carnival or tent show or performance shall pay a license fee of fifty dollars per day.

        B.     The applicant shall also provide the police department with a list of all games, exhibits, rides and amusements to be conducted at the circus, carnival or tent show and the police department shall conduct an investigation of these matters to insure compliance with all laws and regulations. In addition to the license fee set forth in subsection A of this section, the operator of the circus, carnival or tent show shall also pay, at the time of application, a fee of fifty dollars to defray the costs of the inspection. The fee provided shall not apply to any carnival, circus or tent show sponsored by any corporation or organization exempt from payment of tax pursuant to any subdivision of Section 23701 of the California Revenue and Tax Code. (Ord. 1042, 1978; Ord. 401 § 22(e)(2), 1959)

 

5.04.500 Auction sales—Permit required.
        Every person managing an auction sale shall pay a license fee of thirty dollars per day; provided, that the license shall not be issued without a permit from the city council. (Ord. 401 § 22(e)(4), 1959)

 

5.04.510 Automobiles, trucks, etc.—New and used retail sales.
        Any person engaged in the business of selling at retail new or used automobiles, trucks or other automotive vehicles shall pay a minimum annual license tax of thirty‑five dollars plus fifteen cents on each one thousand dollars, or fraction thereof, of gross annual receipts; provided, that the maximum license tax payable shall not exceed five hundred dollars per year. For purposes of computing the license tax pursuant to this section, gross receipts shall include customer payments for automotive repair, service and parts. (Ord. 1346 § 1, 1988; Ord. 1251

(part), 1985; Ord. 1049 § 7, 1978; Ord. 401 § 22(e)(3), 1959)

 

5.04.520 Closing out, fire, bankrupt sales—Application required—Contents.
        A.    Every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of selling or offering for sale, goods, wares or merchandise advertising as a fire or bankrupt, wreck or closing‑out sale, or goods, wares and merchandise which is, or is advertised to be, a sale for the purpose of disposing of the stock of merchandise on hand or any major portion thereof in contemplation of discontinuing the operation or maintenance of the store or place of business of the seller or the removal thereof to another location, or any sale which is advertised or held out as being a sale under bankruptcy, mortgage insolvency or assignee’s or trustee’s or creditor’s sale shall pay a license fee of one hundred dollars per month. Provided, however, that the applicant shall file with the director of finance application setting forth the place where the sale is proposed to be continued, an inventory of the merchandise on hand which the applicant proposes to sell, the length of time of the proposed sale, not to exceed thirty days, and such other information as may be required or pertinent.

        B.     It is further provided that any one who has been continuously in business for a period of one year and has held a license therefor and desires to conduct such a sale in connection with merchandise on hand, that he may do so by complying with the provisions set forth in subsection A of this section, but without the necessity of any additional license other than his ordinary business license. (Ord. 401 § 22(e)(6), 1959)

 

5.04.530 Coin‑operated machines.
        Every person operating, leasing or renting a vending or other coin‑operated machine placed or located in the city shall pay an annual license tax in the amount of 1.2 percent of total gross annual receipts. (Ord. 1346 § 1, 1988; Ord. 1088 § 2, 1979)

 

5.04.540 Contractor—Additional requirements.
        A.    Each general contractor and each specialty contractor shall pay a license tax according to the time when purchased as follows:

 

Calendar Year

General Contractor

Specialty Contractor

1st quarter

$100.00

$50.00

2nd quarter

75.00

37.50

3rd quarter

50.00

25.00

4th quarter

25.00

12.50

 

        B.     In addition to the amounts designated in subsection A of this section, each general and specialty contractor shall pay as a part of the license tax an amount equal to five cents per one thousand dollars of gross receipts on business and contracting conducted by him; provided, that the maximum license tax payable shall not exceed five hundred dollars per year. Such contractor shall exhibit any required state contractor’s license, and such general contractor shall furnish the city with a complete list of all subcontractors on the job. (Ord. 1346 § 1, 1988; Ord. 1251, 1985; Ord. 1049 § 9, 1978; Ord. 401 § 22(e)(5), 1959)

 

5.04.550 Escrow or loan service.
        Every person managing, conducting or carrying on the business of providing an escrow or loan service shall pay an annual license fee in accordance with Section 5.04.210, class A business. (Ord. 401 § 22(e)(7), 1959)

 

5.04.560 Fortunetellers, palmistry, etc.—Application for license.
        A.    Every person carrying on, practicing or professing to practice the business or art of astrology, palmistry, phrenology, card reading, fortunetelling, cartomancy, clairvoyance, clairaudience, crystal gazing, hypnotism, mediumship, prophecy, augury, divination, magic or necromancy, within the city, and demanding or receiving directly or indirectly a fee for the practice, exercise or exhibition of such art therein, or who gives an exhibition thereof at any place within the city where an admission fee is charged, shall pay a license tax of fifty dollars per day, or three hundred dollars per month, in advance. The maximum fee for any one calendar year for any such person carrying on, practicing or professing to practice the business or arts mentioned in this section shall be the sum of one thousand dollars; provided, however, that none of the businesses or arts mentioned in this section shall be licensed until the planning commission/city council shall first grant a conditional use permit application pursuant to Chapter 18.66 of this code; providing further, that such businesses shall be restricted to C-2 and C-3 zones in the city.

        B.     In the event that any of the activities as set forth in subsection (A) of this section are offered exclusively for entertainment purposes and in conjunction with the operation of another business, there shall be no requirement that such business obtain a conditional use permit as provided in subsection (A) of this section. However, the applicant shall comply with all other provisions of subsection (A) of this section. (Ord. 1719 § 1 (Exh. B), 2010; Ord. 1310 §§ 1, 2, 1987; Ord. 1248 § 1, 1985; Ord. 716, 1967; Ord. 401 § 22(e)(11), 1959)

 

5.04.570 Hotels, apartments, rooming houses, trailer courts.
        A.    Each person managing, conducting, operating or carrying on the business of operating a hotel, motel, trailer court or mobile home park consisting of three or more units shall pay a minimum annual license tax of thirty‑five dollars for the first three units, and an additional annual tax of six dollars and fifty cents per unit in excess of three; provided, that the maximum license tax shall not exceed five hundred dollars per year.

        B.     Each person managing, conducting, operating or carrying on the business of operating an apartment house, rooming house or bungalow court consisting of three or more units shall pay a minimum annual license tax of thirty‑five dollars for the first three units and an additional tax of six dollars and fifty cents for each unit in excess of three. (Ord. 1346 § 1, 1988; Ord. 1251, 1985; Ord. 1049 § 10, 1978; Ord. 830 § 1, 1971; Ord. 401 § 22(e)(8), 1959)

 

5.04.580 House moving—Additional regulations.
        Every person moving houses or other structures shall pay a semiannual license fee of twenty dollars, or a daily fee of fifteen dollars; provided, that reasonable regulations of the police and public works departments shall govern such operations. (Ord. 401 § 22(e)(9), 1959)

 

5.04.590 Newspaper publishing and agencies.
        Every person conducting or managing the business of publishing a newspaper shall pay a license fee in accordance with Division III of this article. Every person operating or managing a newspaper agency shall pay an annual license fee in accordance with Division II of this article, class A business. (Ord. 401 § 22(e)(10), 1959)

 

5.04.600 Peddlers, solicitors and canvassers.
        A.    Street Peddlers. All persons both principal and agent, not having a fixed place of business in the city, who engage in the business in the city of hawker or peddler of goods, wares or merchandise, and who for the purpose of carrying on such business sell tangible commodities from house to house, store to store or on the streets or in any public place, or from any vehicle parked on any street for a period of two hours or more, shall pay a license fee of one hundred dollars per day, or two hundred dollars per year, in advance.

        B.     Peddling from Vehicles. All persons both principal and agent, not having a fixed place of business in the city, who sell or offer for sale any tangible commodities, candy, ice cream, confection, bakery goods, or any food or beverage for human consumption, from any motor vehicle or any vehicle on any public street or sidewalk in the city shall pay a permit fee of forty dollars annually, in advance, for each additional vehicle.

 

        C.     Canvassers and Solicitors. All persons both principal and agent, not having a fixed place of business in the city, who go in and upon private residences in the city, not having been requested or invited so to do by the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of the private residences, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, or for intangible services, or who solicit subscriptions, and/or for the purpose of disposing of and/or peddling or hawking the same shall pay an annual license tax of two hundred dollars, in advance, or fifty dollars per day, in advance.

        D.    Itinerant Merchants and Transient Vendors. All persons both principal and agent, who engage in a temporary or transient business in the city selling goods, wares or merchandise with the intention of continuing the business in the city for a period of not more than thirty days, and, who for the purpose of carrying on such business hire, lease or occupy any room, building or structure for the exhibition or sale of such goods, wares or merchandise shall pay an annual license tax of two hundred dollars or fifty dollars per day, in advance.

        E.     The provisions of subsections A through D of this section shall not apply to commercial travelers, or selling agents, selling their goods to dealers, whether selling for present or future delivery, by sample or otherwise.

        F.     The provisions of subsection C shall not apply to newspaper distributors and newsboys.

        G.    The provisions of subsections A through D of this section shall not be deemed or construed to require the payment of a license tax to conduct, manage or carry on any business, occupation or activity by any religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, military, state, county or municipal organization but such charitable or nonprofit organization shall be subject to the provisions of Section 5.04.220. (Ord. 656, 1965)

 

5.04.610 Seasonal commercial sales lots.
        “Seasonal commercial sales” is defined as one of the following three activities:

        A.    “Pumpkin and Christmas tree commercial sales lot” means any activity involving the use of a commercial lot involving seasonal sales of pumpkins or Christmas trees which continues for a period of sixty days or less.

        B.     “Produce stand commercial sales lot” means the sale of farm-produced crops and goods, including, but not limited to, fruits and vegetables which are displayed and sold from a temporary structure. The establishment of temporary produce stands shall be limited to a maximum period of one hundred twenty days during a calendar year. The produce stand commercial sales lot will be subject to review and approval by the design review committee.

        C.     “Farmers’ market commercial sales lot” means an outdoor public market at which the primary items sold are farm produced crops and goods sold directly to the public by the producer. The duration of a farmers’ market will be subject to review and approval by the design review committee but typically operate one day per week or every other week.

        D.    Any person, firm or other entity intending to conduct or maintain a seasonal commercial sales lot shall comply with the following:

        1.     All seasonal commercial sales events shall file a special event permit application with the planning division at least forty-five days prior to the event. The applicant shall pay the special event processing fee as established in the master fee schedule.

        2.     The commercial lot at which the seasonal commercial sales event is to take place shall have all entrances and exits face upon a commercial street and shall not front onto a residential street.

        3.     There shall be at least four off-street parking spaces provided at a minimum and where the event is larger than one thousand square feet in size, four additional parking spaces per one thousand square feet of gross display area shall be provided thereafter.

        4.     There shall be no obstructions of the public right-of-way with any structure, signs or merchandise associated with the seasonal commercial sales lot.

        5.     There shall be restroom facilities available to the employees and patrons on site as approved by the chief building official or representative.

        6.     Advertising signage shall not exceed a collective total of one hundred square feet of area, and no sign shall exceed a height of eight feet; only one sign shall be allowed on the commercial street frontage. The use of human display signs is prohibited.

        7.     The hours of operation shall be limited to nine a.m. to nine p.m. Sunday through Thursday, and nine a.m. to ten p.m. Friday and Saturday.

        8.     The time period that such seasonal commercial sales is permitted includes setup and cleanup of the property for the subject event.

        9.     Applicants of seasonal commercial sales lots shall obtain a business license and shall pay the fire prevention inspection fee as approved by the city council. A clean up fee of one thousand dollars shall be deposited with the community and economic development department. The cleanup fee is to guarantee compliance with the city regulations and clearance of the site. If the site is left in a clean and neat condition, as determined by the director of community and economic development or designated representative, then the cleanup deposit shall be refunded to the applicant.

        10.   A building permit shall be obtained from the chief building official for the use of temporary power poles associated with a seasonal commercial sales lot. All temporary power poles shall be removed from the site within the timeframe permitted for the seasonal commercial sales event.

        11.   Upon request by the applicant to the city council, the city council may waive the fee for the fire prevention inspection for local non-profit, charitable organizations.

        12.   Should any person, firm or entity fail to comply with the provisions of this section, the chief building official or representative shall close down the seasonal commercial sales lot until compliance has been made. If the seasonal commercial sales lot has commenced prior to obtaining a special event permit, then the chief building official shall determine when the seasonal commercial sales lot began and upon obtaining a special event permit, will be limited to the time remaining for the event. Failure to comply with the requirements of Section 5.04.610 may be grounds for denial of future event requests by the applicant as determined by the development review committee. (Ord. 1785 § 3, 2017; Ord. 1749 § 3, 2013; Ord. 1325 § 1, 1988; Ord. 1048 § 1, 1978)

Chapter 5.08 BINGO
5.08.010 Definitions.
        As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:

        A.    “Bingo” means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols selected at random.

        B.     “Mobile home park association” means an association organized for the primary purpose of governing a mobile home park, or providing or sponsoring recreational or social activities for residents of a mobile home park located in the city all of the members of which are residents of such park.

        C.     “Senior citizens organization” means an organization organized for the primary purpose of providing recreational and social activities for persons over the age of fifty‑five, all of the members of which are over the age of fifty‑five. (Ord. 991 § 2, 1977; Ord. 960 § 1, 1976)

 

5.08.020 License—Organizations eligible for license to conduct games.
        Corporations, or other organizations exempted from the payment of the bank and corporations tax by Sections 23701(a), 23701(b), 23701(d), 23701(e), 23701(f) and 23701(l) of the Revenue and Taxation Code which have been in existence and operating in the city for at least two years prior to application, and mobile home park associations and senior citizens organizations which have been in existence and operating in the city for at least two years prior to application are eligible to apply for licenses as herein provided for to conduct bingo games in the city. (Ord. 991 § 1, 1977)

 

5.08.030 License—Applicants must be qualified.
        No license shall be issued to any organization unless such applicant is an eligible organization as per Section 5.08.020 and its application conforms to the requirements, terms and conditions of this chapter. (Ord. 960 § 1, 1976)

 

5.08.040 Permit—Application—Term—Filing fee.
        Eligible organizations desiring to obtain a permit to conduct bingo games in the city shall make application to the director of finance on a form to be provided by the finance department. The permit, if issued, shall be for a term of one year from the date of issuance, subject to renewal and annual fee. A filing fee in the amount of fifty dollars shall accompany the application, to be used to defray the city’s cost of investigating the application. If an application for a license is denied, one‑half of any license fee paid shall be refunded to the organization. (Ord. 991 § 3, 1977; Ord. 960 § 1, 1976)

 

5.08.050 Permit—Application—Contents.
        The application for a permit shall contain the following:

        A.    The name of the applicant organization and a statement that applicant is an eligible organization under Section 5.08.020;

        B.     The name, address and signature of at least two officers, including the presiding officer of the corporation or community chest and the trustee of any trust;

        C.     The particular property within the city, including the street address, owned or leased by the applicant, used by such applicant for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the applicant is organized, on which property bingo games will be conducted, together with the occupancy capacity of such place;

        D.    Proposed days of week and hours of day for conduct of bingo games;

        E.     That the applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in strict accordance with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code and this chapter as they may be amended from time to time, and agrees that the permit to conduct bingo games may be revoked by the city manager upon violation of any such provisions;

        F.     The application shall be signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury;

        G.    The annual permit fee fixed by the city council by resolution shall accompany the application;

        H.    The applicant shall submit, with its application, a copy of its certificate or determination of exemption under one of the provisions of the Revenue and Taxation Code sections enumerated in Section 5.08.020 or a letter of good standing from the Exemption Division of the Franchise Tax Board showing the exemption. In the event the applicant is either a senior citizens organization or a mobile home park association it shall submit a declaration executed under penalty of perjury by its president or chairman which shall state the date of its organization, the names and address of all officers and director, and a brief statement setting forth the specific purposes for which the organization was formed.

        I.      Such other information as the license issuing authority of the city may require to ascertain the validity of the application and/or to make a determination on the issuance of a license. (Ord. 991 § 4, 1977; Ord. 960 § 1, 1976)

 

5.08.060 Permit—Application—Investigation.
        Upon receipt of the completed application and the fee, the finance director shall refer the same to interested departments of the city, including, but not limited to, city manager, city attorney, police department, fire department and building department for investigation as to whether or not all the statements in the application are true and whether or not the property of the applicant qualifies and the extent to which it qualifies, conducted as to fire, occupancy and other applicable restrictions. (Ord. 960 § 1, 1976)

 

5.08.070 Permit—Issuance—City manager’s authority—Hearing—Appeals.
        A.    The city manager, or his designee, shall issue a permit to the qualified organization if all requirements for the conduct of bingo games described in this chapter are met. The city manager may recommend to the city council that the applicant be subject to a public hearing and council approval, when in his judgment any such application has or would have an effect upon the public health, safety or welfare of the community.

        B.     Any organization denied a permit by the city manager or his designee, may appeal to the city council in writing, stating reasons why the permit should be granted. Also, the city council may elect on its own motion to review any determination of the city manager granting or denying a permit. (Ord. 960 § 1, 1976)

 

5.08.080 Permit—Issuance—Contents.
        Upon being satisfied that the applicant is fully qualified under law to conduct bingo games in the city, the city manager shall issue a permit to the applicant, which shall contain the following information:

        A.    The name and nature of the organization to whom the permit is issued;

        B.     The address where bingo games are authorized to be conducted;

        C.     The occupancy capacity of the room in which bingo games are to be conducted;

        D.    Date of the expiration of such permit;

        E.     Such other information as may be necessary or desirable for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 960 § 1, 1976)

 

5.08.090 License—Summary suspension pending opportunity for hearing—Continuation constitutes misdemeanor—Revocation.
        A.    Whenever it appears to the city manager that the licensee is conducting a bingo game in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the city manager shall have the authority to summarily suspend the license and order the licensee to immediately cease and desist any further operation of any bingo game.

        B.     Any person who continues to conduct a bingo game after any summary suspension thereof under subsection A of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

        C.     The order issued under subsection A of this section shall also notify the licensee that it shall have five days from the date of such order to request a hearing to determine whether such license shall be revoked. Failure to request, in writing, such hearing before the city manager within the five‑day period, shall result in a revocation of the license.

        D.    Upon such request by the licensee, whose license has been suspended under subsection A of this section, for a hearing to determine whether such license shall be revoked, the city manager shall provide such hearing within ten days after receipt of such request at which hearing the suspended licensee may appear before the city manager for the purpose of presenting evidence why the license should not be revoked. No license shall be revoked under this section unless notice of the time and place of such hearing shall have first been given at least five days before the hearing thereof by depositing in the United States mail a notice directed to the suspended licensee at the address given in the application. The notice shall set forth a summary of the ground advanced as the basis of the suspension and revocation.

        E.     Any organization whose license is revoked under this section shall not conduct any bingo game in the city until such time as the city council, on appeal, determines to overrule the decision of the city manager. (Ord. 960 § 1, 1976)

 

5.08.100 License—Revocation without summary suspension—Alternative procedure.
        A.    Whenever it appears to the city manager that the licensee is conducting bingo games in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or that the license was obtained by fraudulent representation and no summary suspension is ordered, under Section 5.08.090, the license may be revoked; provided, however, the licensee may appear before the city manager at the time fixed by the city manager, for the purpose of presenting evidence why the license should not be revoked. No license shall be revoked under this section unless written notice shall have first been given at least five days before the hearing thereof by depositing in the United States mail a notice directed to the licensee at the address given in the application. The notice shall set forth a summary of the ground advanced as the basis of the revocation.

        B.     Any organization whose license is revoked under this section shall not conduct any bingo game in the city until such time as the city council, on appeal, determines to overrule the decision of the city manager. (Ord. 960 § 1, 1976)

 

5.08.110 License—Appeal of revocation to city council.
        A.    Any holder of a license whose license is revoked under this chapter shall have the right, within ten days after receiving notice in writing of the revocation, to file a written appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall set forth the specific ground or grounds on which it is based. The city council shall hold a hearing on the appeal within thirty days after its receipt by the city, or at a time thereafter agreed upon and shall cause the appellant to be given at least ten days’ written notice of such hearing. At the hearing, the appellant or its authorized representative shall have the right to present evidence and a written or oral argument, or both, in support of his appeal. The determination of the city council on the appeal shall be final. Also, the city council may itself initiate an appeal of permit revocation and establish a hearing on the action pursuant to the timing and manner prescribed herein.

        B.     Any organization whose license is finally revoked may not again apply for a license to conduct bingo games in the city for a period of one year from the date of such revocation; provided, however, if the ground for revocation is cancellation of the exemption granted under Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code, such organization may again apply for a license upon proof of reinstatement of the exemption. (Ord. 960 § 1, 1976)

 

5.08.120 Maximum amount of prizes.
        The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo games shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game held. (Ord. 960 § 1, 1976)

 

5.08.130 Keeping of profits or proceeds in separate fund or account.
        All profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. The organization shall keep full and accurate records of the income and expenses received and disbursed in connection with its operation, conduct, promotion, supervision and any other phase of bingo games which are authorized by this chapter. The city, by and through its authorized officers, shall have the right to examine and audit such records at any reasonable time and organization shall fully cooperate with city by making such records available. (Ord. 960 § 1, 1976)

 

5.08.140 Financial interest in permittee only.
        No individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity except the organization to which a permit is issued shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game. (Ord. 960 § 1, 1976)

 

5.08.150 Exclusive operation by permittee.
        A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of organization to which a permit is issued. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game. Only the organization to whom a permit is issued shall operate such games or participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game. (Ord. 960 § 1, 1976)

 

5.08.160 Games open to public.
        All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to members of organization to which a permit is issued. (Ord. 960 § 1, 1976)

 

5.08.170 Minor’s participation prohibited.
        No person under the age of eighteen years of age shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. (Ord. 960 § 1, 1976)

 

5.08.180 Intoxicated person’s participation prohibited.
        No alcoholic beverages may be served, sold or consumed within the same room as the bingo game during the conduct of any bingo game, nor within two hours prior to any bingo game, nor during intervals or intermissions between bingo games. No person who is obviously intoxicated shall be allowed to participate in any way in any bingo game. (Ord. 991 § 5, 1977; Ord. 960 § 1, 1976)

 

5.08.190 Hours of operation.
        No organization issued a permit shall conduct any bingo game more than four consecutive hours out of any twenty‑four‑hour period. No bingo games authorized by this chapter shall be conducted before twelve noon nor after twelve midnight of any day. (Ord. 960 § 1, 1976)

 

5.08.200 Participant must be present.
        No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo is being conducted. (Ord. 960 § 1, 1976)

 

5.08.210 Attendance limited to occupancy capacity.
        Notwithstanding that bingo games are open to the public, attendance at any bingo game shall be limited to the occupancy capacity of the room in which such game is conducted, as determined by the fire department and building department of the city in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. Operators of bingo games shall not reserve seats or space for any person. (Ord. 960 § 1, 1976)

 

5.08.220 Receipt of profit by a person constitutes a misdemeanor.
        It is a misdemeanor under Section 326.5(b) of the Penal Code of the state for any person to receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game authorized under this chapter, a violation of which is punishable by a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars which fine shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. (Ord. 960 § 1, 1976)

 

5.08.230 Games conducted on licensee’s property.
        A licensee shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, and which property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. The permit issued under this chapter shall authorize the holder thereof to conduct bingo games only on such property, the address of which is stated in the application. In the event the described property ceases to be used as an office and as a place for performance of the purposes for which the licensee is organized, the permit shall have no further force or effect. A new permit may be obtained by an eligible organization, upon application under this chapter, when it again owns or leases property used by it to an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that the property owned or leased by the organization be used exclusively by such organization. (Ord. 991 § 6, 1977; Ord. 960 § 1, 1976)

 

5.08.240 City may enjoin violation.
        The city may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin a violation of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code or of this chapter. (Ord. 960 § 1, 1976)

Chapter 5.12 HANDBILLS
5.12.010 Purpose.
        To protect the people against the nuisance of and incident to the promiscuous distribution of handbills and circulars, particularly commercial handbills, as defined in Section 5.12.020(A), with the resulting detriment and danger to public health and safety, the public interest, convenience and necessity requires the regulation thereof and to that end the purposes of the ordinance codified in this chapter are specifically declared to be as follows:

        A.    To protect the people against the unlawful, fraudulent, and/or deceptive activities or operations of dissolute persons of criminal habits or tendencies, representing themselves as handbill distributors, by requiring the registration of all such handbill distributors, together with the names of their employers, and by regulating the business of handbills and advertising distribution through the imposition of reasonable license fees;

        B.     To protect local residents against trespassing by handbill distributors upon the private property of such residents if they do not wish to be solicited by such persons or do not desire to receive handbills or advertising matter;

        C.     To protect the people against the health and safety menace and the expense incident to the littering of the streets and public places by the promiscuous and uncontrolled distribution of advertising matter and commercial handbills;

        D.    To protect the people against the menace to their property during their absence therefrom due to the unlawful activities or operations of dissolute persons of criminal habits or tendencies, made aware of the absence of the people from their premises by the accumulation of advertising matter and handbills during such absence;

        E.     To preserve to the people their constitutional right to receive and disseminate information not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency and good morals and public order, by distinguishing between the nuisance created by the promiscuous distribution of advertising and commercial circulars and the right to deliver commercial and noncommercial handbills to all who are willing to receive the same. (Ord. 1613 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1612 § 1, 2002; Ord. 688, 1966)

 

5.12.020 Definitions.
        The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

        A.    “Commercial handbill” means and includes any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature:

        1.     Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing; or

        2.     Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interests thereof by sales; or

        3.     Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, where either of the same is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order; provided, that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind without a license where such license is or may be required by any law of this state, or under any ordinance of this city; or

        4.     Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.

        B.     “Handbill distributor” means and includes any person engaging or engaged in the business for hire or gain of distributing commercial or noncommercial handbills, other than newspapers distributed to subscribers thereof, and any person receiving compensation directly or indirectly for the distribution of such handbills.

        C.     “Newspaper” means and includes any newspaper:

        1.     Which has for its principal purpose the dissemination of local or telegraphic news and intelligence of a general character;

        2.     Which is printed and published at regular intervals;

        3.     Which is not distributed or circulated primarily for advertising purposes; and in addition thereto, means and includes any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the public.

        D.    “Noncommercial handbill” means and includes any printed or written material, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature not included in the definitions of a commercial handbill or a newspaper as set forth in subsections A and C of this section.

        E.     “Person” means and includes any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.

        F.     “Private premises” means and includes any dwelling, house, building or other structure, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule, hallway, or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure, and any vacant lot or other private property.

        G.    “Public place” means and includes any and all streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes, alleys or other public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, plazas, grounds and buildings.

        H.    Words singular in form may include the plural; any words plural in form may include the singular; and words in the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter gender. (Ord. 688, 1966)

 

5.12.030 Distribution in public places.
        It is unlawful for any person to deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any public place within this city; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any commercial or noncommercial handbill in any public place to any person willing to accept such noncommercial handbill. (Ord. 1768 § 1, 2016; Ord. 688, 1966)

 

5.12.040 Distribution on private premises contrary to expressed desire of occupant or owner.
        A.    It is unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any private premises if the owner or occupant thereof has posted a “No Solicitation” sign in plain view at the premises; except that the handbills may be distributed personally to anyone present on the premises who is willing to accept the same.

        B.     Any handbill placed or deposited in or upon any private premises shall only be so placed or deposited if otherwise lawful under subsection A of this section and in such a manner that secures or prevents such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or elsewhere. (Ord. 1768 § 1, 2016; Ord. 1613 § 2, 2002; Ord. 1612 § 2, 2002; Ord. 688, 1966)

 

5.12.050 Distributors required to comply with chapter provisions.
        It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a handbill distributor for hire, or for any person to distribute commercial or noncommercial handbills, without first complying with the terms of this chapter and all other relevant laws and regulations; provided, that nothing contained herein shall apply to any person advertising his or her business or activity upon his or her own premises if such business or activity is regularly established at a definite location in the city, and also if a license has been obtained therefor, if such license be required under the terms of any applicable law or ordinance. (Ord. 1768 § 1, 2016; Ord. 688, 1966)

 

5.12.060 Handbill distributor’s license—Required—Application.
        Any person desiring to engage, as principal, in the business of distributing commercial handbills for hire shall make application to and receive from the director of finance, a handbill distributor’s license in the manner and for the period prescribed by the terms of this chapter and by all relevant provisions of the municipal code and ordinances. Such applicant shall make written application to the director of finance upon a form or forms provided for such purposes by the director of finance. Such form shall contain, among other things that may be required, the name and permanent address of the applicant, the name and address of their business (if any), a brief description of the nature of the business to be conducted and/or the goods to be sold by the applicant, the probable number of agents and employees to be engaged by applicant in the city, together with a request for a license for the period for which this applicant seeks to engage in such business. (Ord. 1768 § 1, 2016; Ord. 1613 § 4, 2002; Ord. 1612 § 4, 2002; Ord. 688, 1966)

 

5.12.070 Handbill distributor’s license—Revocation—Nontransferable.
        Without excluding other just grounds for revocation, the city council, or city administrator, may revoke any handbill distributor’s license obtained under an application containing a false or fraudulent statement knowingly made by the applicant with the intent to obtain a license by means of false or fraudulent representations, or for violation of this chapter, or any other grounds specified by law. Such application shall be accompanied by the fee provided for in Section 5.12.080. No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable; and if any such license shall be surrendered by the licensee therein named, or shall be revoked for cause, neither the licensee named in such license, nor any other person, shall be entitled to any refund of any part of such fee. (Ord. 1768 § 1, 2016; Ord. 688, 1966)

 

5.12.080 Distributors license—Fee—Exemption.
        License fees under the terms of this chapter and for any such purpose, shall be as set by resolution.

        Provided, that persons acting for licensees, as agents or employees, in the distributing of any such handbills shall not be required to obtain a license or pay a fee, but each such person shall comply with each and all of the other provisions of this chapter, and be subject thereto. (Ord. 1768 § 1, 2016; Ord. 1213 §§ 2, 3, 1983; Ord. 688, 1966)

 

5.12.090 Exemptions.
        The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers as defined in Sec-

tion 5.12.020(C). (Ord. 1768 § 1, 2016; Ord. 688, 1966)

 

5.12.100 Existing ordinances not affected by chapter provisions.
        The provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall not be deemed to repeal, amend or modify any ordinance ever ordained, either prohibiting, regulating or licensing solicitors, canvassers, hawkers, peddlers, transient merchants, or any person, using the public streets or places for any private business or enterprise, or for commercial sales, not covered in this herein. (Ord. 1768 § 1, 2016; Ord. 688, 1966)

Chapter 5.16 NEWSRACKS
5.16.010 Purpose and intent.
        The council of the city of La Habra finds and declares that:

        A.    Newsracks and coin vending machines placed upon public property in a location which unreasonably interferes with, or impedes, the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic creates a nuisance which jeopardizes the safety of the citizens of the city by preventing safe passage to and from public sidewalks, public streets, roadways or parkways.

        B.     The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public peace, morals, health, safety and general welfare by regulating the placement, appearance, servicing and insuring of newsracks so as to protect against the dangers of impairing or distracting the vision of motorists and pedestrians; the hazards of unreasonably interfering with or impeding the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic; and unreasonably interfering with the use of public property for its intended purpose.

        C.     The public display of pictorial material depicting nudity and sexual conduct (“harmful matter”) in publications contained in newsracks located on public rights-of-way or public places is patently offensive and harmful to passersby when readily visible to them, and is detrimental to a healthy moral environment to which persons of the city are entitled.

        D.    Such public displays of harmful matter are thrust indiscriminately on children and unwilling adults and constitute assaults upon individual privacy.

        E.     Every person is entitled to use the public rights-of-way in the city without being subjected to such public displays of harmful matter. Such public displays of harmful matter constitute a public nuisance.

        F.     The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of persons in the city and to reduce liability exposure of the city to personal injury or property damage claims and litigation through the regulation of placement, appearance, number, size and servicing of newsracks on public rights-of way. (Ord. 1563 § 1B, 1999)

 

5.16.020 Definitions.
        For the purpose of the provisions of this chapter concerning newsracks on public rights-of-ways hereinafter set forth, the following words and phrases shall be construed to have the meanings herein set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:

        “Distributor” means a person who has the responsibility of placing, servicing or maintaining a newsrack by depositing and/or removing material from such newsrack and/or by collecting monies from such newsrack.

        “Harmful matter” means any matter, taken as a whole, which to the average person, applying contemporary statewide standards, appeals to the prudent interest, and is matter which, taken as a whole, depicts or describes in a patently offensive way sexual conduct and which, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value and shall include, but not be limited to the following:

        1.     Any statements or words describing explicit sexual acts, sexual organs, or excrement where such statements or words have as their purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront;

        2.     Any picture or illustration of genitals, pubic hair, perineums, anuses, anal regions of any person or any portion of the breast below the areola of any female person, where such picture or illustration has as their purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront;

        3.     Any picture or illustration depicting explicit sexual acts where such picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront. “Explicit sexual act,” as used in this chapter, means depictions of sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, sadism, masochism, or excretory function in conjunction with sexual activity, masturbation, or lewd exhibition of the genitals, whether any of the above conduct is depicted or described as being performed alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or between human beings and animals or other acts of sexual arousal involving any physical contact with a person’s genital, pubic region, pubic hair, perineum, anus or anal region.

        “Hearing officer” means the director of public works, who shall preside at the administrative hearings authorized by this chapter.

        “Matter” means any book, magazine, newspaper, periodical, record or other printed or written material or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture or other pictorial representation or any mechanical, chemical or electrical reproduction or any other articles, equipment, machines or material.

        “Minor” means any natural person under eighteen years of age.

        “Newsrack” means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display, sale or distribution of any written or printed matter, including but not limited to newspapers, news periodicals, magazines, books, pictures, photographs and records.

        “Owner” means any and all natural persons or entity who owns, controls, manages and/or leases a newsrack for the display, sale or distribution of any written or printed matter.

        “Parkway” means that area between the sidewalks and the curb of any street, and where there is no sidewalk, that area between the edge of the curb and the property line adjacent thereto. Parkways shall also include any area within a roadway which is not open to vehicular travel.

        “Public place” means any area that is used or held out for use of the public whether owned or operated by public or private interests but not including indoor areas.

        “Public right-of-way” means any place of any nature which is dedicated to use by the public for pedestrian and vehicular travel, and includes, but is not limited to, a street, sidewalk, curb, gutter, crossing, intersection, parkway, highway, alley, lane, mall, court, way, avenue, boulevard, road, roadway, viaduct, subway, tunnel, bridge, thoroughfare, park, square, and any other similar public way.

        “Roadway” means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.

        “Sidewalk” means any surface provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians.

        “Street” means all that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks. (Ord. 1563 § 1B, 1999)

 

5.16.030 Permit required.
        A.    A newsrack permit issued in accordance with this chapter shall be required prior to installation, placement or maintenance of any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in, or over any public right-of-way. Each application for a newsrack permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee established by resolution of the city council. Such fee shall be based upon the total number of newsracks identified in the application.

        The owner of a newsrack or newsracks or currently located in the city at the time of the effective date of this chapter shall be required to obtain a permit pursuant to the provisions hereunder upon expiration of the owner’s current business license.

        Applications for new permits required hereunder shall be filed with the department of public works upon forms provided by the city. The application shall be signed by the applicant and shall contain the following information:

        1.     Name of the street and approximate location(s) of the newsrack(s) to be installed or maintained;

        2.     Name, address and telephone number of the owner of the newsrack and the name, address and telephone number of the distributor, if different than the owner;

        3.     The name of the newspaper, periodical or other publication to be contained in each newsrack;

        4.     The type or brand of newsrack, including a physical description of the newsrack and how it will be mounted;

        5.     A precise diagram showing the applicant’s proposed location for the newsrack and the location and number of all other newsracks existing within one hundred feet thereof;

        6.     The total number of newsracks currently present at the proposed location;

        7.     Every applicant shall be required to sign a hold harmless statement for the benefit of the city whereby the applicant agrees to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, its elected officials, officers and employees, with respect to any loss or liability or damage, including attorneys fees, expenses and costs, for personal injury and for property damage sustained by any person as a result of the applicant’s installation, use or maintenance of a newsrack or newsracks within the city.

        8.     Every applicant for a newsrack permit shall provide proof of liability insurance in an amount satisfactory to the city attorney and naming the city as an additional insured. The evidence of insurance submitted with the application and kept on file with the risk manager shall include a statement by the insurance carrier that thirty days notice will be given to the city before any cancellation of coverage.

        B.     The director of public works, or his designee shall approve the location designated in the application based on the standards and criteria set forth in Sections 5.16.090 and 5.16.100. Such application may be granted either in whole or in part when more than one location or newsrack is proposed by an applicant. If an application is denied based solely as to a proposed location, or number of newsracks, the applicant shall be allowed, without prejudice, to amend such application to designate a different location or locations. (Ord. 1563 § 1B, 1999)

 

5.16.040 Issuance of permit.
        The director of public works, or his designee, shall cause the permit to be issued if all of the following requirements have been met:

        A.    The applicant has paid the required fees for the permit, as required by this chapter, and has obtained any other license or permit that may be required under any other chapter of this code; and

        B.     The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this chapter; and

        C.     The applicant has not made a material misrepresentation of fact in the application; and

        D.    The applicant does not have any outstanding debt owing to the city. (Ord. 1563 § 1B, 1999)

 

5.16.050 Denial of permit.
        A.    If the director of public works, or his designee, finds that all of the requirements set forth in Section 5.16.030 have not been met, he or she shall deny the application for the newsrack permit. In the event an application for a permit is denied by the director of public works or his designee, written notice of such denial shall be given to the applicant specifying the ground or grounds of such denial. Notice of denial of the permit shall be deemed to have been served upon the applicant on the date it is personally served on the applicant or when deposited in the United States mail with postage prepaid and addressed to the applicant at his or her residence as set forth in the application for the permit.

        B.     Any applicant whose application for a permit has been denied by the director of public works or his designee, may file an appeal of the denial to the city manager as set forth in Section 5.16.170. If the application has been denied for the failure to provide required information and the applicant provides the additional information within the ten days time for appeal, the applicant shall not be required to pay additional fees for an appeal. Once the additional information is received, the permit will be issued or notice of denial on other grounds will be served. (Ord. 1563 § 1B, 1999)

 

5.16.060 Permit not transferable.
        No permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferred or assigned to or used by a person or entity not named on the permit. (Ord. 1563 § 1B, 1999)

 

5.16.070 Revocation of permit.
        A.    Any newsrack permit may be revoked or suspended by the director of public works, or his designee, for any of the following reasons:

        1.     Falsehood of any information supplied by the permittee upon which issuance of the permit was based;

        2.     Failure of the permittee or any employee to comply with the regulations set forth in this chapter;

        3.     Failure of the permittee to notify the department of public works within two weeks of any change or modification of the information provided by the permittee upon which issuance of the permit was based occurring subsequent to the issuance of the permit, including, but not limited to, the sale or transfer of ownership of the newsrack;

        4.     Conviction of any violation by the permittee or distributor of any of the provisions of this chapter.

        B.     The permittee shall be notified of the decision of the director of public works by mailed, written notice.

        C.     The determination that a permit shall be suspended or revoked may be appealed by a permittee pursuant to the same procedures applicable to administrative hearing and appeal hereunder. No such revocation or suspension shall become effective until the permit holder has been notified in writing of the right to appeal such suspension or revocation. If a timely request for administrative hearing is filed pursuant to Section 5.16.170, the suspension or revocation shall be stayed pending the decision of the hearing officer and if an appeal is filed, pending the final decision of the planning commission. Otherwise, the revocation shall become effective immediately upon expiration of the appeal period.

        D.    No person whose permit is revoked, shall be eligible to apply for a new permit for a period of one year following such revocation. (Ord. 1563 § 1B, 1999)

 

5.16.080 Prohibitions.
        A.    No owner shall knowingly install, place or maintain, or cause to be installed, placed or maintained, in any newsrack, which rests in whole or in part, upon, in or on any portion of a public right-of-way, or public place, other than a public place from which minors are excluded, or which projects onto, into or over any part of a public right-of-way, any publication or material which while in such newsrack, exposes to public view any harmful matter, as defined by Section 313 of the Penal Code of the state of California.

        B.     No owner shall install, use or maintain, or cause to be installed, used or maintained, any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway, when such installation, use or maintenance:

        1.     Endangers the safety of persons or property; or

        2.     Unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicle; or

        3.     Unreasonably interferes with or impedes the ingress into or egress from any residence or place of business, or the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes or other objects permitted at or near the location; or

        4.     Interferes with the cleaning of any sidewalk by the use of mechanical sidewalk cleaning machinery.

        D.    No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes other than dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the publication sold therein. (Ord. 1563 § 1B, 1999)

 

5.16.090 Standards for installation and maintenance.
        Any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway, shall comply with the following standards:

        A.    No newsrack shall exceed four feet in height, as measured from the ground up, or two feet in depth, or thirty inches in width.

        B.     Newsracks shall only be placed near a curb or adjacent to the wall of a building. Newsracks placed near the curb shall be placed no less than eighteen inches nor more than twenty-four inches from the edge of the curb. Newsracks placed adjacent to the wall of a building shall be placed parallel to such wall and not more than six inches from the wall. No newsrack shall be placed or maintained on the sidewalk or parkway opposite a newsstand or another newsrack.

        C.     Newsracks may be chained or otherwise attached to one another; however, no more than three newsracks may be joined together in this manner; provided that, no group of newsracks shall extend more than eight lineal feet along a curb or wall and a space of no less than thirty-six inches shall separate each group of three newsracks so attached.

        D.    No newsrack shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any property not owned by the owner of the newsrack or to any permanently fixed object.

        E.     No newsrack or group of attached newsracks allowed under subsection C of this section shall weigh, in the aggregate, in excess of one hundred twenty-five pounds when empty.

        F.     Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, no newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:

        1.     Within five feet of any marked crosswalk;

        2.     Within fifteen feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk;

        3.     Within five feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or other emergency facility;

        4.     Within five feet of any driveway;

        5.     Within five feet ahead of, or twenty-five feet to the rear of any sign marking a designated bus stop;

        6.     Within fifteen feet of any bus bench;

        7.     At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than four feet;

        8.     Within three feet of any area improved with lawns, flowers, shrubs or trees or within five feet of any display window of any building abutting the sidewalk or parkway or in such manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of such window for display purposes;

        9.     Within one hundred feet of any other such newsrack on the same side of the street within the same block containing the same edition of the same publication except where separated by a street or corner.

        G.    Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, if the director of public works, or his designee, finds that the location of a newsrack, in accordance with the standards set forth herein, will create or allow a condition prohibited by Section 5.16.080, or will otherwise endanger the public peace, health, safety or welfare or be contrary to the purposes and intent of this chapter, he or she may prohibit the location of such newsrack in accordance with such standards and/or may allow the location of such a newsrack in a manner deviating from, or at variance with the standards provided herein, subject to such terms, conditions and regulations as he deems necessary to protect the public peace, health, safety or welfare and to carry out the purposes and intent of this chapter.

        1.     The director of public works, or his designee may make such finding at any time.

        2.     If such finding is made prior to the issuance of a permit, the finding of the director of public works, or his designee, shall be made a part of the permit at the time of issuance.

        3.     If the finding is made subsequent to the issuance of a permit, written notice of the finding of the director of public works, or his designee, shall be given to the owner of said newsrack with the direction that there shall be compliance with the finding of the director of public works, or his designee, within ten working days from the date of mailing notice. Failure of the owner to comply with said notice in the time specified shall result in removal of the newsrack pursuant to Section 5.16.130.

        H.    Each newsrack shall be maintained by owner at all times in a good, safe and clean operating condition. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, removal of graffiti, repair or replacement of any cracked, broken or unclear glass or plastic casing or coverings. Newsracks shall be painted or covered with a protective coating to keep the newsrack free from rust and general deterioration. The director of public works, or his designee, shall provide the owner of any newsrack not in compliance with this provision written notice of the specific violation(s) with the direction that there shall be compliance with the findings of the director of public works, or his designee, within ten working days from the date of mailing notice. Failure of the owner to comply with such notice in the time specified shall result in removal of the newsrack pursuant to Section 5.16.130. (Ord. 1563 § 1B, 1999)

 

5.16.100 Numerical limitations.
        No more than six newsracks shall be located on any public right-of-way within a space of two hundred feet in any direction within the same block of the same street; provided, however, that no more than twelve newsracks shall be allowed on any one block. As used herein, “block” shall mean one side of a street between the two consecutive intersecting streets. The director of public works, or his designee, shall use the following criteria in determining which newsracks shall be permitted to remain in its current location which, because of the number of newsracks is in violation of the provisions of this chapter:

        A.    First priority shall be given to newsracks used for the sale of publications which have been adjudicated to be newspapers of general circulation for Orange County, pursuant to the procedure set forth in Title 1, Division 7, Chapter 1, Article 2 of the Government Code of the state of California.

        B.     Second priority shall be given to newsracks used for the sale of daily publications (those published on five or more days in a calendar week) which have not been adjudicated to be newspapers of general circulation for Orange County.

        C.     Third priority shall be given to newsracks used for the sale of weekly publications (those published on at least one but less than five days in a calendar week) which have not been adjudicated to be newspapers of general circulation for Orange County. (Ord. 1563 § 1B, 1999)

 

5.16.110 Identification.
        Every owner who places or maintains, or causes to be placed or maintained, a newsrack which requires a permit pursuant to this chapter, on the streets of the city shall have the owner’s name, address and telephone number affixed thereto in a place where such information may be easily seen. Upon acceptance of a newsrack permit, each permittee shall be deemed to have consented to receive any notices given pursuant to this chapter by mail at the address affixed to such permitted newsrack. (Ord. 1563 § 1B, 1999)

 

5.16.120 Violation—Notice to owner.
        A.    Whenever any newsrack is found to be in violation of this chapter, the director of public works, or his designee, shall cause to be attached to such newsrack, a notice of violation, specifying the date and nature of the violation, that the newsrack shall be impounded if corrections are not timely made, and that a hearing may be requested within ten working days of the posting or mailing date of such notice. A copy of the notice of violation shall be mailed to the person whose name and address appears on the permit application or on the newsrack as provided in Section 5.16.110 on the same date the notice is affixed to the newsrack. The owner shall, within ten working days of the date on which the notice of violation was mailed, either cause the violation to be corrected or request a hearing in writing pursuant to Section 5.16.170.

        B.     In the case of violation of this chapter relative to restrictions upon attachments of newsracks to property other than that owned by the owner of the newsrack, to fixed objects or each other, and upon location of newsracks, any designated public employee may, as an alternative to removal under subsection A of this section, remove such attachment and/or move such rack or racks in order to restore them to a legal condition. (Ord. 1563 § 1B, 1999)

 

5.16.130 Impounding of newsracks.
        A.    Any harmful matter displayed or exhibited in violation of Section 5.16.080(A) may be summarily removed and stored in any convenient place by any officer of the city. Such officer shall take reasonable steps to notify the owner of the newsrack of the fact that the harmful matter has been removed pursuant to this section. Upon failure of the owner to claim such harmful matter and pay the expenses of removal and storage within thirty calendar days after such removal, such harmful matter shall be deemed to be unclaimed property in possession of the police department and may be disposed of pursuant to the provisions of this code.

        B.     In the event any newsrack which is installed pursuant to this chapter does not have the owner’s name, address and telephone number affixed, or where a newsrack has been determined to be abandoned, the city may impound it pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter. For the purposes of this section, the term “abandoned” shall include, but is not limited to, circumstances where no publication is in the newsrack for a period of over seven working days or is not serviced with the publication it is designed to disseminate for a period of over seven working days.

        C.     Failure to properly correct a violation or offending condition within ten working days, unless a hearing is requested pursuant to Section 5.16.170, shall result in the offending newsrack being impounded and processed as unclaimed property under applicable provisions of law relating thereto.

        D.    In the event that any newsrack is found in a location or in damaged condition, creating an immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the city may immediately impound it pending a hearing pursuant to Section 5.16.170; provided, such hearing is requested by the owner within ten working days of the date of mailing of a written notice of impoundment to the owner, if known.

        E.     Whenever any newsrack is to be impounded pursuant to this section, the owner may, within ten working days of the date the notice of violation is posted on the newsrack or mailed, request a hearing in writing as provided in Section 5.16.170. (Ord. 1563 § 1B, 1999)

 

5.16.140 Return of impounded newsracks—Conditions.
        A.    Provided the owner’s identity is known, any newsrack, together with its contents, which have been impounded shall be returned to the owner as follows:

        1.     Upon receipt of an impound fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council, within thirty calendar days of the date of impoundment or an order affirming an impoundment; or

        2.     Upon a determination after hearing by the director of public works that the newsrack should not have been impounded or should otherwise be returned to the owner; or

        3.     Where an appeal is timely filed, upon a decision by the city manager that the newsrack should not have been impounded or should otherwise be returned.

        B.     In the event a hearing has not been requested within the time permitted, an impound fee, the amount of which has been set by resolution of the city council, shall be imposed upon the owner. (Ord. 1563 § 1B, 1999)

 

5.16.150 Sale or disposal after impoundment.
        The director of public works, or his designee, may sell or otherwise dispose of any newsrack, together with its contents, and retain the proceeds including any monies, on behalf of the city; provided that, either:

        A.    Thirty calendar days have elapsed since impoundment or the date of an order affirming an impoundment, and the owner has failed to pay all impound fees assessed; or

        B.     A hearing, if requested, and/or an appeal, if filed, have resulted in a final determination that the newsrack was properly impounded and fees assessed have not been received within thirty calendar days from the date of such final determination. (Ord. 1563 § 1B, 1999)

 

5.16.160 Delivery of notice.
        Any notice of denial, suspension or revocation of a permit, notice of violation, impound, summary abatement of a newsrack or the matter therein, or any other adverse determination hereunder (hereinafter collectively referred to as the “notice”), shall be delivered pursuant to the following requirements:

        A.    The notice shall state the factual reasons for the action so noticed and that the recipient has a right to appeal the matter as set forth in Section 5.16.170 through Section 5.16.180 of this chapter.

        B.     Delivery shall be deemed complete upon: (1) personal service to the recipient; (2) deposit in the U.S. mail, postage prepaid for first class delivery; or (3) facsimile service with confirmation of receipt.

        C.     The address for notice shall be the address affixed to such newsrack pursuant to Section 5.16.110. (Ord. 1563 § 1B, 1999)

 

5.16.170 Administrative hearing procedures.
        A.    Any person receiving a notice, or any person who is subject to any adverse determination made pursuant to this chapter, may appeal the matter by requesting an administrative hearing as set forth below.

        B.     Any person appealing a notice or an adverse determination shall, within ten days of receipt thereof, file a written request for an administrative hearing with the office of the city clerk, accompanied by an administrative hearing fee as established by separate resolution of the city council. A copy of the request for administrative hearing shall also be mailed on the date of filing to the hearing officer. Thereafter, a hearing on the matter shall be held before the hearing officer within thirty business days of the date of filing of the written request unless, in the reasonable discretion of the hearing officer and pursuant to a written request by the appealing party, a continuance of the hearing is granted.

        C.     The hearing officer shall receive all relevant information and evidence pertaining to the violation(s), or noncompliance with any of the provisions of this chapter. The hearing need not be conducted according to technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. The decision of the hearing officer shall be issued within ten business days of the conclusion of the hearing and shall be delivered by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the appealing party. The decision of the hearing officer may include an order to the owner to remove the newsrack within ten working days of the mailing date of the decision, if the hearing officer determines there is a violation of this chapter. If a notice of appeal is not filed within ten days from the date of delivery, the hearing officer, or his designee, may thereafter impound such newsrack without further notice to the owner.

        D.    Notwithstanding subsections A through C of this section, the decision of the hearing officer in any proceeding determining the validity of a summary abatement shall be mailed within five business days following the conclusion of the hearing. However, all other provisions in this chapter regarding appeal procedures shall apply to summary abatements. (Ord. 1563 § 1B, 1999)

 

5.16.180 Final decision and appeals.
        A person may appeal the decision of the hearing officer by filing a written notice of appeal with the public works department within ten business days from the date of mailing of the hearing officer’s decision. The appeal shall be scheduled for planning commission action in accordance with customary filing deadlines for projects submitted to the planning commission. The notice of appeal shall state in detail the factual basis for the appeal. The planning commission shall consider the appeal at a public meeting not less than ten, nor more than forty-five days following the filing of the appeal. The planning commission may continue the hearing date where necessary. At the time and place set for such appeal the planning commission shall hold a de novo hearing. If the planning commission finds from the relevant evidence at the hearing that the action taken was in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, it shall require compliance with the hearing officer’s decision. A copy of the planning commission’s decision shall be mailed to the appellant within five working days after adoption thereof. (Ord. 1563 § 1B, 1999)

 

5.16.190 Costs.
        The installation, maintenance, replacement, removal and relocation of newsracks shall be at the sole expense of the permittee or owner. Upon removal of any newsrack, the permittee or owner shall at his or her sole expense cause the public right-of way to be repaired to its original condition and in conformity to the surrounding area. If the permittee or owner fails to make such repairs within ten working days from removal, the work may be done by the city and all costs for such removal shall be charged to the permittee or owner. (Ord. 1563 § 1B, 1999)

 

5.16.200 Penalty for violation.
        A.    Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction, and punishable as such, notwithstanding the fact that at the discretion of the city or district attorney, the violation of any section of this chapter may be filed as a misdemeanor. The complaint charging such violation shall specify whether the violation is a misdemeanor or an infraction. Each day a violation of any provision of this chapter shall continue shall be a new and separate violation.

        B.     A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil process by means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances. (Ord. 1563 § 1B, 1999)

 

5.16.210 Time limit for compliance.
        Except as otherwise provided herein, owners of newsracks shall comply with the requirements of this chapter within thirty calendar days from the effective date of this chapter. (Ord. 1563 § 1B, 1999)

 

5.16.220 Severability.
        A.    If any section, subsection, clause or phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of all other provisions of this chapter.

        B.     The city council declares that it would have passed the ordinance codified in this chapter, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more of the sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases or portions thereof be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 1563 § 1B, 1999)

Chapter 5.24 CABLE, VIDEO, AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDERS
Article I. General Provisions
5.24.010 Title.
        This chapter is known and may be cited as the “Cable, Video, and Telecommunications Service Providers Ordinance” of the city of La Habra. (Ord. 1652 § 2, 2005)

 

5.24.020 Purpose and intent.
          A.      The city council finds and determines as follows:

        1.     The development of cable, video, and telecommunications services and systems may provide significant benefits for, and have substantial impacts upon, the residents of the city.

        2.     Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable, video, and telecommunications services and systems, the public convenience, safety, and general welfare can best be served by the city’s exercise of its regulatory powers.

        3.     This chapter adopts provisions that authorize the city to regulate cable, video, and telecommunications service providers to the extent authorized by federal and state law, including but not limited to the Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Federal Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, applicable regulations of the Federal Communications Commission, and applicable California statutes and regulations.

        4.     The cable, video, and telecommunications services that are addressed in this chapter include services provided by cable television systems, open video systems, master antenna television systems, satellite master antenna television systems, direct broadcast satellite systems, multichannel multipoint distribution systems, local multipoint distribution systems, and other providers of video programming, whatever their technology, as well as voice and data services provided by telephone corporations.

        B.     The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide for the attainment of the following objectives:

        1.     To enable the city to discharge its public trust in a manner consistent with rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition, and technological development.

        2.     To authorize and to manage reasonable access to the city’s public rights-of-way and public property for cable, video, and telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory basis, and in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state statutes and regulations.

        3.     To obtain fair and reasonable compensation for the city and its residents for authorizing the private use of the public rights-of-way and public property.

        4.     To promote competition in cable, video, and telecommunications services, minimize unnecessary local regulation of cable, video, and telecommunications service providers, and encourage the delivery of advanced and competitive cable, video, and telecommunications services on the broadest possible basis to local government and to the businesses, institutions, and residents of the city.

        5.     To establish clear local guidelines, standards, and time frames for the exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of cable, video, and telecommunications service providers.

        6.     To encourage the deployment of advanced cable, video, and telecommunications infrastructure that satisfies local needs, delivers enhanced services, and provides informed consumer choices in an evolving cable, video, and telecommunications marketplace.

        7.     To maintain and to enhance educational and governmental programming opportunities that will enable local government to communicate with its residents. (Ord. 1652 § 2, 2005)

 

5.24.030 Defined terms and phrases.
        Various terms and phrases used in this chapter are defined in Section 5.24.180 of Article VI of this chapter. (Ord. 1652 § 2, 2005)

 

5.24.040 Suspension and waiver of application fee deposits.
        A.    With regard to any application fee deposit for an initial franchise, or for the renewal of a franchise, or for the transfer or change in control of a franchise that is authorized by this chapter, the city manager may suspend that application fee deposit in accordance with this section.

        B.     The city manager, in consultation with the city attorney, will review all written information submitted by the applicant or franchisee in support of its contention that applicable law prohibits imposition of the application fee deposit provided for by this chapter. If a determination is made that applicable law supports the contention of the applicant or franchisee, then the city manager may suspend the imposition of the application fee deposit; provided, however, that such suspension must be ratified by the city council within thirty days after the city manager’s determination and, if ratified, the application fee deposit will be deemed to have been waived. (Ord. 1652 § 2, 2005)

 

Article II. Cable Television Systems
5.24.050 Authority and findings.
        A.    In accordance with applicable federal and state law, the city is authorized to grant one or more nonexclusive franchises to construct, reconstruct, operate, and maintain cable television systems within the city limits.

        B.     The city council finds that the development of cable television services may provide significant benefits for, and substantial impacts upon, the residents of the city. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable television, the city council further finds that the public convenience, safety, and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers to be exercised by the city. This article is intended to specify the means for providing to the public the best possible cable television services, and every franchise issued in accordance with this article is intended to achieve this primary objective. It is the further intent of this article to adopt regulatory provisions that will enable the city to regulate cable television services to the maximum extent authorized by federal and state law. (Ord. 1652 § 2, 2005)

 

5.24.060 Franchise terms and conditions.
        A.    Franchise Purposes. A franchise granted by the city under the provisions of this article may authorize the grantee to do the following:

        1.     To engage in the business of providing cable television services that are authorized by law and that the grantee elects to provide to its subscribers within the designated franchise service area.

        2.     To erect, install, construct, repair, rebuild, reconstruct, replace, maintain, and retain, cable lines, related electronic equipment, supporting structures, appurtenances, and other property in connection with the operation of the cable system in, on, over, under, upon, along and across streets and public rights-of-way within the designated franchise service area.

        3.     To maintain and operate the franchise properties for the origination, reception, transmission, amplification, and distribution of television and radio signals, and for the delivery of cable services and such other services as may be authorized by law.

        B.     Franchise Required. It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, or operate a cable television system within any street or public way in the city without first obtaining a franchise under the provisions of this article.

        C.     Term of  Franchise.

        1.     A franchise granted under this article will be for the term specified in the franchise agreement, commencing upon the effective date of the resolution adopted by the city council that authorizes the franchise.

        2.     A franchise granted under this article may be renewed upon application by the grantee in accordance with the then-applicable provisions of state  and federal law and this article.

        D.    Franchise Service Area. A franchise is effective within the territorial limits of the city, and within any area added to the city during the term of the franchise, unless otherwise specified in the resolution granting the franchise or in the franchise agreement.

        E.     Federal or State Jurisdiction. This article will be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state laws, and it applies to all franchises granted or renewed after the effective date of this chapter, to the extent authorized by applicable law.

        F.     Franchise Non-Transferable.

        1.     Grantee may not sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet, or dispose of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, contract, consolidation, or otherwise, the franchise or any of the rights or privileges therein granted, without the prior written consent of the city council, which consent may not be unreasonably denied or delayed. Any attempt to sell, transfer, lease, assign, or otherwise dispose of the franchise without the written consent of the city council is null and void. The granting of a security interest in any assets of the grantee, or any mortgage or other hypothecation, will not be deemed a transfer for the purposes of this subsection. A transfer to a person or entity owned or controlled by or under common ownership or control of grantee shall not be deemed a transfer for the purposes of this subsection.

        2.     The requirements of subsection (F)(1) of this section apply to any change in control of grantee. The word “control” as used herein is not limited to the ownership of major stockholder or partnership interests, but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. If grantee is a partnership or a corporation, prior authorization of the city council is required where ownership or control of twenty-five percent or more of the partnership interests or of the voting stock of grantee, or any company in the tier of companies controlling the grantee, whether directly or indirectly, is acquired by a person or a group of persons acting in concert, none of whom, individually or collectively, owns or controls those partnership interests or that voting stock of the grantee, or grantee’s upper tier of controlling companies, as of the effective date of the franchise.

        3.     Unless precluded by federal law, grantee  must give prior written notice to the city of any proposed foreclosure or judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the grantee’s franchise property. That notification will be considered by the city as notice that a change in control of ownership of the franchise will take place, and the provisions of this paragraph that require the prior written consent of the city council to that change in control of ownership will apply.

        4.     For the purpose of determining whether it will consent to an acquisition, transfer, or change in control, the city may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective transferee or controlling party, and grantee must assist the city in that inquiry. In seeking the city’s consent to any change of ownership or control, grantee or the proposed transferee, or both, must complete Federal Communications Commission Form 394 or its equivalent. This application must be submitted to the city not less than one hundred twenty days prior to the proposed date of transfer. The transferee must establish that it possesses the legal, financial, and technical capability to remedy all then-existing defaults and deficiencies, and, during the remaining term of the franchise, to operate and maintain the cable system and to comply with all franchise requirements. If the legal, financial, and technical qualifications of the proposed transferee are determined to be satisfactory, then the city will consent to the transfer of the franchise.

        5.     Any financial institution holding a pledge of the grantee’s assets to secure the advance of money for the construction or operation of the franchise property has the right to notify the city that it, or a designee satisfactory to the city, will take control of and operate the cable television system upon grantee’s default in its financial obligations. Further, that financial institution must also submit a plan for such operation within ninety days after assuming control. The plan must insure continued service and compliance with all franchise requirements during the period that the financial institution will exercise control over the system. The financial institution may not exercise control over the system for a period exceeding one year unless authorized by the city, in its sole discretion, and during that period of time it will have the right to petition the city to transfer the franchise to another grantee.

        6.     Unless prohibited by applicable law, grantee must reimburse the city for the city’s reasonable review and processing expenses incurred in connection with any transfer or change in control of the franchise. These expenses may include, without limitation, costs of administrative review, financial, legal, and technical evaluation of the proposed transferee, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by these experts), notice and publication costs, and document preparation expenses. The total amount of these reimbursable expenses may be subject to maximum limits that are specified in the franchise agreement between the city and the grantee. No reimbursement may be offset against any franchise fee payable to the city during the term of the franchise.

        G.    Geographical Coverage.

        1.     Unless otherwise provided in the franchise agreement, grantee must design, construct, and maintain the cable television system to have the capability to pass every dwelling unit and commercial building in the franchise service area, subject to any service- area line extension requirements or territorial restrictions set forth in the franchise agreement.

        2.     After service has been established by activating trunk or distribution cables for any service area, grantee must provide standard installations to any requesting subscriber within that activated part of the service area within seven days from the date of request, or such longer time as may be requested by the subscriber, provided that the grantee is able to secure on reasonable terms and conditions all rights-of-way and permits necessary to extend service to that subscriber within that period. Standard installations are defined as installations that are located up to one hundred fifty feet from the existing distribution system and do not require trenching to serve.

        H.    Nonexclusive Franchise. Every franchise granted is nonexclusive. The city reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a cable television system that it deems appropriate, subject to applicable state and federal law. If an additional franchise is proposed to be granted to a subsequent grantee, a noticed public hearing must first be held if required by the provisions of Government Code Section 53066.3.

        I.      Multiple Franchises.

        1.     The city may grant any number of franchises, subject to applicable state and federal law. The city may limit the number of franchises granted, based upon, but not necessarily limited to, the requirements of applicable law and the following specific local considerations:

        a.     The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate multiple cables in addition to the cables, conduits, and pipes of the existing utility systems, such as electrical power, telephone, gas, and sewerage.

        b.     The benefits that may accrue to subscribers as a result of cable system competition, such as lower rates and improved service.

        c.     The disadvantages that may result from cable system competition, such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on residents’ property, and the disruption arising from numerous excavations within the public rights-of-way.

        2.     The city may require that any new grantee be responsible for its own underground trenching and the associated costs if, in the city’s opinion, the rights-of-way in any particular area cannot reasonably accommodate additional cables. (Ord. 1652 § 2, 2005)

 

5.24.070 Franchise applications and renewal.
        A.    Filing of Applications. Any person desiring an initial franchise for a cable television system must file an application with the city. An application fee deposit in an amount established by resolution of the city council must accompany the application. That application fee deposit will cover all anticipated costs associated with reviewing and processing the application, including without limitation costs of administrative review, financial, legal, and technical evaluation of the applicant, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by those experts), notice and publication requirements, and document preparation expenses. If actual costs exceed the application fee deposit, the applicant must pay the difference to the city within thirty days following receipt of an itemized statement of those costs. If actual costs are less than the application fee deposit, the remaining balance will be refunded to the applicant.

        B.     Applications—Contents. An application for an initial franchise for a cable television system must contain, as applicable:

        1.     A statement describing the proposed franchise service area and an explanation whether this proposed service area is, or will be, part of a larger regional cluster of franchise service areas.

        2.     A resume of the applicant’s prior history, including the applicant’s experience in the cable television industry.

        3.     A list of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant, if a partnership, or the percentage of stock owned or controlled by each stockholder, if a closely-held corporation. If the applicant is a publicly-owned partnership or corporation, each owner of ten percent or more of the partnership interests, or of the issued and outstanding capital stock, must be identified. If the applicant is a limited liability company, the following information must be provided: the address of its principal executive office; the name and business or residence address of each member and of each holder of an economic interest in the limited liability company, together with the contribution and the share in profits and losses of each member and holder of an economic interest; the name and business or residence address of any manager or managers and the chief executive officer, if any, appointed or elected in accordance with the articles of organization or operating agreement.

        4.     A list of officers, directors, and managing employees of the applicant, and a description of the background and qualifications of each of those persons.

        5.     A statement specifying the number of people employed by the applicant, whether on a full-time or part-time basis.

        6.     The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, or any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part, or that is owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant.

        7.     Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles that demonstrate the applicant’s financial ability to:

        a.     Construct, operate, maintain and remove any new physical plant that is proposed to be constructed in the city.

        b.     Comply with the city’s public, educational, and governmental access requirements.

        c.     Comply with the city’s requirement that franchise fees be paid on the applicant’s gross revenues derived from the operation of the cable system to provide cable services.

        8.     An accurate map showing the location of any existing telecommunications facilities in the city that the applicant intends to use, to purchase, or to lease.

        9.     A description of the cable services and any other services that will be offered by the applicant using existing or proposed facilities.

        10.   The proposed construction and service schedule, the proposed rate structure for cable services, and the proposed commitment to provide public, educational, and governmental access capacity, services, facilities, and equipment.

        11.   Any additional information that the city deems to be reasonably necessary to evaluate the applicant’s qualifications.

        C.     Consideration of Initial Applications.

        1.     Upon receipt of an application for an initial franchise, the city manager or the city manager’s designee must prepare a report and make recommendations to the city council concerning that application.

        2.     A public hearing will be noticed prior to any initial franchise grant, at a time and date approved by the city council. Within thirty days after the close of the hearing, the city council will make a decision, based upon the documents and testimony received at the hearing, whether the franchise should be granted, and, if granted, subject to what conditions. The city council may grant one or more franchises, or may decline to grant any franchise.

        D.    Franchise Renewal. Franchise renewals will be processed in accordance with then-applicable law and with the renewal terms, if any, of the franchise agreement. By mutual consent, city and grantee may enter into renewal negotiations at any time during the term of the franchise. Unless prohibited by applicable law, a renewal application fee deposit in an amount established by resolution of the city council must accompany the renewal application or the renewal request. That renewal application fee deposit will cover all anticipated costs associated with reviewing and processing the renewal application, including the review of grantee’s prior compliance with the franchise, the ascertainment of the community’s cable-related needs and interests, the engagement of technical and legal consultants, and expenses related to negotiations and document preparation. If actual costs exceed the renewal application fee deposit, grantee must pay the difference to the city within thirty days following receipt of an itemized statement of those costs. If actual costs are less than the renewal application fee deposit, the remaining balance will be refunded to grantee. No renewal application fee may be offset against any franchise fee payable to the city during the term of the franchise. The city council may authorize the renewal of a cable television franchise agreement by resolution. (Ord. 1652 § 2, 2005)

 

5.24.080 Contents of cable television franchise agreements.
        A.    The provisions of a franchise agreement for the operation of a cable television system may relate to or include, without limitation, the following subject matters:

        1.     The geographical area, duration, and nonexclusive nature of the franchise.

        2.     The applicable franchise fee to be paid to the city, including the percentage amount, the method of computation, and the time for payment.

        3.     Requirements relating to compliance with and implementation of state and federal laws and regulations pertaining to the operation of the cable television system.

        4.     Requirements relating to the construction, upgrade, or rebuild of the cable television system, as well as the provision of special services, such as outlets for public buildings, emergency alert capability, and parental control devices.

        5.     Requirements relating to the maintenance of a performance bond, a security fund, a letter of credit, or similar assurances to secure the performance of the grantee's obligations under the franchise agreement.

        6.     Requirements relating to comprehensive liability insurance, workers’ compensation insurance, and indemnification.

        7.     Requirements relating to consumer protection and customer service standards, which requirements may include, without limitation, compliance with the statutes, rules and regulations set forth in Section 5.24.090 of this article.

        8.     Requirements relating to grantee’s support of local cable usage, including the provision of public, educational, and governmental access channels, the coverage of public meetings and special events, and financial support for the required access channels.

        9.     Requirements relating to grantee’s obligation to provide an institutional network, and channel capacity on that institutional network for educational or governmental use, subject to the city’s rules and procedures for the use of such channel capacity and for compatibility with any telecommunications network that has been or may be developed by the city.

        10.   Requirements relating to construction, operation, and maintenance of the cable television system within the city’s streets and public rights-of-way, including compliance with all applicable building codes and permit requirements of the city, the abandonment, removal, or relocation of facilities, and compliance with FCC technical standards.

        11.   Requirements relating to recordkeeping, accounting procedures, reporting, periodic audits, performance reviews, the inspection of grantee’s books and records, and reimbursement for technical audits and franchise fee audits under specified circumstances.

        12.   Acts or omissions constituting material breaches of or defaults under the franchise agreement, and the applicable penalties or remedies for such breaches or defaults, including fines, penalties, liquidated damages, suspension, revocation, and termination.

        13.   Requirements relating to the sale, assignment, or other transfer or change in control of the franchise.

        14.   Grantee’s obligation to maintain continuity of service and to authorize, under certain specified circumstances, the city’s operation and management of the cable system.

        15.   Such additional requirements, conditions, policies, and procedures as may be mutually agreed upon by the parties to the franchise agreement and that will, in the judgment of city staff and the city council, best serve the public interest and protect the public health, welfare, and safety.

        B.     If there is any conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of a franchise agreement authorized by the city council and provisions of this article, the provisions of the franchise agreement will control. (Ord. 1652 § 2, 2005)

 

5.24.090 Consumer protection and service standards.
        A.    Operational Standards.

        1.     Grantee must maintain the necessary facilities, equipment, and personnel to comply with the following consumer protection and service standards under “normal operating conditions” as that term is defined in subsection (A)(4) of this section:

        a.     Provide sufficient toll-free telephone line capacity during normal business hours to ensure that telephone calls are answered promptly. Telephone answer time by a customer service representative, including wait time, may not exceed thirty seconds when the connection is made. Callers who must be transferred may not be required to wait more than thirty seconds before being connected to a service representative.

        b.     Under normal operating conditions, a caller may not receive a busy signal more than three percent of the time, measured on a quarterly basis.

        c.     Provide emergency toll-free telephone line capacity on a twenty-four-hour basis, including weekends and holidays. After normal business hours, the telephone calls may be answered by a service or an automated response system, including an answering machine. Calls received after normal business hours must be responded to by a trained company representative on the next business day.

        d.     Provide a conveniently located local business and service or payment office open during normal business hours at least eight hours daily on weekdays, and at least four hours weekly on evenings or weekends, and adequately staffed with trained customer service representatives to accept subscriber payments and to respond to service requests, inquiries, and complaints.

        e.     Provide an emergency system maintenance and repair staff, capable of responding to and repairing major system malfunctions on a twenty-four-hour per day basis.

        f.      Maintain a trained installation staff to provide service to any subscriber requiring a standard installation within seven days after receipt of a request, or such longer time as may be requested by the subscriber, in all areas where trunk and feeder cable have been activated. “Standard installations” are those that are located up to one hundred fifty feet from the existing distribution system, unless otherwise defined in the franchise agreement.

        g.     Grantee must schedule, within a specified four-hour time period Monday through Saturday (legal holidays excluded), all appointments with subscribers for installation of service, service calls, and other activities at the subscriber’s location. Grantee may schedule installation and service calls outside of normal business hours for the convenience of the subscriber. Grantee may not cancel an appointment with a subscriber after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. If a grantee representative is delayed in keeping an appointment with a subscriber and will not be able to honor the scheduled appointment, the subscriber must be contacted prior to the time of the scheduled appointment, and the appointment must be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time that is convenient for the subscriber. Grantee must undertake appropriate quality control measures to ensure that the customer is satisfied with the work.

        h.     Subscribers who have experienced a late or a missed appointment due to the fault of grantee will either receive an installation free of charge or a twenty dollar credit.

        i.      Upon a subscriber’s request, grantee will arrange for pickup or replacement of converters or other equipment provided by grantee at the subscriber’s address within fourteen days after the request is made if the subscriber is mobility-limited.

        2.     Under normal operating conditions, the standards of subsections (A)(1)(a) through (A)(1)(c), and (A)(1)(g) must be met not less than ninety percent of the time, measured on a quarterly basis. The standards of subsection (A)(1)(f) must be met not less than ninety-five percent of the time, measured on a quarterly basis. Grantee must submit to the city quarterly reports setting forth its compliance with these standards.

        3.     As used in this subsection, the term “normal business hours” means those hours during which most similar businesses in the community are open to serve customers. In all cases, “normal business hours” must include some evening hours at least one night per week, or some weekend hours, or both.

        4.     As used in this subsection, the term “normal operating conditions” means those service conditions that are within the control of the cable operator. Conditions that are not within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Conditions that are ordinarily within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system.

        B.     Service Standards.

        1.     Grantee will render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Except in emergency situations, scheduled interruptions will occur during a period of minimum use of the cable system, preferably between midnight and six o’clock a.m. Unless the scheduled interruption lasts for no more than two hours and occurs between midnight and six o’clock a.m. (in which event twenty-four hours’ prior notice must be given to the city), forty-eight hours’ prior notice must be given to subscribers.

        2.     Grantee will maintain a repair force of technicians who will respond to subscriber requests for service within the following timeframes:

        a.     For a system outage: Within two hours, including weekends, after receiving subscriber calls or requests for service that by number identify a system outage of sound or picture on one or more channels, affecting five or more subscribers to the system.

        b.     For an isolated outage: Within twenty-four hours, including weekends, after receiving requests for service identifying an isolated outage of sound or picture on one or more channels.

        c.     For inferior signal quality: No later than two business days, excluding Sundays and holidays, after a request for service identifying a problem concerning picture or sound quality.

        3.     Grantee will be deemed to have responded to a request for service under the provisions of this subsection when a technician arrives at the service location and begins work on the problem if the problem cannot be corrected from a remote location. If a subscriber is not home when the technician arrives, the technician must leave written notification of arrival.

        4.     Grantee may not charge for the repair or replacement of defective or malfunctioning equipment provided by grantee to subscribers, unless the defect or malfunction was caused by the subscriber.

        5.     Grantee must determine the nature of the problem within twenty-four hours after commencing work and resolve all cable system related problems within three business days, unless technically infeasible.

        C.     Billing and Information Standards.

        1.     Subscriber bills must be clear, concise, and understandable. Bills must be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills also must clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates, and credits.

        2.     The first billing to a subscriber after a new installation or service change must be prorated based upon when the new or changed service commenced. Subscribers must not be charged a late fee or otherwise penalized for any failure attributable to grantee, including the failure to timely or correctly bill the subscriber.

        3.     In case of a billing dispute, grantee must respond in writing to a written complaint from a subscriber within ten days after receiving the complaint at the office specified on the billing statement for receiving that complaint.

        4.     Upon request by a subscriber, credits or refunds must be provided by grantee to subscribers who experience an outage, interruption, or disconnection of service of four or more consecutive hours, provided that such loss of service is neither caused by the subscriber nor attributable to scheduled repairs, maintenance, or construction in circumstances where grantee has provided advance written notice to subscriber, and the loss of service does not exceed the time period specified by grantee. For subscribers terminating service, credits or refunds must be issued promptly, but no later than thirty days after the return of any grantee-supplied equipment.

        5.     Grantee must provide written information on each of the following matters at the time of the installation of service, annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon request:

        a.     Products and services offered.

        b.     Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services.

        c.     Installation and service maintenance policies.

        d.     Instructions on the use of the cable service.

        e.     Channel positions of programming carried on the system.

        f.      Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and telephone number of the city’s office designated for dealing with cable-related issues.

        g.     Consumer protection and service standards and penalties for noncompliance.

        6.     Subscribers must be notified in writing of any changes in rates, programming services, or channel positions as soon as possible. Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of thirty days in advance of those changes if the change is within grantee’s control. In addition, grantee will endeavor to notify grantor of those changes at least five working days before subscribers are notified.

        7.     Grantee must maintain a public file containing all written notices provided to subscribers under these consumer protection and service standards and all published promotional offers made by grantee to subscribers. These documents must be maintained for a minimum period of two years.

        D.    Verification of Compliance with Standards.

        1.     Upon thirty days prior written notice, city may require grantee to provide a written report demonstrating its compliance with any of the consumer service standards specified in this section. Grantee must provide sufficient documentation to enable city to verify compliance.

        2.     A repeated and verifiable pattern of noncompliance with the consumer protection and service standards of this section, after grantee’s receipt of written notice and an opportunity to cure, may be deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement.

        3.     With regard to the grantee’s telephone response obligations set forth in subsections (A)(1)(a) through (A)(1)(c) of this section, if the city gives written notice to grantee that grantee is in violation of any of these obligations, then upon city’s request the grantee must submit summary information on either a monthly or a quarterly basis until such time as grantee has demonstrated compliance for two consecutive calendar quarters.

        E.     Subscriber Complaints and Disputes.

        1.     Grantee must establish written procedures for receiving, acting upon, and resolving subscriber complaints without intervention by the city. The written procedures must prescribe the manner in which a subscriber may submit a complaint, either orally or in writing, specifying the subscriber’s grounds for dissatisfaction. Grantee must file a copy of these procedures with the city. These procedures must include a requirement consistent with subsection (C)(3) of this section.

        2.     Upon request, and subject to applicable law protecting subscriber privacy rights, city has the right to review grantee’s response to subscriber complaints.

        3.     All subscribers have the right to continue receiving service so long as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. If grantee elects to rebuild, modify, or sell the system, or if city gives notice of intent to terminate or not to renew the franchise, grantee must act to ensure that all subscribers receive service while the franchise remains in force.

        4.     Upon a change of control of grantee, or if a new operator acquires the cable system, the original grantee must cooperate with the city, the new grantee, or the new operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During that transition period, grantee is entitled to the revenues derived from its operation of the cable system.

        F.     Disconnection and Downgrades.

        1.     A subscriber may terminate service at any time, and grantee must promptly comply with the subscriber’s request within seven days or at any later time requested by the subscriber. No period of notice prior to voluntary termination of service may be required of subscribers. Grantee will impose no charges for the voluntary termination of service unless a service call to the subscriber’s premises is required to remove a converter box or other equipment or property owned by grantee.

        2.     Grantee may, in accordance with applicable law, charge a fee to downgrade service if a service call is required.

        3.     Grantee may disconnect a subscriber’s service in compliance with paragraphs (i), (j) and (k) of Section 53088.2 of the California Government Code. If service is disconnected for nonpayment of past due fees or charges, grantee must promptly reinstate service upon payment in full by the subscriber of all such fees and charges, including late charges.

        4.     Notwithstanding the requirements of subsection (F)(3) of this section, grantee may immediately disconnect service to a subscriber if the subscriber is damaging or destroying grantee’s cable system or equipment.

        5.     Grantee may also disconnect service to a subscriber when service causes signal leakage exceeding federal limits. If service is disconnected, grantee will immediately resume service without charge upon the satisfactory correction of the signal leakage problem if the signal leakage problem is attributable to grantee.

        6.     Grantee may also disconnect service in those cases where customers are stealing service or have made threats of physical violence upon grantee’s personnel.

        7.     Upon termination of service to a subscriber, grantee will remove its equipment from the subscriber’s premises within thirty days. The equipment will be deemed abandoned if it is not removed within that time period unless grantee has been denied access to the subscriber’s premises.

        G.    Negative Option Billing Prohibited. No charge may be imposed for any service or equipment that the subscriber has not affirmatively selected. Payment of the regular monthly bill will not by itself constitute an affirmative selection.

        H.    Deposits. Grantee may require a reasonable, nondiscriminatory deposit on equipment provided to subscribers. Those deposits must be placed in an interest- bearing account. The deposit must be returned, with interest earned to the date of repayment, within 30 days after the equipment is returned to grantee.

        I.      Parental Control Option. Grantee must provide parental control devices at no charge to all subscribers who desire to block the video or audio portion of any pay channels providing adult programming that the subscriber finds objectionable. For other programming, those devices will be provided at a reasonable charge to the subscriber.

        J.      Additional Requirements.

        1.     All officers, agents, and employees of grantee, or of its contractors or subcontractors, who, in the normal course of work come into contact with members of the public, or who require entry onto subscribers’ premises, must display a photo-identification card. Grantee must account for all identification cards at all times. All vehicles of grantee or its subcontractors must be clearly identified as vehicles engaged in providing services for grantee.

        2.     Additional standards relating to service, consumer protection, and response by grantee to subscriber complaints not otherwise provided for in this section may be adopted by ordinance, and grantee must comply with those standards in the operation of the cable television system. A verified and continuing pattern of noncompliance may be deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement, provided that grantee receives written notice and an opportunity to cure before any penalty or other remedy is imposed.

        K.    Penalties for Noncompliance.

        1.     Purpose. The purpose of this paragraph is to authorize the imposition of monetary penalties for the violation of the customer service standards established by this section. The imposition of penalties authorized by this subsection will not prevent the city or any other affected party from exercising any other remedy to the extent permitted by law, including but not limited to any judicial remedy as provided in subsection (K)(2)(d) of this section.

        2.     Administration and Appeals.

        a.     The city manager is authorized to administer this subsection. Decisions by the city manager to assess monetary penalties against grantee must be in writing and must contain findings supporting the decisions. Decisions by the city manager are final, unless appealed to the city council.

        b.     If grantee or any interested person is aggrieved by a decision of the city manager, the aggrieved party may appeal that decision in writing to the city council. The appeal letter must be accompanied by the fee established by the city council for processing the appeal. The city council may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the city manager.

        c.     Schedule of Penalties. The following schedule of monetary penalties may be assessed against grantee for the material violation of the provisions of the customer service standards set forth in this section, provided that the violation is within the grantee’s reasonable control:

        (i)     The maximum penalty for a first material violation is two hundred dollars for each day of the material violation.

        (ii)    For a second material violation of the same nature within a twelve-month period for which the city has provided notice and a penalty has been assessed, the maximum penalty is five hundred dollars for each day of the material violation.

        (iii)   For a third or further material violation of the same nature within a twelve-month period for which the city has provided notice and a penalty has been assessed, the maximum penalty is seven hundred fifty dollars for each day of the material violation.

        d.     Judicial Remedy. This paragraph does not preclude any affected party from pursuing any judicial remedy available to that party without regard to this subsection.

        e.     Notice of Violation. The city must give grantee written notice of any alleged violation of the consumer service standards and allow grantee at least thirty days from receipt of the notice to remedy the specified violation.

        f.      Assessment of Monetary Penalties.

        (i)     If a violation has not been corrected or cured by grantee within the time specified by the city, the monetary penalties specified in subsection (K)(2)(c) of this section may be assessed from the date of delivery to grantee of city’s written notice of violation.

        (ii)    In assessing monetary penalties under this subsection, the city manager may take into account the nature, circumstances, extent and gravity of the violation and, with respect to grantee, the degree of culpability, any history of prior violations, and such other matters as may be relevant. If warranted under the circumstances, the monetary penalty to be assessed may be less than the maximum penalty amount specified in subsection (K)(2)(c) of this section.

        L.     Additional Consumer Protection and Service Standards.

        1.     In addition to the consumer protection and service standards that are specified in subsections (A) through (K) of this section, the franchise agreement with a grantee may require compliance with the following:

        a.     Federal statutes, and the rules, regulations, and orders of the Federal Communications Commission, including the following:

        (i)     The provisions of Section 76.309(c) of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as it now exists or may later be amended.

        (ii)    The provisions of Section 76.630 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as it now exists or may later be amended.

        (iii)   The provisions of Section 551 of Title 47, United States Code, as it now exists or may later be amended.

        b.     The provisions of California Government Code Section 53054 et seq., entitled the “Cable Television and Video Provider Customer Service and Information Act.”

        c.     The provisions of California Government Code Section 53088 et seq., entitled the “Video Customer Service Act.”

        d.     The provisions of California Civil Code Section 1722(b)(1)-(6) relating to service or repair transactions between cable television companies and their subscribers.

        e.     The provisions of California Penal Code Section 637.5 relating to subscribers’ rights to privacy protection.

        2.     The city may, in its discretion, incorporate in a franchise agreement those customer service and protection standards referenced in subsection (L) of this section that are the most stringent, and that afford the greatest protection to consumers. These standards will apply, to the extent authorized by law, to all video, voice, and data services that are provided by grantee to its subscribers within the franchise service area. (Ord. 1652 § 2, 2005)

 

5.24.092 Fee for support of local cable usage.
        A fee paid to the city is established for the support of public, educational, and governmental access facilities and activities within the city. Unless a higher percentage is authorized by applicable state or federal law, this fee shall be one percent of a grantee’s gross revenues, as that term is defined in the grantee’s franchise agreement, or in applicable provisions of state or federal law. This fee is also applicable to a state video franchise holder operating within the city, which shall pay to the city one percent of its gross revenues, as defined in California Public Utilities Code Section 5860. (Ord. 1678 § 1, 2007)

 

5.24.094 Special provisions applicable to holders of state video franchises.
        A.    Franchise Fee. A state video franchise holder operating in the city shall pay to the city a franchise fee that is equal to five percent of the gross revenues of that state video franchise holder. The term “gross revenues” shall be defined as set forth in Public Utilities Code Section 5860.

        B.     Audit Authority. Not more than once annually, the city may examine and perform an audit of the business records of a holder of a state video franchise to ensure compliance with all applicable statutes and regulations related to the computation and payment of franchise fees.

        C.     Customer Service Penalties Under State Video Franchises.

        1.     The holder of a state video franchise shall comply with all applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service.

        2.     The city shall monitor a state video franchise holder’s compliance with state and federal customer service and protection standards. The city will provide to the state video franchise holder written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer service and protection standards, and will allow the state video franchise holder thirty days from receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within the thirty-day time period will be subject to the following monetary penalties to be imposed by the city in accordance with state law:

        a.     For the first occurrence of a violation, a monetary penalty of five hundred dollars shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars for each violation.

        b.     For a second violation of the same nature within twelve months, a monetary penalty of one thousand dollars shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed three thousand dollars for each violation.

        c.     For a third or further violation of the same nature within twelve months, a monetary penalty of two thousand five hundred dollars shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars for each violation.

        3.     A state video franchise holder may appeal a monetary penalty assessed by the city within sixty days. After relevant evidence and testimony is received, and staff reports are submitted, the city council will vote to either uphold or vacate the monetary penalty. The city council’s decision on the imposition of a monetary penalty shall be final.

        D.    City Response to State Video Franchise Applications.

        1.     Applicants for state video franchises within the boundaries of the city must concurrently provide to the city complete copies of any application or amendments to applications filed with the California Public Utilities Commission. One complete copy must be provided to the city clerk.

        2.     The city will provide any appropriate comments to the California Public Utilities Commission regarding an application or an amendment to an application for a state video franchise.

        E.     PEG Channel Capacity. A state video franchise holder that uses the public rights-of-way shall designate sufficient capacity on its network to enable the carriage of at least three public, educational, or governmental (PEG) access channels.

        1.     PEG access channels shall be for the exclusive use of the city or its designees to provide public, educational, or governmental programming.

        2.     Advertising, underwriting, or sponsorship recognition may be carried on the PEG access channels for the purpose of funding PEG-related activities.

        3.     The PEG access channels shall be carried on the basic service tier.

        4.     To the extent feasible, the PEG access channels shall not be separated numerically from other channels carried on the basic service tier, and the channel numbers for the PEG access channels shall be the same channel numbers used by the incumbent cable operator unless prohibited by federal law.

        5.     After the initial designation of PEG access channel numbers, the channel numbers shall not be changed without the prior written consent of the city, unless the change is required by federal law.

        6.     Each PEG access channel shall be capable of carrying a National Television System Committee (NTSC) television signal.

        F.     Interconnection. Where technically feasible, a state video franchise holder and incumbent cable operator shall negotiate in good faith to interconnect their networks for the purpose of providing PEG access channel programming. Interconnection may be accomplished by direct cable, microwave link, satellite, or other reasonable method of connection. State video franchise holders and incumbent cable operators shall provide interconnection of the PEG access channels on reasonable terms and conditions and may not withhold the interconnection. If a state video franchise holder and an incumbent cable operator cannot reach a mutually acceptable interconnection agreement, the city may require the incumbent cable operator to allow the state video franchise holder to interconnect its network with the incumbent’s network at a technically feasible point on the holder’s network as identified by the holder. If no technically-feasible point for interconnection is available, the state video franchise holder shall make an interconnection available to the channel originator and shall provide the facilities necessary for the interconnection. The cost of any interconnection shall be borne by the state video franchise holder requesting the interconnection unless otherwise agreed to by the parties.

        G.    Emergency Alert System and Emergency Overrides. A state video franchise holder must comply with the emergency alert system requirements of the Federal Communications Commission in order that emergency messages may be distributed over the holder’s network. Provisions in city-issued franchises authorizing the city to provide local emergency notifications shall remain in effect, and shall apply to all state video franchise holders in the city for the duration of the city-issued franchise, or until the term of the franchise would have expired had it not been terminated pursuant to subdivision (m) of Section 5840 of the California Public Utilities Code, or until January 1, 2009, whichever is later. (Ord. 1678 § 2, 2007)

 

Article III. Open Video Systems
5.24.100 Applicability.
        The provisions of this article apply to an open video system operator, as defined in Section 5.24.180 of this chapter, that intends to deliver video programming to consumers in the city over an open video system. (Ord. 1652 § 2, 2005)

 

5.24.110 Application required.
        A.    Before commencing the delivery of video programming services to consumers in the city over an open video system, the open video system operator must file an application with the city. That application must include or be accompanied by the following, as applicable:

        1.     The identity of the applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant.

        2.     Copies of FCC Form 1275, all “Notices of Intent” filed under 47 CFR 76.1503(b)(1), and the Order of the FCC, all of which relate to certification of the applicant to operate an open video system in the city in accordance with Section 653(a)(1) of the Communications Act and the FCC’s rules.

        3.     The area or areas of the city that the applicant desires to serve.

        4.     A description of the open video system services that will be offered by the applicant over its existing or proposed facilities.

        5.     A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the applicant to deliver the open video system services.

        6.     Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant’s technical qualifications and experience regarding the ownership and operation of the open video system described in the application.

        7.     Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles that demonstrate the applicant’s financial ability to:

        a.     Construct, operate, maintain and remove any new physical plant that is proposed to be constructed in the city.

        b.     Comply with the city’s public, educational, and governmental access requirements as specified in Section 5.24.130(B)(4) of this chapter.

        c.     Comply with the city’s requirement that gross revenue fees be paid in the maximum amount authorized under federal law, as specified in Section 5.24.130(B)(2) of this chapter.

        8.     An accurate map showing the location of any existing telecommunications facilities in the city that the applicant intends to use, to purchase, or to lease.

        9.     If the applicant’s operation of the open video system will require the construction of new physical plant and facilities in the city, the following additional information must be provided:

        a.     A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates.

        b.     Preliminary engineering plans, specifications, and a network map of any new facilities to be constructed in the city, in sufficient detail to identify:

        (i)     The location and route requested for the applicant’s proposed facilities.

        (ii)    The locations, if any, for interconnection with the facilities of other telecommunications service providers.

        (iii)   The specific structures, improvements, facilities, and obstructions, if any, that the applicant proposes to add, remove, or relocate on a temporary or permanent basis.

        c.     The applicant’s statement that, in constructing any new physical plant, the applicant will comply with all applicable ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city, including the payment of all required permit and processing fees.

        10.   The information and documentation that is required to be submitted to the city by a video provider, as specified in subsection (B) of Section 5.24.150 of this chapter.

        11.   Such additional information as may be requested by the city manager.

        12.   An application fee deposit in an amount established by resolution of the city council.

        B.     If any item of information specified in subsection (A) of this section is determined under paramount federal or state law to be unlawful, the city manager is authorized to waive the requirement that such information be included in the application. (Ord. 1652 § 2, 2005)

 

5.24.120 Review of the application.
        Within thirty days after receipt of an application filed under Section 5.24.110 of this chapter that is deemed to be complete, the city manager will give written notice to the applicant of the city’s intent to negotiate an agreement setting forth the terms and conditions under which the operation of the proposed open video system will be authorized by the city. The commencement of those negotiations will be on a date that is mutually acceptable to the city and to the applicant. (Ord. 1652 § 2, 2005)

 

5.24.130 Agreement required.
        A.    No video programming services may be provided in the city by an open video system operator unless the operator and the city have executed a written agreement, which may be designated as a franchise, setting forth the terms and conditions under which the operation of the proposed open video system will be authorized by the city. That agreement may be approved by resolution of the city council.

        B.     The agreement between the city and the open video system operator may contain provisions that relate to the following subject matters, to the extent that such provisions and subject matters are not preempted by federal law or regulations:

        1.     The nature, scope, and duration of the agreement, including provisions for its renewal or extension.

        2.     The obligation of the open video system operator to pay to the city, at specified times and in lieu of the franchise fees permitted under Section 622 of the Communications Act, fees on gross revenue received by the operator, as authorized by 47 CFR 76.1511, in accordance with the following standards and procedures:

        a.     The amount of the fees on the gross revenue will be the maximum amount authorized by Section 653(c)(2)(B) of the Communications Act, which is the rate imposed by the city on the existing franchised cable operator.

        b.     The term “gross revenue” means (i) all gross revenue received by an open video system operator or its affiliates, including all revenue received from subscribers and all carriage revenue received from unaffiliated video programming providers; and (ii) all advertising revenue received by the operator or its affiliates in connection with the provision of video programming, where such revenue is included in the calculation of the cable franchise fee paid to the city by the incumbent franchised cable operator. The term “gross revenue” does not include revenue, such as subscriber or advertising revenue, collected by unaffiliated video programming providers.

        3.     The obligation of the open video system operator to comply with requirements relating to information collection and recordkeeping, accounting procedures, reporting, periodic audits, and inspection of records in order to ensure the accuracy of the fees on gross revenue that are required to be paid as specified in subsection (B)(2) of this section.

        4.     The obligation of the open video system operator to meet the city’s requirements with respect to public, educational, and governmental access channel capacity, services, facilities, and equipment, as provided for in 47 CFR 76.1505. In this regard, the following standards and procedures are applicable:

        a.     The open video system operator is subject to the same public, educational, and governmental access requirements that apply within the cable television franchise service area with which its system overlaps.

        b.     The open video system operator must ensure that all subscribers receive all public, educational, and governmental access channels within the franchise service area in which the city’s subscribers are located.

        c.     The open video system operator may negotiate with the city to establish the operator’s obligations with respect to public, educational, and governmental access channel capacity, services, facilities, and equipment. These negotiations may include the city’s franchised cable operator if the city, the open video system operator, and the franchised cable operator so desire.

        d.     If the open video system operator and the city are unable to reach an agreement regarding the operator’s obligations with respect to public, educational, and governmental access channel capacity, services, facilities, and equipment within the city’s jurisdiction, then the following obligations will be imposed:

        (i)     The open video system operator must satisfy the same public, educational, and governmental access obligations as the city’s franchised cable operator by providing the same amount of channel capacity for public, educational, and governmental access and by matching the city’s franchised cable operator’s annual financial contributions in support of public, educational, and governmental access services, facilities, and equipment that are actually used by the city. For in-kind contributions, such as cameras or production studios, the open video system operator may satisfy its statutory obligation by negotiating mutually agreeable terms with the city’s franchised cable operator, so that public, educational, and governmental access services to the city are improved or increased. If these terms cannot be agreed upon, the open video system operator must pay to the city the monetary equivalent of the franchised cable operator’s depreciated in-kind contribution, or, in the case of facilities, the annual amortization value. Any matching contributions provided by the open video system operator must be used to fund activities arising under Section 611 of the Communications Act.

        (ii)    The city will impose upon the open video system operator the same rules and procedures that it imposes upon the franchised cable operator with regard to the open video system operator’s use of channel capacity designated for public, educational, and governmental access use when that capacity is not being used for those purposes.

        e.     The city’s franchised cable operator is required under federal law to permit the open video system operator to connect with its public, educational, and governmental access channel feeds. The open video system operator and the franchised cable operator may decide how to accomplish this connection, taking into consideration the physical and technical characteristics of the cable and the open video systems involved. If the franchised cable operator and the open video system operator cannot agree on how to accomplish the connection, the city has the right to decide. The city may require that the connection occur on city-owned property or on public rights-of-way.

        f.      All costs of connection to the franchised cable operator’s public, educational, and governmental access channel feed must be borne by the open video system operator. These costs will be counted towards the open video system operator’s matching financial contributions set forth in subsection (B)(4)(d)(i) of this section.

        g.     The city will not impose upon the open video system operator any public, educational, or governmental access obligations that are greater than those imposed upon the incumbent franchised cable operator.

        h.     If there is no incumbent franchised cable operator, the provisions of 47 CFR 76.1505(d)(6) will be applicable in determining the obligations of the open video system operator.

        i.      The open video system operator must adjust its system to comply with new public, educational, and access obligations imposed on the city’s incumbent franchised cable operator following a renewal of the cable television franchise; provided, however, that the open video system operator will not be required to displace other programmers using its open video system to accommodate public, educational, and governmental access channels. The open video system operator must comply with such new public, educational, and governmental access obligations whenever additional capacity is or becomes available, whether it is due to increased channel capacity or to decreased demand for channel capacity.

        5.     If the city and the open video system operator cannot agree on the application of the FCC’s rules regarding the open video system operator’s obligations to provide public, educational, and governmental access under the provisions of subsection (B)(4) of this section, then either party may file a complaint with the FCC in accordance with the dispute resolution procedures set forth in 47 CFR 76.1514. No agreement will be executed by the city until the dispute has been finally resolved.

        6.     If the open video system operator intends to maintain an institutional network, as defined in Section 611(f) of the Communications Act, the city will require that educational and governmental access channels be designated on that institutional network to the same extent that those channels are designated on the institutional network of the city’s franchised cable operator.

        7.     The authority of an open video system operator to exercise editorial control over any public, educational, or governmental use of channel capacity will be restricted in accordance with the provisions of 47 CFR 76.1505(f).

        8.     The obligation of the open video system operator to comply with all applicable federal, state, and local statutes, ordinances, and regulations relating to customer service standards, including those specified in Section 5.24.090 of Article II of this chapter.

        9.     If new physical plant is proposed to be constructed within the city, the obligation of the open video system operator to comply with the following rights-of-way use and management responsibilities that are also imposed by the city upon other cable television and telecommunications service providers in a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral manner:

        a.     Compliance with all applicable state statutes and city codes, including applications for excavation, encroachment, and construction permits and the payment of all required permit and inspection fees.

        b.     The coordination of construction activities.

        c.     Compliance with established standards and procedures for constructing lines across private property.

        d.     Compliance with all applicable insurance and indemnification requirements.

        e.     The repair and resurfacing of construction-damaged streets.

        f.      Compliance with all public safety requirements that are applicable to cable television and telecommunications service providers using public property or public rights-of-way.

        10.   Acts or omissions constituting breaches or defaults of the agreement, and the applicable penalties, liquidated damages, and other remedies, including fines or the suspension, revocation, or termination of the agreement.

        11.   Requirements relating to the sale, assignment, or transfer of the open video system.

        12.   Requirements relating to the open video system operator’s compliance with and implementation of state and federal laws, rules, and regulations pertaining to the operation of the open video system.

        13.   Such additional requirements, conditions, terms, policies, and procedures as may be mutually agreed upon by the city and the open video system operator and that will, in the judgment of the city council, best serve the public interest and protect the public health, welfare, and safety. (Ord. 1652 § 2, 2005)

 

Article IV. Other Video and Telecommunications Services and Systems
5.24.140 Other multichannel video programming distributors.
        The term “cable system,” as defined in federal law and as set forth in Section 5.24.180 of this chapter, does not include a facility that serves subscribers without using any public rights-of-way. Consequently, the categories of multichannel video programming identified below are not deemed to be “cable systems” and are therefore exempt from the city’s franchise requirements and from certain other local regulatory provisions authorized by federal law, provided that their distribution or transmission facilities do not involve the use of the city’s public rights-of-way:

        A.    Multichannel multipoint distribution service (“MMDS”), also known as “wireless cable,” which typically involves the transmission by an FCC-licensed operator of numerous broadcast stations from a central location using line-of-sight technology.

        B.     Local multipoint distribution service (“LMDS”), another form of over-the-air wireless video service for which licenses are auctioned by the FCC, and which offers video programming, telephony, and data networking services.

        C.     Direct broadcast satellite (“DBS”), also referred to as “direct-to-home satellite services,” which involves the distribution or broadcasting of programming or services by satellite directly to the subscriber’s premises without the use of ground receiving or distribution equipment, except at the subscriber’s premises or in the uplink process to the satellite. Local regulation of direct-to-home satellite services is further proscribed by the following federal statutory provisions:

        1.     47 U.S.C. Section 303(v) confers upon the FCC exclusive jurisdiction to regulate the provision of direct-to-home satellite services.

        2.     Section 602 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 states that a provider of direct-to-home satellite service is exempt from the collection or remittance, or both, of any tax or fee imposed by any local taxing jurisdiction on direct-to-home satellite service. The terms “tax” and “fee” are defined by federal statute to mean any local sales tax, local use tax, local intangible tax, local income tax, business license tax, utility tax, privilege tax, gross receipts tax, excise tax, franchise fees, local telecommunications tax, or any other tax, license, or fee that is imposed for the privilege of doing business, regulating, or raising revenue for a local taxing jurisdiction. (Ord. 1652 § 2, 2005)

 

5.24.150 Video providers—Registration—Customer service standards.
        A.    Notwithstanding the definition of the term “video provider” in Section 5.24.180 of this chapter, the provisions of this section do not apply to providers of direct-to-home satellite services, also known as direct broadcast satellite (“DBS”).

        B.     Unless the customer protection and customer service obligations of a video provider, as that term is defined in Section 5.24.180 of this chapter (but excluding “DBS”), are specified in a franchise, license, lease, or similar written agreement with the city, a video provider must comply with all applicable provisions of the following state statutes:

        1.     The Cable Television and Video Customer Service and Information Act (Government Code Section 53054 et seq.)

        2.     The Video Customer Service Act (Government Code Section 53088 et seq.).

        C.     All video providers that are operating in the city on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or that intend to operate in the city after its effective date, must register with the city; provided, however, that this registration requirement is not applicable to any video provider that has executed a franchise, license, lease or similar written agreement with the city. The registration form must include or be accompanied by the following:

        1.     The video provider’s name, address, and local telephone numbers.

        2.     The names of the officers of the video provider.

        3.     A copy of the video provider’s written policies and procedures relating to customer service standards and the handling of customer complaints, as required by Government Code Section 53054 et seq. These customer service standards must include, without limitation, standards regarding the following:

        a.     Installation, disconnection, service and repair obligations, employee identification, and service call response time and scheduling.

        b.     Customer service telephone and office hours.

        c.     Procedures for billing, charges, refunds, and credits.

        d.     Procedures for termination of service.

        e.     Notice of the deletion of a programming service, the changing of channel assignments, or an increase in rates.

        f.      Complaint procedures and procedures for bill dispute resolution.

        g.     The video provider’s written acknowledgment of its obligation under Government Code Section 53055.1 to provide to new customers a notice describing the customer service standards specified in subsections (C)(3)(a) through (f) of this section at the time of installation or when service is initiated. The notice must also include, in addition to all of the information described in subsections (C)(3)(a) through (f) of this section, all of the following:

        (i)     A listing of the services offered by the video provider that clearly describes all levels of service and the rates for each level of service.

        (ii)    The telephone number or numbers through which customers may subscribe to, change, or terminate service, request customer service, or seek general or billing information.

        (iii)   A description of the rights and remedies that the video provider may make available to its customers if the video provider does not materially meet its customer service standards.

        h.     The video provider’s written commitment to distribute annually to its employees and customers, and to the city, a notice describing the customer service standards specified in subsections (C)(3)(a) through (f) of this section. This annual notice must include the report of the video provider on its performance in meeting its customer service standards, as required by Government Code Section 53055.2. Subject to the written notice and cure provisions of Government Code Section 53056(b), a video provider that fails to distribute the annual notice required by Government Code Section 53055.1 will be assessed a monetary penalty in the sum of five hundred dollars for each year in which the annual notice is not distributed to all of its customers.

        4.     Unless a video provider is exempt under federal law from its payment, a registration fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council to cover the reasonable costs incurred by the city in reviewing and processing the registration form.

        5.     In addition to the registration fee specified in subsection (C)(4) of this section, the written commitment of the video provider to pay to the city, when due, all costs and expenses reasonably incurred by the city in resolving any disputes between the video provider and its subscribers, which dispute resolution is mandated by Government Code Section 53088.2(o).

        D.    The customer service obligations imposed upon video providers by the Video Customer Service Act (Government Code Section 53088 et seq.) consist of the following:

        1.     Every video provider must render reasonably efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only as necessary.

        2.     All video provider personnel contacting subscribers or potential subscribers outside the office of the provider must be clearly identified as associated with the video provider.

        3.     At the time of installation, and annually thereafter, all video providers must provide to all customers a written notice of the programming offered, the prices for that programming, the provider’s installation and customer service policies, and the name, address, and telephone number of the city’s office that is designated for receiving complaints.

        4.     All video providers must have knowledgeable, qualified company representatives available to respond to customer telephone inquiries Monday through Friday, excluding holidays, during normal business hours.

        5.     All video providers must provide to customers a toll-free or local telephone number for installation, service, and complaint calls. These calls must be answered promptly by the video providers.

        6.     All video providers must render bills that are accurate and understandable.

        7.     All video providers must respond promptly to a complete outage in a customer’s service. The response must occur within twenty-four hours of the reporting of that outage to the provider, except in those situations beyond the reasonable control of the video provider. A video provider will be deemed to respond to a complete outage when a company representative arrives at the outage location within twenty-four hours and begins to resolve the problem.

        8.     All video providers must provide a minimum of thirty days’ written notice before increasing rates or deleting channels. All video providers must make every reasonable effort to submit the notice to the city in advance of its distribution to customers. The thirty-day notice is waived if the increases in rates or deletion of channels are outside the control of the video provider. In those cases, the video provider must make reasonable efforts to provide customers with as much notice as possible.

        9.     All video providers must allow every residential customer who pays his or her bill directly to the video provider at least fifteen days from the date the bill for services is mailed to the customer, to pay the listed charges unless otherwise agreed to pursuant to a residential rental agreement establishing tenancy. Customer payments must be posted promptly. No video provider may terminate residential service for nonpayment of a delinquent account unless the video provider furnishes notice of the delinquency and impending termination at least fifteen days prior to the proposed termination. The notice must be mailed, postage prepaid, to the customer to whom the service is billed. Notice must not be mailed until the sixteenth day after the date the bill for services was mailed to the customer. The notice of delinquency and impending termination may be part of a billing statement. No video provider may assess a late fee any earlier than the twenty-second day after the bill for service has been mailed.

        10.   Every notice of termination of service pursuant to subsection (D)(9) of this section must include all of the following information:

        a.     The name and address of the customer whose account is delinquent.

        b.     The amount of the delinquency.

        c.     The date by which payment is required in order to avoid termination of service.

        d.     The telephone number of a representative of the video provider who can provide additional information and handle complaints or initiate an investigation concerning the service and charges in question. Service may only be terminated on days in which the customer can reach a representative of the video provider either in person or by telephone.

        11.   Any service terminated without good cause must be restored without charge for the service restoration. Good cause includes, but is not limited to, failure to pay, payment by check for which there are insufficient funds, theft of service, abuse of equipment or system personnel, or other similar subscriber actions.

        12.   All video providers must issue requested refund checks promptly, but no later than forty-five days following the resolution of any dispute, and following the return of the equipment supplied by the video provider, if service is terminated.

        13.   All video providers must issue security or customer deposit refund checks promptly, but no later than forty-five days following the termination of service, less any deductions permitted by law.

        14.   Video providers must not disclose the name and address of a subscriber for commercial gain to be used in mailing lists or for other commercial purposes not reasonably related to the conduct of the businesses of the video providers or their affiliates, unless the video providers have provided to the subscriber a notice, separate or included in any other customer notice, that clearly and conspicuously describes the subscriber’s ability to prohibit that disclosure. Video providers must provide an address and telephone number for a local subscriber to use without toll charge to prevent disclosure of the subscriber’s name and address.

        E.     As authorized by Government Code Section 53088(q), the following schedule of penalties is adopted. These penalties may be imposed for the material breach by a video provider of the consumer protection and service standards that are set forth in subsection (D) of this section, provided that the breach is within the reasonable control of the video provider. These penalties are in addition to any other remedies authorized by this article or by any other law, and the city has discretion to elect the remedy that it will apply. The imposition of penalties authorized by this subsection will not prevent the city or any other affected party from exercising any other remedy to the extent permitted by law, including but not limited to any judicial remedy as provided in subsection (E)(2) of this section.

        1.     Schedule of Penalties.

        a.     For a first material breach: the maximum penalty is two hundred dollars for each day of material breach, but not to exceed a cumulative total of six hundred dollars for each occurrence of material breach, irrespective of the number of customers affected.

        b.     For a second material breach of the same nature for which a monetary penalty was previously assessed within the preceding twelve-month period: the maximum penalty is four hundred dollars per day, not to exceed a cumulative total of one thousand two hundred dollars for each occurrence of the material breach, irrespective of the number of customers affected.

        c.     For a third or further material breach of the same nature for which a monetary penalty was previously assessed within the preceding twelve-month period: the maximum penalty is one thousand dollars per day, not to exceed a cumulative total of three thousand dollars for each occurrence of the material breach, irrespective of the number of customers affected.

        d.     The maximum penalties referenced above may be increased by any additional amount authorized by state law.

        2.     Judicial Remedies Not Affected. The imposition of penalties in accordance with the provisions of subsection (E)(1) of this section does not preclude any affected party from pursuing any judicial remedy that is available to that party.

        3.     Administration, Notice, and Appeal.

        a.     The city manager is authorized to administer this subsection. Decisions by the city manager to assess penalties against a video provider must be in writing and must contain findings supporting the decisions. Decisions by the city manager are final, unless appealed to the city council.

        b.     If the video provider or any interested person is aggrieved by a decision of the city manager, the aggrieved party may, within ten days of the written decision, appeal that decision in writing to the city council. The appeal letter must be accompanied by the fee established by the city council for processing the appeal. The city council may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the city manager.

        c.     The imposition of monetary penalties under subsection (E)(1) of this section is subject to the following requirements and limitations:

        (i)     The city must give the video provider written notice of any alleged material breach and must allow the video provider at least thirty days from receipt of that notice to remedy the breach.

        (ii)    If a material breach has not been corrected or cured by grantee within the time specified by city, the monetary penalties specified in subsection (E)(1) of this section may be assessed from the date of delivery to the video provider of city’s written notice of material breach. (Ord. 1652 § 2, 2005)

 

5.24.160 Telecommunications service provided by telephone corporations.
        A.    The city council finds and determines as follows:

        1.     The Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 preempts and declares invalid all state rules that restrict entry or limit competition in both local and long-distance telephone service.

        2.     The California Public Utilities Commission (“CPUC”) is primarily responsible for the implementation of local telephone competition, and it issues certificates of public convenience and necessity to new entrants that are qualified to provide competitive local telephone exchange services and related telecommunications service, whether using their own facilities or the facilities or services provided by other authorized telephone corporations.

        3.     Section 234(a) of the California Public Utilities Code defines a “telephone corporation” as “every corporation or person owning, controlling, operating, or managing any telephone line for compensation within this state.”

        4.     Section 616 of the California Public Utilities Code provides that a telephone corporation “may condemn any property necessary for the construction and maintenance of its telephone line.”

        5.     Section 2902 of the California Public Utilities Code authorizes municipal corporations to retain their powers of control to supervise and regulate the relationships between a public utility and the general public in matters affecting the health, convenience, and safety of the general public, including matters such as the use and repair of public streets by any public utility and the location of the poles, wires, mains, or conduits of any public utility on, under, or above any public streets.

        6.     Section 7901 of the California Public Utilities Code authorizes telephone and telegraph corporations to construct telephone or telegraph lines along and upon any public road or highway, along or across any of the waters or lands within this state, and to erect poles, posts, piers, or abutments for supporting the insulators, wires, and other necessary fixtures of their lines, in such manner and at such points as not to incommode the public use of the road or highway or interrupt the navigation of the waters.

        7.     Section 7901.1 of the California Public Utilities Code confirms the right of municipalities to exercise reasonable control as to the time, place, and manner in which roads, highways, and waterways are accessed, which control must be applied to all entities in an equivalent manner. Nothing in Section 7901.1 adds to or subtracts from any existing authority that municipalities have with respect to the imposition of fees.

        8.     Section 50030 of the California Government Code provides that any permit fee imposed by a city for the placement, installation, repair, or upgrading of telecommunications facilities, such as lines, poles, or antennas, by a telephone corporation that has obtained all required authorizations from the CPUC and the FCC to provide telecommunications services, must not exceed the reasonable costs of providing the service for which the fee is charged, and must not be levied for general revenue purposes.

        B.     In recognition of and in compliance with the statutory authorizations and requirements set forth in subsection (A) of this section, the following regulatory provisions are applicable to a telephone corporation that desires to provide telecommunications service by means of facilities that are proposed to be constructed within the city’s public rights-of-way:

        1.     The telephone corporation must apply for and obtain, as may be applicable, an excavation permit, an encroachment permit, or a building permit (“ministerial permit.”)

        2.     In addition to the information required by this code in connection with an application for a ministerial permit, a telephone corporation must submit to the city the following supplemental information:

        a.     A copy of the certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the CPUC to the applicant, and a copy of the CPUC decision that authorizes the applicant to provide the telecommunications service for which the facilities are proposed to be constructed in the city’s public rights-of-way. Any applicant that, prior to 1996, provided telecommunications service under administratively equivalent documentation issued by the CPUC may submit copies of that documentation in lieu of a certificate of public convenience and necessity.

        b.     If the applicant has obtained from the CPUC a certificate of public convenience and necessity to operate as a “competitive local carrier,” the following additional requirements are applicable:

        (i)     As required by Decision No. 95-12-057 of the CPUC, the applicant must establish that it has timely filed with the city a quarterly report that describes the type of construction and the location of each construction project proposed to be undertaken in the city during the calendar quarter in which the application is filed, so that the city can coordinate multiple projects, as may be necessary.

        (ii)    If the applicant’s proposed construction project will extend beyond the utility rights-of-way into undisturbed areas or other rights-of-way, the applicant must establish that it has filed a petition with the CPUC to amend its certificate of public convenience and necessity and that the proposed construction project has been subjected to a full-scale environmental analysis by the CPUC, as required by Decision No. 95-12-057 of the CPUC.

        (iii)   The applicant must inform the city whether its proposed construction project will be subject to any of the mitigation measures specified in the Negative Declaration [“Competitive Local Carriers (CLCs) Projects for Local Exchange Communication Service throughout California”] or to the Mitigation Monitoring Plan adopted in connection with Decision No. 95-12-057 of the CPUC. The city’s issuance of a ministerial permit will be conditioned upon the applicant’s compliance with all applicable mitigation measures and monitoring requirements imposed by the CPUC upon telephone corporations that are designated as “competitive local carriers.”

        C.     The city reserves all rights that it now possesses or may later acquire with respect to the regulation of any cable or telecommunications service that is provided, or proposed to be provided, by a telephone corporation. These reserved rights may relate, without limitation, to the imposition of reasonable conditions in addition to or different from those set forth in this section, the exaction of a fee or other form of consideration or compensation for use of public rights-of-way, and related matters; provided, however, that such regulatory rights and authority must be consistent with federal and state law that is applicable to cable or telecommunications services provided by telephone corporations. (Ord. 1652 § 2, 2005)

 

Article V. Use of Public Rights-of-Way
5.24.170 Findings—Policies and procedures.
        A.    The city council finds and determines that numerous and repetitive excavations in the public rights-of-way diminish the useful life of the surface pavement and generally cause adverse negative impacts for local residents, local businesses, and vehicular and pedestrian traffic. The city council further finds and determines that the utility substructure in the public rights-of-way is subject to potential adverse negative impacts as a consequence of new economic and regulatory policies that foster increased competition between various utility service providers, including telephone corporations, and between other service providers, such as cable system operators. In order to mitigate these potential adverse negative impacts, the following policies are adopted:

        1.     The city manager is directed to develop and to implement public rights-of-way policies and procedures that incorporate, to the extent reasonably feasible and consistent with all applicable laws and regulations, the following requirements that are intended to encourage the shared use by utility and other service providers of existing facilities in the public rights-of-way:

        a.     A requirement that utility and other service providers requesting permits review information provided by the city that identifies the location of facilities, such as underground conduits, that are available for shared use, and the owners of those facilities.

        b.     A requirement that utility and other service providers requesting permits submit a written statement that describes in reasonable detail the efforts made to obtain from other utility service providers the right to use excess capacity within existing facilities, and to thereby avoid the construction of new facilities.

        c.     A requirement that utility and other service providers occupying the public rights-of-way submit annually to the city a map, which may be in an electronic data format maintained in the ordinary course of business, that shows the location of their respective facilities in the public rights-of-way. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an updated annual map need not be provided unless there are changes to the location of the service provider’s facilities in the public rights-of-way.

        d.     Any additional requirements that will encourage utility and other service providers to share excess capacity within previously constructed facilities and to coordinate the construction of new facilities in order to minimize the number of excavations in the public rights-of-way.

        2.     The city manager is directed to ensure that all utility and other service providers, including telephone corporations and cable system operators, comply with all local design, construction, maintenance and safety standards that are consistent with state and federal laws and regulations and that are contained within, or are related to, any permit that authorizes the construction of facilities within the public rights-of-way, including all applicable insurance provisions.

        3.     Based upon the city’s projected plans for street construction or renovation projects, the city manager is authorized to establish on a quarterly basis one or more construction time periods or “windows” for the installation of facilities within arterial or collector streets, or where city rehabilitation or maintenance activities within the public rights- of-way will be affected. Cable system operators, telephone corporations, and other utility service providers that submit applications for permits to construct facilities after a predetermined date may be required to delay such construction until the next quarterly “window” that is established by the city; provided, however, that exemptions and exceptions may be established for the emergency repair of facilities within arterial or collector streets, or for safety-related work that must be completed prior to the next construction time period or “window.”

        B.     The city council finds and determines that the installation in the public rights-of-way of numerous aboveground facilities by utility service providers, including telephone corporations, and other service providers may create safety hazards and adverse visual impacts. Consequently, the city is authorized to impose, in a manner consistent with all applicable laws and regulations, reasonable conditions in order to mitigate those potential adverse impacts that may result, whether on an individual or a cumulative basis, from permitted aboveground facilities. Those conditions may include or relate to, without limitation, the following:

        1.     Prior to issuance of the requisite permits, all aboveground facilities proposed to be installed by a utility or other service provider in the public rights-of-way must be clearly delineated on the plans when they are submitted for the city’s review.

        2.     The design and installation by qualified professionals of landscaping and barriers to minimize public view of aboveground facilities whose location has been approved by the city.

        3.     The maintenance of all aboveground facilities in good condition, including compliance with the city’s maintenance standards and ordinances regarding graffiti removal.

        4.     The placement of aboveground facilities, such as overhead drops, as close as possible to other utility drops, consistent with all applicable electrical codes.

        5.     Reasonable limitations upon the number of aboveground facilities that may be installed within a designated geographical area.

        6.     Reasonable limitations upon the dimensions or volume, or both, of aboveground facilities.

        7.     The specification of colors, as are available from the manufacturer used by the service provider, of aboveground facilities reasonably requested by the city to ensure that these facilities blend with the surrounding environment to the maximum extent possible.

        8.     Such additional conditions regulating the time, place, and manner of installations of aboveground facilities as will reasonably mitigate potential safety hazards and adverse visual impacts attributable to these facilities.

        C.     The city reserves all rights that it now possesses or may later acquire to adopt and implement city-wide requirements for the undergrounding of aboveground facilities, or any portion thereof, in a competitively neutral and non-discriminatory manner. To the extent authorized by law, all utility and other service providers will be required to comply with those requirements at their sole expense.

        D.    Disputes relating to the application of the policies, conditions and limitations set forth in this article to utility service providers, cable system operators, or other users of the public rights-of-way are subject to appeal to the city council. (Ord. 1652 § 2, 2005)

 

Article VI. Definitions
5.24.180 Defined terms and phrases.
        A.    The words, terms, phrases, and their derivations set forth in this chapter have the meanings set forth below. Words used in the present tense include the future tense, and words in the singular include the plural number.

        “Cable service” means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming services, and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of that video programming or other programming service. For the purposes of this definition, “video programming” means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station; and “other programming service” means information that a cable system operator makes available to all subscribers generally.

        “Cable system,” “cable communications system,” or “cable television system,” means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community. The term “cable system” does not include:

        (i)     A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations;

        (ii)    A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way;

        (iii)   A facility of a common carrier that is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act, except that such facility will be considered a cable system (other than for purposes specified in Section 621(c) of the Communications Act) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services;

        (iv)   An open video system that complies with Section 653 of the Communications Act; or

        (v)    Any facilities of an electric utility that are used solely for operating its electric utility system.

        “Cable system operator” means any person or group of persons:

        (i)     Who provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that cable system; or

        (ii)    Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of that cable system.

        “City” means the city of La Habra as represented by its city council or by any delegate acting within the scope of its delegated authority.

        “___ CFR” means the Code of Federal Regulations. Thus, the citation of “47 CFR 80.1” refers to Title 47, part 80, section 1, of the Code of Federal Regulations.

        “Communications Act” means the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. Section 153 et seq.), as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996.

        “FCC” or “Federal Communications Commission” means the federal administrative agency, or any lawful successor, that is authorized to regulate telecommunications services and telecommunications service providers on a national level.

        “Franchise” means an initial authorization, or the renewal of an initial authorization, granted by the city council, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, agreement, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, or otherwise, that authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system or an open video system.

        “Franchise fee” means any fee or assessment of any kind that is authorized by state or federal law to be imposed by the city on a grantee as compensation in the nature of rent for the grantee’s use of the public rights-of-way. The term “franchise fee” does not include:

        (i)     Any tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services, but not including a tax, fee, or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or cable subscribers);

        (ii)    Capital costs that are required by the franchise to be incurred by a grantee for public, educational, or governmental access facilities;

        (iii)   Requirements or charges that are incidental to the award or enforcement of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or

        (iv)   Any fee imposed under Title 17, United States Code.

        “Franchise service area” or “service area” means the entire geographic area of the city as it is now constituted, or may in the future be constituted, unless otherwise specified in the ordinance or resolution granting a franchise, or in a franchise agreement.

        “Grantee” means any person that is awarded a franchise in accordance with this chapter, and that person’s lawful successor, transferee, or assignee.

        “Multichannel video programming distributor” or “video programming distributor” means a person such as, but not limited to, a cable system operator, an open video system operator, a multichannel multipoint distribution service, a direct broadcast satellite service, or a television receive-only satellite program distributor, who makes available multiple channels of video programming for purchase by subscribers or customers.

        “Open video system” means a facility consisting of a set of transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service, including video programming, and that is provided to multiple subscribers within the city, provided that the FCC has certified that such system is authorized to operate in the city and complies with 47 CFR 1500 et seq., entitled “Open Video Systems.”

        “Open video system operator” means any person or group of persons who provides cable service over an open video system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that open video system, or otherwise controls or is responsible for the management and operation of that open video system.

        “Person” means an individual, partnership, limited liability company, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation, or governmental entity.

        “Public, educational or government access facilities” or “PEG access facilities,” means the total of the following:

        (i)     Channel capacity designated for noncommercial public, educational, or government use; and

        (ii)    Facilities and equipment for the use of that channel capacity.

        “Subscriber,” “customer” or “consumer” means any person who, for any purpose, subscribes to the services provided by a multichannel video programming distributor and who pays the charges for those services.

        “Street” or “public right-of-way” means each of the following that has been dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by others and is located within the city limits: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights- of-way, and similar public property that the city from time to time authorizes to be included within the definition of a street.

        “Telecommunications” means the transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user’s choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received.

        “Telecommunications equipment” means equipment, other than customer premises equipment, used by a telecommunications service provider to provide telecommunications service, including software that is integral to that equipment.

        “Telecommunications service” means the offering of telecommunications directly to the public for a fee, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the equipment or facilities that are used.

        “Telecommunications service provider” means any provider of telecommunications service.

        “____ U.S.C. Section ____” means the United States Code. Thus, the citation of “47 U.S.C. Section 153” refers to Title 47, Section 153, of the United States Code.

        “Video programming provider” means any person or group of persons who has the right under the federal copyright laws to select and to contract for the carriage of specific video programming on a cable system or an open video system.

        “Video provider” means any person, company, or service that provides one or more channels of video programming to a residence, including a home, multi-family dwelling complex, congregate-living complex, condominium, apartment, or mobilehome, where some fee is paid for that service, whether directly or as included in dues or rental charges, and whether or not public rights-of-way are used in the delivery of that video programming. A “video provider” includes, without limitation, providers of cable television service, open video system service, master antenna television, satellite master antenna television, direct broadcast satellite, multipoint distribution services, and other providers of video programming, whatever their technology.

        B.     Unless otherwise expressly stated, words, terms, and phrases not defined in this chapter will be given their meaning as used in Title 47 of the United States Code, as amended, and, if not defined in that code, their meaning as used in Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations. (Ord. 1652 § 2, 2005)

 

Article VII. Violations—Severability
5.24.190 Violations—Enforcement.
        A.    Unless precluded by applicable law, any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as provided for in Chapter 1.08 of Title 1 of this code.

        B.     The misdemeanor penalty specified in subsection (A) of this section is not applicable to a violation of any provision of this chapter for which another sanction or penalty may be imposed under any franchise, license, lease, or similar written agreement between the city and a multichannel video programming distributor or telecommunications service provider.

        C.     The city may initiate a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin any violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1652 § 2, 2005)

 

5.24.200 Severability.
        If any provision of this chapter is determined by any court of competent jurisdiction, or by any federal or state agency having jurisdiction over its subject matter, to be invalid and in conflict with any paramount federal or state law or regulation now or hereafter in effect, or is determined by that court or agency to require modification in order to conform to the requirements of that paramount law or regulation, then that provision will be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent part of this chapter, and such determination will not affect the validity and enforceability of any other provisions. If that paramount federal or state law or regulation is subsequently repealed or amended so that the provision of this chapter determined to be invalid or subject to modification is no longer in conflict with that law or regulation, then that provision will again become effective and will thereafter be binding on the city and any affected cable or telecommunications service provider; provided, however, that the city must give the affected cable or telecommunications service provider thirty days’ written notice of that change before requiring compliance with that provision, or such longer period of time as may be reasonably required for the cable or telecommunications service provider to comply with that provision. (Ord. 1652 § 2, 2005)

Chapter 5.28 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
5.28.010 Findings and purpose.
        The city council finds and declares as follows:

        A.    The permit requirements and restrictions imposed by this chapter are reasonably necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city.

        B.     The city is authorized, by virtue of the Constitution of the state of California, and Section 51031 of the California Government Code, to regu-

late massage establishments by imposing reasonable standards relative to the skill and experience of massage operators and massage technicians and imposing reasonable conditions on the operation of the massage establishment.

        C.     There is a significant risk of injury to massage clients by improperly trained and/or educated massage technicians and this chapter provides reasonable safeguards against injury and economic loss.

        D.    There is opportunity for acts of prostitution and other unlawful sexual activity to occur in massage establishments. Courts have long recognized massage as a pervasively regulated activity and that massage establishments are often brothels in disguise. The establishment of reasonable standards for issuance of permits and restrictions on operations would serve to reduce the risk of illegal activity.

        E.     The restrictions and requirements contained in this chapter are intended to reduce the burden of massage establishment regulation on the police department.

        F.     The regulations and restrictions contained in this chapter are intended to discourage massage establishments from degenerating into houses of prostitution and the means utilized in this chapter bear a reasonable and rational relationship to the goals sought to be achieved. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 2009)

 

5.28.020 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

        “Adult-oriented merchandise” means sexually-oriented implements or paraphernalia, such as, but not limited to: dildos, auto sucks, sexually-oriented vibrators, Ben Wa balls, inflatable orifices, anatomical balloons with orifices, simulated and battery operated vaginas, and similar sexually-oriented devices which are designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sado-masochistic activity.

        “Chief of police” means the chief of police of the city of La Habra, or designee.

        “City” means the city of La Habra.

        “City council” means the city council of the city of La Habra.

        “City manager” means the city manager of the city of La Habra, or designee.

        “Conviction,” or “convicted” means a guilty plea, guilty verdict or a conviction following a plea of nolo contendere.

        “Customer area” means areas open to customers of the establishment or the general public.

        “Employee” means any and all persons, other than a massage technician, operator or manager, who renders any service, with or without compensation, for the owner, operator, manager or agent of either an owner, operator or manager of a massage establishment and who has no physical contact with customers or clients. For purposes of this chapter the term “employee” shall include independent contractors.

        “Health department” means the health care agency of the county of Orange.

        “Lobby” means one room or designated area, adjacent to the public entry, which is used for an entry and/or waiting room for customers or other persons authorized to enter the premises.

        “Manager” means the person(s) designated by the operator of the massage establishment to act as the representative and agent of the operator in managing day-to-day operations with corresponding liabilities and responsibilities. Evidence of management includes, but is not limited to, evidence that the individual has the power to direct or hire and dismiss employees, control hours of operation, create policy or rules or purchase supplies. A manager may also be an owner. A manager must meet the standards and qualifications of Sections 5.28.050 and 5.28.060 to qualify as a manager.

        “Massage” means any method of treating the external parts of the human body for remedial, health, hygienic, relaxation or any other reason or purpose, whether by means of pressure on, friction against or stroking, kneading, tapping, pounding, vibrating, rubbing or any other manner of touching external parts of the human body with the hands, or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, with or without supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniment, antiseptic, oil, powder, cream, ointment or other similar preparations commonly used in this type of business or trade.

        “Massage certificate” means a certificate to practice massage, issued by the California Massage Therapy Council (CAMTC) pursuant to the California Business and Professions Code Sections 4600 et seq.

        “Massage establishment” means any enterprise or establishment having a fixed place of business conducted within the city of La Habra, where any person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or combination of individuals, engages in, conducts, carries on or permits to be conducted or carried on, for money or any other consideration, the administration to another person of a massage, bath or health treatment involving massages or baths including, but not limited to, fomentation, electric or magnetic treatments, alcohol rubs, or any other type of system for treatment or manipulation of the human body with or without any character of bath, such as Turkish, Russian, Swedish, Japanese, vapor, shower, electric tub, sponge, mineral, fomentation, or any other type of bath.

        “Massage room” means a cubicle, booth, room or enclosed or semi-enclosed area within a massage establishment where massage services are performed on patrons.

        “Massage technician” means any person who administers to another person a massage as defined herein, within a massage establishment for any form of consideration or in exchange for anything of value whatsoever. The terms “massage therapist,” “massage practitioner,” “massage trainee,” “masseur” or “a masseuse” are included within this definition for purposes of this chapter.

        “Operator” means all persons who have an ownership interest in the massage establishment. An operator may also be a manager or an owner. A proposed operator shall provide all of the information required for and meet all of the standards set forth in Sections 5.28.050 and 5.28.060 to qualify as an operator.

        “Operator’s permit” means the permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter required to operate and/or manage a massage establishment.

        “Out call massage” means a massage performed or administered for money or other consideration by a licensed massage technician at a location other than a licensed massage establishment.

        “Owner” means the individual(s) whose name appears on the city business license and includes any and all persons who have any ownership interest in a massage establishment. An owner may also be an operator or manager.

        “Person” means any natural person, individual, or corporation, partnership, association or other group or combination of individuals acting as an entity.

        “Police department” means the police department of the city of La Habra.

        “Qualified massage association” means any association which meets all of the following criteria:

        1.     Has established, as a minimum education requirement for membership, the completion of at least five hundred hours of training in anatomy, physiology, hygiene, sanitation, massage therapy and practice, ethics of massage practice, first aid and CPR from a recognized school of massage, and has a written and practical testing of equivalency administered and overseen by its admissions committee or by a national certified program endorsed by the National Commission for Certifying Agencies (NCAA), which will be considered in lieu of the minimum education requirement of five hundred hours;

        2.     Offers and requires participation and completion by members of a minimum of twenty hours of specified continuing education per year as a condition of continuing membership;

        3.     Is open to members of the general public, meeting the requirements for membership on a national basis;

        4.     The association has established rules of ethics and has enforcement procedures for the suspension or revocation of membership for violation of such rules.

        “Recognized school of massage” means any school or institution of learning which teaches, through state certified instructors, the theory, ethics, practice, profession, or work of massage, which school or institution complies with the California Education Code, including, but not limited to, Sections 94900 or 94905, and which requires a resident course of study before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation. Schools offering a correspondence course not requiring personal attendance shall not be deemed a recognized school. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 2009)

5.28.030—5.28.040

5.28.030 Operator’s permit required.
        Except as otherwise provided herein, it is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit the engagement in, conduct of or carrying on the business or operation of a massage establishment within the city without first obtaining an operator’s permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and complying with all other applicable provisions of this code, including, but not limited to, securing the necessary business licenses. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 2009)

 

5.28.040 Exceptions.
        The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the following individuals while engaged in performing the duties of their respective professions:

        A.    Massage establishments that utilize or employ only massage therapists and/or massage practitioners in good standing with a massage certificate, irrespective of the employee or independent contractor status of the massage therapist and massage practitioner, shall not be required to obtain a massage establishment operator’s permit.

        B.     Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists or osteopaths duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the state of California. The herein exemption only applies if the massage is performed by the aforementioned licensed professionals and/or by a staff member of said licensed professionals in the course of treatment prescribed by said professional and only when said professional is present on the premises.

        C.     Acupuncturists who are duly licensed to practice their respective profession in the state of California. The exemption herein only applies if the massage therapy is performed by the aforementioned licensed professional to the treated area. If a duly licensed acupuncturist wished to provide massage therapy by another individual/s said individual/s must obtain and possess a valid massage technician permit or a massage certificate and the office (acupuncturist/owner) must obtain a massage establishment permit from the city of La Habra in compliance with all codes and the California Acupuncture Board.

        D.    A registered or licensed vocational nurse working on the premises of, and under the direct supervision of, a state licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath. Practical nurses or other persons that do not meet the requisite qualifications for a massage technician, or any other person not otherwise licensed by the state of California or the Massage Therapy Organization (California Business and Professions Code Sections 4600 et seq.), whether or not employed by physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, acupuncturists, or physical therapists, may not provide massage services or act as a massage technician.

        E.     Hospitals, nursing homes, sanatoriums, or other health care facilities duly licensed by the state of California.

        F.     Barbers, beauticians and manicurists who are duly licensed by the state of California while engaging in the practice within the scope of their respective licenses, except that this exemption applies solely for the massaging of the neck, face and/or scalp of the customer or client of said barber or beautician or in the case of a licensed manicurist, the massaging of the forearm, hands, calves and/or feet.

        G.    Accredited high schools, junior colleges, and colleges or universities whose coaches and trainers are acting within the scope of their employment.

 

        H.    Trainers of amateur, semi-professional or professional athletes or athletic teams. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 2009)

 

5.28.050 Operator’s permit—Application.
        A.    Any person desiring to obtain a permit to operate a massage establishment shall submit a written application under penalty of perjury on the required form to the community preservation manager. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee established by separate resolution of the city council to help defray the cost of the investigation required by this chapter.

        B.     The application shall be completed and signed by the owner of the proposed massage establishment, if a sole proprietorship, or, if the applicant is a corporation or partnership, it shall designate one of its officers or general partners as its authorized representative. The authorized representative shall complete and sign all application forms required for an individual applicant under this chapter.

        C.     The application and fee required pursuant to this section shall be in addition to any other license, permit or fee required by any other chapter of this code or ordinance hereafter adopted. Only one application fee shall be charged regardless of the number of owners or operators designated in the application.

        D.    The application for a permit does not authorize the operation of a massage establishment unless and until such permit has been properly granted, nor does the possession of a valid massage establishment permit authorize the possessor to perform work for which a massage technician permit or a massage certificate is required.

        E.     The application for a massage establishment permit shall contain or be accompanied by the following information:

        1.     The type of ownership of the business, i.e., whether by individual, partnership, corporation or otherwise.

        a.     If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter together with the state and date of incorporation and the names and residence addresses of each of its current officers, directors and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock of that corporation,

        b.     If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the name and residence addresses of each of the partners, including limited partners,

        c.     If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the Secretary of State. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply;

        2.     The true full and precise name under which the massage establishment is to be conducted;

        3.     The present or proposed address where the massage establishment is to be conducted and all telephone numbers for the massage establishment;

        4.     A complete current list of the names and residence addresses of all proposed massage technicians, aides, trainees and other employees who are or will be employed in the massage establishment, if known. If not known at the time of submission of the application, the applicant shall provide the required information no later than ten calendar days prior to opening for business;

        5.     The name and residence addresses of the proposed operator or manager who will be principally in charge of the operation of the massage establishment;

        6.     A description of any other business operated on the same premises as the proposed massage establishment, or within the city or the state, which is owned or operated by the owner or operator;

        7.     The name and address of the owner and lessor of the real property upon or in which the proposed business is to be conducted. In the event the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, the application must be accompanied by a copy of the lease and a notarized affidavit from the owner of the property acknowledging that a massage establishment will be located on his or her property;

        8.     The complete business, occupation and employment history for eight years preceding the date of application, including, but not limited to, a massage establishment or similar type of business history and experience of the applicant;

        9.     The complete massage permit history; whether such person has ever had any similar type of permit or license issued by any agency, board, city, county, territory or state; the date of issuance of such a permit or license, whether the permit or license has been or was ever denied, revoked or suspended; if a vocational or professional license or permit has been or was ever denied, revoked or suspended; if the applicant has ever been required to surrender a permit or license as a result of pending criminal charges or in lieu of said permit or license being suspended or revoked and the reason therefor;

        10.   All criminal convictions, including pleas of nolo contendere, within the last ten years including those convictions dismissed or expunged pursuant to Penal Code Section 1203.4, but excluding minor traffic violations, and the date and place of each such conviction and reason therefor;

        11.   A complete set of fingerprints taken by the police department. The applicant shall be responsible for payment of any fingerprinting fee;

        12.   Two portrait photographs at least two inches by two inches in size taken within the last month;

        13.   Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek verification of the information contained in the application;

        14.   Such other identification and information as the chief of police may reasonably require in order to discover the truth of the matters herein specified and as required to be set forth in the application;

        15.   A statement in writing and dated by the person providing the information that he or she certifies under penalty of perjury that all information contained in the application is true and correct;

        16.   A certificate of compliance from any affected department or agency, including, but not limited to, the city’s community development department, building and safety division and the Orange county health department must be submitted prior to the application’s final approval. Any required inspection fees shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant. If the certificates of compliance are not received by the community preservation manager or designee, within ninety calendar days of the date of filing of the application, said application shall be deemed void. If any land use permit or other entitlement for the use of the property as a massage establishment is required, such permit or use entitlement shall be obtained by the applicant prior to the massage establishment permit becoming effective.

        F.     Every owner and operator shall also provide the following personal information:

        1.     The full, true name and all aliases used;

        2.     Date and place of birth, California driver’s license, California identification card, Social Security card and resident alien card, if applicable.

        3.     The current residence address and residence telephone number and all previous residential addresses for a minimum of eight years immediately preceding the present address of the applicant and the dates of residence for each address;

        4.     Acceptable written proof that the owner and/or operator is at least eighteen years of age;

        5.     Height, weight, gender and color of hair and eyes.

        G.    If, during the term of a permit, the permittee has any change in information submitted on the original or renewal application, the permittee shall notify the police department in writing of any such change within ten business days thereafter.

        H.    If an owner or operator also desires to act as a massage technician or out call massage technician, he or she shall also satisfy the requirements for the respective permit set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 2009)

 

 

5.28.060 Operator and massage employees—Examination required.
        A.    Every operator and massage employee shall be required to take and pass a written test dealing with the requirement of this chapter to ensure a complete understanding of the owner’s operator’s, manager’s or employee’s respective duties prior to issuance of an operator’s permit or before engaging in work at a massage establishment.

        B.     The chief of police shall establish standards and procedures governing administrating, grading and noticing of the examination required by this section.

        C.     The examination shall consist solely of a written test regarding the rules and regulations for massage establishments and employees as set forth in this chapter. The examination shall be prepared, conducted and graded by the city, or in its sole discretion, by a competent instructor certified by the Council for Private Post-Secondary and Vocational Education pursuant to Education Code Section 94311.1.

        D.    A score of seventy percent or better is required on each section of the written test. An applicant who fails to pass any section of the examination shall not be eligible to take another examination until sixty calendar days after the previous examination. An applicant who fails to pass upon a second attempt, shall not again be eligible until six months thereafter. If an applicant has three or more sustained municipal code violations during any permit period, the applicant, upon renewal, must retake and pass the written examination designated in this chapter.

        E.     The examination will be in the English language. In the event the applicant requires that any section of the examination be given in another language, the applicant shall pay any additional fees or costs for a court-certified and La Habra community preservation division approved interpreter to interpret the examination. Proof of valid court certification must be provided to the community preservation manager prior to the administration of any such non-English language examination. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 2009)

5.28.060—5.26.070

5.28.070 Operator’s permit—Issuance or denial.
        A.    Upon receipt of a complete written application for a permit, the chief of police or designee shall conduct an investigation to ascertain whether a permit should be issued as requested. The chief of police or designee, shall, within ninety calendar days of receipt of an application, approve, conditionally approve or deny the application. The ninety-day period may be extended for up to thirty additional calendar days, if necessary, to complete the investigation. The chief of police shall advise the community preservation manager of the findings of the investigation. The community preservation manager at that time may issue such permit as requested, unless he or she makes any of the following findings:

        1.     The applicant has not passed the written examination as required by this chapter;

        2.     The applicant, or any of the officers or directors of the corporation, a partner or any person directly engaged or employed in the massage establishment, has within eight years preceding the date of the application:

        a.     Been convicted of a violation of any provision of law pursuant to which a person is required to register under the provisions of Penal Code Section 290, or conduct in violation of California Penal Code Sections 266h, 266i, 314, 315, 316, 318, subsections (a), (b) or (d) of Penal Code Section 647, or convicted of an attempt to commit or conspiracy to commit any of the above mentioned offenses, or any other crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or moral turpitude or when the prosecution accepted a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a charge of a violation of California Penal Code Sections 415, 602 or any lesser included or related offense, in satisfaction of, or as a substitute for, any of the previously listed crimes, or any crime committed while engaged in the ownership of a massage establishment or the practice of massage,

 

        b.     Been convicted of a violation of Health and Safety Code Section 11550 or any offense involving the illegal sale, distribution or possession of a controlled substance specified in Health and Safety Code Section 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058,

        c.     Been convicted of any offense in any other state, which is the equivalent of any of the abovementioned offenses,

        d.     Been subjected to a permanent injunction against the conducting or maintaining of a nuisance pursuant to Sections 11225 through 11235 of the California Penal Code, or any similar provisions of law in a jurisdiction outside the state of California,

        e.     Committed an act in another jurisdiction which, if committed in this state, would have been a violation of law and, which, if done by a permittee under this chapter, would be grounds for denial, suspension or revocation of the permit,

        f.      Has had a massage operator or massage technician permit or other similar license or permit denied, suspended or revoked for cause by the city, any state, local agency or other licensing authority, or has had to surrender a permit or license as a result of pending criminal charges or in lieu of said permit or license being suspended or revoked,

        g.     Has engaged in conduct, which would constitute grounds for suspension or revocation under Section 5.28.300 of this chapter;

        3.     The owner and/or operator has made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement or omission of fact to the city in the permit application process;

        4.     The application does not contain all of the information required by Section 5.28.050;

        5.     The owner and/or operator is not at least eighteen years of age;

        6.     The massage establishment as proposed does not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, health, zoning, fire and safety requirements and standards;

        7.     The required fee(s) has not been paid and/or all other requirements of this chapter have not been satisfied in the time specified.

        B.     If the application is denied for failure to comply with subsection (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section, the applicant may not reapply for a period of six months from the date the application was denied.

        C.     If the chief of police, upon completion of the investigation, determines that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this chapter, the chief of police shall deny said application by dated written notice to the applicant. The applicant shall have the right of appeal as set forth in Section 5.28.320. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 2009)

 

5.28.080 Operating requirements—General conditions.
        All owners and operators, including those that have a massage certificate, shall comply with the following general conditions and any other conditions specified by the chief of police. Sole proprietorships, with a massage certificate, or massage establishments that employ only persons with massage certificates, shall be exempt from any of the following requirements that are contrary to the provisions of California Business and Professions Code Section 4612(b).

        A.    Except to the extent required, in writing, by a state-licensed medical practitioner, no massage technician or employee shall massage the genitals, gluteal fold, or anal area of any patron or the breasts of any female patron, nor shall any operator or manager of a massage establishment allow or permit such a massage to the above specified areas. A massage shall not be given and no patron shall be in the presence of a massage technician, operator, manager or other employee of a massage establishment unless the patron’s genitals, gluteal fold, anus, and, if a female patron, the female patron’s breasts, are fully covered by a nontransparent covering.

        B.     No person granted a permit pursuant to this chapter shall use any name or conduct business under any designation not specified in his or her permit.

        C.     All massage establishments required to be licensed under this chapter shall have a manager on the premises at all times the massage establishment is open. The operator of each massage establishment shall file a statement with the community preservation manager or designee, designating the person or persons with power to act as a manager. The operator and/or on duty manager shall post, on a daily basis, the name and photograph (a minimum size of four inches by six inches) of each on-duty manager and each on-duty technician in a conspicuous public place in the lobby of the massage establishment. The operator, or the manager in the operator’s absence, shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with this chapter.

        D.    The operator’s permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the lobby of the massage establishment.

        E.     The hours of operation must be posted in the front window and clearly visible from the outside.

        F.     No massage establishment required to be licensed under this chapter shall open for business without having at least one massage technician who holds a current valid massage technician’s permit for that specific massage establishment or a massage certificate. There shall be at least one massage technician who holds a current valid massage technician’s permit or a massage certificate on the premises, and on duty, at all times when the establishment is open.

        G.    The operator and/or manager shall ensure that the massage technician permit and/or massage certificate for each on-duty massage technician is conspicuously displayed in a public place in the lobby and that each massage technician is wearing the identification required by Section 5.28.200(B) at all times when working in the massage establishment. Such identification shall be provided to a city official upon demand.

        H.    An operator and/or manager shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees while they are on the massage establishment premises. Any act or omission of any employee or independent contractor constituting a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator or manager for purposes of determining whether the operator’s license shall be revoked, suspended, denied or renewed.

        I.      No operator and/or manager shall employ any person as a massage technician who does not have a valid massage technician permit issued pursuant to this chapter or a massage certificate in good standing. Every operator or manager shall report to the chief of police or designee, any change of employees, whether by new or renewed employment, discharge or termination, on the form and in the manner required by the chief of police. The report shall contain the name of the employee and the date of hire or termination. The report shall be made within five calendar days of the date of hire or termination. The operator or manager shall deliver notice of the termination of any massage technician no longer employed by the operator or manager to the chief of police or designee, within five calendar days of termination.

        J.      All employees, including massage technicians, shall, at all times while on the business premises, wear clean, nontransparent outer garments solidly covering the shoulders to four inches or less above the knees. Under no circumstances shall these garments permit the genitals, pubic area, buttocks or chest to be exposed. Massage technicians shall maintain the massage technician permit badge or the massage certificate badge visibly on their person affixed to the right front of their required smock at all times during business hours.

        K.    The operator and/or manager shall maintain a register of all employees. The employee register shall be maintained on the premises for a minimum period of two years following an employee’s termination. The operator and/or manager shall make the employee register immediately available for inspection upon demand of a representative of the police department at all reasonable times. The employee register shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:

        1.     The name, nicknames and/or aliases used by an employee;

        2.     The employee’s home address and relevant phone numbers (including, but not limited to, home, cellular and pager numbers);

        3.     The employee’s age, date of birth, gender, height, weight, color of hair and eyes;

        4.     The employee’s Social Security number;

        5.     The date of employment and termination, if any;

        6.     The duties of each employee.

        L.     No massage establishment shall operate as a school of massage, or use the same facilities as that of a school of massage.

        M.    At all times, the operator, manager and employees shall comply with all provisions of this chapter and any applicable provisions of this code.

        N.    Insurance. No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on the business of a massage establishment unless there is on file with the community preservation division, in full force and effect at all times, a policy of insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state of California evidencing that the permittee is insured under a liability insurance policy providing minimum coverage of one million dollars for injury or death to one person arising out of the operation of any massage establishment and the administration of a massage. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 2009)

 

5.28.090 Operating requirements—Facilities.
        All owners, operators and managers, including those that have a massage certificate, shall comply with the following operating requirement for facilities and any other conditions specified by the chief of police. Sole proprietorships, with a massage certificate, or massage establishments that employ only persons with massage certificates, shall be exempt from any of the following requirements that are contrary to the provisions of California Business and Professions Code Section 4612(b).

        A.    Structure. Massage establishments shall be carried on in a structure, which is located in a zoning district, which permits such use. When a massage establishment is newly constructed, three sets of plans shall be submitted to the city and the county health care agency for approval and shall be accompanied by the appropriate plan check fee.

        B.     Signs. Any signs shall be in conformance with the current sign ordinances of the city. Each operator and/or manager shall post and maintain, adjacent to the main entrance and the front of the business, a readable sign identifying the premises as a massage establishment. The sign, and the front of the business, shall not be illuminated by strobe or flashing lights.

        C.     Services List. Each operator and/or manager shall post and maintain a list of services available and the cost of such services in the lobby of the massage establishment in a conspicuous public place and in any other location on the premises as the operator and/or manager deems appropriate. No operator or manager shall permit, and no massage technician shall offer or perform, any service other than those posted. If food service is proposed, the applicant will be required to obtain a conditional use permit.

        D.    Lighting. Minimum lighting for a massage establishment shall be provided in accordance with Article 220 of the National Electric Code or successor provision or provisions. The lighting in each massage room shall be at least one sixty watt white light bulb and shall be activated at all times while the patron is in a massage room. No strobe, flashing lights or dimmer switches shall be used. No colored lights shall be used nor shall any coverings be used which change the color of the primary light source.

        E.     Ventilation. The operator and/or manager shall provide in each massage room, minimum ventilation in accordance with the Section 1203.4 of the 2007 California Building Code (CCR Title 24, Part 2, Volume 1 of 2) or successor provision or provisions.

        F.     Toilet Facilities. A minimum of one toilet and one separate wash basin shall be provided for patrons in each massage establishment, which basin shall provide soap or detergent and hot and cold running water at all times and shall be located within close proximity to the massage rooms. A permanently installed soap dispenser, filled with soap, and a single service towel dispenser shall be provided at the restroom washbasin. Bar soaps shall not be used. A trash receptacle shall be provided in each toilet room.

        G.    Bathing, Dressing and Locker Facilities. A minimum of one shower and one dressing room containing a separate locker capable of being locked, shall be provided for patrons to be served at the massage establishment. The shower facility shall be equipped with soap or detergent and hot and cold running water at all times and shall be located within close proximity to the massage rooms. Bar soaps shall not be used.

        H.    Separate Rooms. If male and female patrons are to be treated simultaneously at the same massage establishment separate massage rooms, dressing, bathing and toilet facilities shall be provided for male and female patrons. Each separate facility or room shall be clearly marked as such.

        I.      Maintenance. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms or cabinets, toilet rooms, shower and bath rooms, tanning booths, whirlpool baths and pools shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected with a disinfectant approved by the county health department, as needed, but at least once each day the premises are open. All facilities for the massage establishment must be in good repair and shall be thoroughly cleaned and sanitized at least on a daily basis when the business is in operation. All walls, floors and ceilings of each restroom and shower area shall be constructed with materials that are smooth and easily cleanable. No carpeting shall be installed in any of these specified areas.

        J.      Massage Tables. A massage table shall be provided in each massage room and all massages shall be performed on the massage table. The tables should have a minimum height of eighteen inches. Two-inch thick foam pads with a maximum width of four feet may be used on a massage table and must be covered with durable, washable plastic or other waterproof material acceptable to the county health department. Beds, floor mattresses and waterbeds shall not be permitted on the premises.

        K.    Front Door. One front door that enters into the lobby and/or other waiting room shall be provided for customer use. All customers and any other persons other than employees shall be required to enter and exit through the front door of the establishment. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 2009)

 

5.28.100 Operating requirements—Operations.
        All owners, operators and managers, including those that have a massage certificate, shall comply with the following operating requirements and any other conditions specified by the chief of police. Sole proprietorships, with a massage certificate, or massage establishments that employ only persons with massage certificates, shall be exempt from any of the following requirements that are contrary to the provisions of California Business and Professions Code Section 4612(b).

        A.    Equipment. Each operator and/or manager shall provide and maintain on the premises adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments used in massage.

        B.     Linen. Common use of towels or linen shall not be permitted. Towels and linen shall be laundered or changed promptly after each use. Separate enclosed cabinets shall be provided for the storage of clean and soiled linen and shall be plainly marked “clean linen” and “soiled linen” and shall have doors or covers.

        C.     Living Quarters Prohibited. No person or persons shall be allowed to reside, dwell, occupy or live inside the massage establishment at any time. Living quarters, if any, shall be completely separate from the massage establishment. No cooking or food preparation of any kind shall be prepared for sale or sold in the establishment unless an appropriate food vending permit is granted by the city and the county of Orange and a full service kitchen is installed. Such a kitchen, if any, shall be for the sole use of employees, and shall be installed in an “employees only” area. The full service kitchen shall have a minimum of a sink with hot and cold running water, a refrigerator, a stove, and sufficient cabinets to store cooking utensils.

        D.    Alcoholic Beverages/Drugs. No person shall enter, be in or on, or remain in or on, any part of a massage establishment while in possession of, consuming, using or under the influence of, any alcoholic beverage or controlled substance. The operator and/or manager shall be responsible to ensure that no such person shall enter or remain upon the premises of the massage establishment. Service of alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted.

        E.     Adult-Oriented Merchandise Prohibited. The use or possession of adult-oriented merchandise in or on any part of a massage establishment is expressly prohibited.

        F.     Recordings. No electrical, mechanical or artificial device shall be used by the operator and/or manager or any employee of the massage establishment for audio and/or video recording or for monitoring the performance of a massage, or the conversation or other sounds in the massage rooms without the knowledge and written consent of the patron.

        G.    Coverings. Each massage establishment shall provide to all patrons clean, sanitary and opaque coverings of a minimum size of thirty inches by sixty inches, capable of covering the patrons’ specified anatomical areas, including, but not limited to, the genital area, anus and female breasts. No common use of such coverings shall be permitted and re-use is specifically prohibited unless adequately cleaned prior to its re-use.

        H.    Records. Every operator and/or manager shall keep a record of the dates and hours of each treatment or service, the name and address of the patron, the name of technician administering such service and a description of the treatment or service rendered. A short medical history form shall be completed by the operator and/or manager to determine if the patron has any communicable diseases, areas of pain, high blood pressure or any physical condition which may be adversely affected by massage. These records shall be prepared prior to administering any massage or treatment and shall be retained for a period of twenty-four months after such treatment or service. These records shall be open to inspection upon demand only by officials charged with enforcement of this chapter or emergency personnel for emergency purposes and for no other purpose. The police department may periodically inspect the records to ensure compliance with this section. The information furnished or secured as a result of any such records shall be used only to ensure and enforce compliance with this chapter, or any other applicable state or federal laws and shall remain confidential. Any unauthorized disclosure or use of such information by any officer or employee of the city shall constitute a misdemeanor.

        I.      Hours of Operation. Massage operations shall be carried on or conducted, and the premises shall be open, only between the hours of seven a.m. and seven p.m. The operator and/or manager must advise the city, in writing, at the time of submission of the application for a massage establishment permit of the hours of operation within the times set forth herein. The operator and/or manager shall notify the city, in writing, at least thirty calendar days prior to the date of the effective change, of any changes in the hours of operation. No person shall operate a massage establishment or administer a massage in any massage establishment or administer a massage pursuant to an off premises massage permit between the hours of seven p.m. and seven a.m. A massage begun any time before seven p.m. must nevertheless terminate at seven p.m. All customers, patrons and visitors shall be excluded from the massage establishment during these hours and be advised of these hours. The hours of operation must be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the lobby within the massage establishment and in the front window clearly visible from the outside.

        J.      Advertising. No massage establishment shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, published or distributed any advertising matter that depicts any portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective customers or clients that any service is available other than those services described in this chapter and posted on the premises as required by this chapter, nor shall any massage establishment or out call massage service employ language in the text of any advertising that would reasonably suggest to a prospective patron that any service is available other than those services described in this chapter and posted on the premises as required by this chapter.

        K.    Handicapped Areas. All massage establishments must comply with all state and federal laws and regulations for handicapped customers.

        L.     Compliance. Proof of compliance with all applicable provisions of this code shall be provided.

        M.    Doors. All exterior doors (except back or rear exterior doors used only for employee entrance to and exit from the massage establishment) shall remain unlocked during business hours. All interior doors, including but not limited to all doors leading to customer areas, the front reception, hallway or front exterior doors, shall not have any locking mechanisms. A door leading from the lobby area to customer areas, if any, shall not have any locking mechanism or be capable of being locked or blocked to prevent entry, in any manner.

        N.    Massage and Dressing Room Doors. All massage and dressing rooms shall be screened off by curtains, draw drapes, or in the alternative, swinging doors, so long as such doors are mounted at least eighteen inches from the floor and not less than ten inches from the top of the door frame. A full door may be used if it does not have a locking mechanism and contains a reverse peephole, allowing visual inspections from outside the room. No other type of door shall be used except those provided for in this section for massage and dressing room doors. No massage may be given within any massage room within a massage establishment, which is fitted with a door capable of being locked.

        O.    Access. No person(s) other than the owner, operator, operator’s employees, holders of valid massage technician permits issued pursuant to this chapter and customers will be allowed beyond the front lobby, which lobby shall be located directly inside the front door entrance, during the hours of operation. Any other person(s) found beyond the first interior door leading to the inside of the business including, but not limited to, hallways, massage rooms, reception/business offices or lounge area will be in violation of this section. Entry doors to any room shall not be obstructed by any means.

        P.     Discrimination. No massage establishment may discriminate or exclude patrons on the basis of race, sex, religion, age or handicap.

        Q.    Notices. The chief of police shall require that the following notice be posted in the event that any employee of the massage establishment or any person who has been aided and abetted by an employee of the massage establishment has been found, after full hearing by administrative proceeding or by a State Court, to have violated any of the offenses that would be grounds for denial under Section 5.28.070 or 5.28.190:

 

NOTICE TO ALL PATRONS

 

THIS MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT AND THE MASSAGE ROOMS DO NOT PROVIDE COMPLETE PRIVACY AND ARE SUBJECT TO INSPECTION BY THE LA HABRA POLICE DEPARTMENT WITHOUT PRIOR NOTICE.

 

        1.     The language for said notice set forth above shall be provided by the chief of police. Every owner, operator and/or manager required to post such notice shall be required to pay for the cost of any and all notices required by this section.

        2.     The notice shall be conspicuously posted in a location within the massage establishment that is easily visible to any person entering the premises and in each massage room. The notices shall be posted for twelve months following the violation of any of the offenses set forth herein. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 2009)

 

5.28.110 Inspections.
        A.    The police chief and the county health department, or their authorized representatives, shall have the right to enter the massage establishment at any time during business hours for the purpose of making reasonable unscheduled inspections to observe and enforce compliance with applicable regulations, laws, and provisions of this chapter. During an inspection, the police department may also verify the identity of all employees.

        B.     The city’s building and safety department, fire department, police department and the county health department may, from time to time, make an inspection of each massage establishment for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this chapter, state law or other applicable laws or regulations are met. Criminal investigations may be conducted as directed by the chief of police. The police department may inspect the occupied massage rooms for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this chapter are met upon occurrence of any of the conditions described in Section 5.28.100(Q), which would require the posting of the “Notice To All Patrons.”

        C.     Inspections of the massage establishment shall be conducted during business hours.

        D.    An operator, manager, their agents, servants or employees commits a punishable offense if he or she refuses to permit, delays or interferes with a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the police department at any time it is occupied or open for business. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 2009)

5.28.120—5.28.140

5.28.120 Operator’s permit—Nonassignability.
        No operator’s permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit and such permit shall thereafter be null and void except as hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 2009)

 

5.28.130 Operator’s permit—Change in ownership of business.
        A.    If the permittee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such permit, and in such case, the permit, upon notification to the chief of police, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partners. One or more proposed partners in a partnership granted a permit hereunder may make application to the chief of police, together with the fee established by the city council therefor, to amend the original application providing all information as required for partners in the first instance and, upon approval thereof, the transfer of the interests of one or more partners to the proposed partner or partners may occur.

        B.     If the permit is issued to a corporation; stock may be sold, transferred, issued, or assigned to stockholders who have been named on the application. If any stock is sold, transferred, issued, or assigned to a person not listed on the application as a stockholder, the permit shall be deemed terminated and void; provided, however, the proposed transferee may submit to the chief of police, together with a fee established by the city council, an application to amend the original application providing all information as required for stockholders in the first instance, and, upon approval thereof, the transfer may then occur. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 2009)

 

5.28.140 Operator’s permit—Change of location or name.
        A.    Every operator and/or manager shall report immediately to the police department any and all changes of name or designation under which the business is to be conducted, and all changes of address or telephone numbers of the massage establishment. A change of location of the massage establishment may be approved by the chief of police provided there is compliance with all applicable regulations of the city and the new location is zoned for such a use.

        B.     No permittee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on the business of a massage establishment under any name other than the person’s name and the name of the massage establishment specified in the permit.

        C.     Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business of a massage establishment shall require inspection(s) and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this chapter and all other city ordinances including, but not limited to, zoning ordinances and building, safety and occupancy standards. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 2009)

5.28.150—5.28.170

5.28.150 Applicability to existing massage establishments.
        A.    Commencing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, all permits for a massage establishment are to be issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

        B.     The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and businesses described herein whether the described activities were established before or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, except that massage establishments legally in business prior to the effective date hereof shall have three months or until the expiration of their current business license, whichever is greater, to comply with the terms hereof. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 2009)

 

5.28.160 Massage technician permit required.
        No person shall perform or administer a massage, or advertise to provide massage services in the city, unless such person has in effect a valid massage technician permit issued pursuant to Section 5.28.190 of this chapter or a valid current massage certificate. Each massage technician permit holder shall be issued a photo identification badge and a massage technician permit. Each massage certificate holder shall also be issued a photo identification badge. The permit or certificate holder shall wear the identification badge on his or her person, at all times when working in the massage establishment and shall ensure that the massage technician permit or massage certificate is displayed in a conspicuous place in the lobby during business hours. Each permit holder shall immediately surrender to the chief of police any identification badge and massage technician permit issued by the city upon the suspension, revocation, or expiration of such permit. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 2009)

 

5.28.170 Massage technician permit—Application.
        A.    Any person desiring to obtain a massage technician permit shall file a written application under penalty of perjury on the required form with the community preservation manager. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee established by separate resolution of the city council to help defray the cost of the investigation required by this chapter.

        B.     The application and fee required pursuant to this section shall be in addition to any other license, permit or fee required by any other chapter of this code or ordinance hereafter adopted.

        C.     The application for a massage technician permit shall contain or be accompanied by the following information:

        1.     A statement of the exact location at which the applicant will be working as a massage technician, including the full street address and all telephone numbers associated with said location.

        2.     The applicant’s complete business, occupation and employment history for eight years preceding the date of application, including, but not limited to, a massage technician license or similar type of business history and experience of the applicant;

        3.     The complete massage technician permit history of the applicant; whether such person has ever had any similar type of permit or license issued by any agency, board, city, county, territory or state; the date of issuance of such a permit or license, whether the permit or license has been or was ever denied, revoked or suspended; if a vocational or professional license or permit has been or was ever denied, revoked or suspended; if the applicant has ever surrendered a permit or license as a result of pending criminal charges or in lieu of said permit or license being suspended or revoked and the reason therefor;

        4.     All criminal convictions, including pleas of nolo contendere, within the last ten years including those dismissed or expunged pursuant to Penal Code Section 1203.4, but excluding minor traffic violations, and the date and place of each such conviction and reason therefor;

        5.     A complete set of fingerprints taken by the police department. The applicant shall be responsible for payment of any fingerprinting fee;

        6.     Three portrait photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two  inches in size taken within the last month;

        7.     Such other information and identification as the chief of police or designee may require in order to discover the truth of the matters herein specified and as required to be set forth in the application;

        8.     Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek verification of the information contained in the application;

        9.     A statement in writing, and dated, by the applicant that he or she certifies under penalty of perjury that all information contained in the application is true and correct.

        D.    Each applicant shall also provide the following personal information concerning the applicant:

        1.     The full, true name and all aliases used by the applicant;

        2.     Date and place of birth, California driver’s license or California identification card, Social Security card and resident alien card, if applicable;

        3.     The current residence address and residence telephone number and all previous residential addresses for a minimum of eight years immediately preceding the present address of the applicant and the dates of residence for each address;

        4.     Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen years of age;

        5.     Height, weight, color of hair, eyes and gender.

        E.     If, during the term of a permit, a permit holder has any change in information submitted on the original or renewal application; the permit holder shall notify the police department of such change within ten business days thereafter, in writing.

        F.     In addition to the above information, each applicant must also furnish either:

        1.     An original or certified copy of a diploma or certificate and certified transcript of graduation from a recognized school of massage; or

        2.     Proof of passage of an independently prepared and administered national certification exam which has been recognized by objective standards to fairly evaluate professional levels of skill, safety and competence as determined by a qualified massage association; or

        3.     Proof of membership or the ability to obtain membership in a qualified massage association.

        G.    The applicant must also supply a course description, an outline of material covered, and a letter to the city from the school administrator verifying completion.

        H.    The applicant must also supply an original, valid state CPR certificate.

        I.      Any outside course of study submitted for approval shall meet the state of California’s Office of Post-Secondary Education’s minimum requirements and be for completion of five hundred hours of on-premises training. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 2009)

 

5.28.180 Massage technician—Practical and written examination required.
        A.    Every massage technician shall be required to take and pass a practical application test to certify the qualifications of the applicant and a written test which will include questions on the contents of this chapter to ensure a complete understanding of the massage technician’s duties prior to issuance of a massage technician’s permit and before engaging in work at a massage establishment.

        B.     The chief of police shall establish standards and procedures governing administrating, grading and noticing of the examination required by this section.

        C.     The practical test required by this section shall be structured to fairly determine the ability of the applicant to properly perform the work which the applicant would be authorized to do by the permit applied for, shall require the applicant to demonstrate his/her knowledge of the practice of massage and shall cover the following basic subjects: anatomy, physiology, ethics, hygiene, the practice and theory of massage, as massage is defined in this code, and CPR.

        D.    The written test shall test the competency and ability of the applicant to engage in the practice of massage and his or her knowledge of the rules and regulations set forth in this chapter.

        E.     The examination shall be prepared, conducted and graded by the city, or in its sole discretion, by a competent instructor certified by the Council for Private Post-Secondary and Vocational Education pursuant to Education Code Section 94311.1.

        F.     A score of seventy percent or better is required on each section of both the practical and written test. An applicant who fails to pass any section of the examination shall not be eligible to take another examination until sixty calendar days after the previous examination. An applicant, who fails to pass upon a second attempt, shall not again be eligible until six months thereafter. If an applicant has three or more sustained municipal code violations during any permit period, the applicant, upon renewal, must retake and pass the written examination designated in this chapter.

        G.    The examination will be in the English language. In the event the applicant requires that any section of the examination be given in another language, the applicant shall pay any additional fees or costs for a court-certified and La Habra police department approved interpreter to interpret the examination. Proof of valid court certification must be provided to the chief of police prior to the administration of any such non-English language examination. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 2009)

 

5.28.190 Massage technician permit—Issuance and denial.
        A.    Upon receipt of a complete written application for a permit, the chief of police or designee shall conduct an investigation to ascertain whether a permit should be issued as requested. The chief of police or designee, shall, within ninety calendar days of receipt of an application, approve, conditionally approve or deny the application. The ninety-day period may be extended for up to thirty additional calendar days, if necessary, to complete the investigation. The chief of police shall advise the community preservation manager of the findings of the investigation. The community preservation manager at that time may issue such permit as requested, unless he or she makes any of the following findings:

        1.     The applicant has not passed every section of the practical and written examination as required by this chapter;

        2.     The applicant has, within ten years preceding the date of the application, been convicted of any of the following:

        a.     A violation of any provision of law pursuant to which a person is required to register under the provisions of Penal Code Section 290, or conduct in violation of California Penal Code Sections 266h, 266i, 314, 315, 316, 318, subsections (a), (b) or (d) of Penal Code Section 647, or convicted of an attempt to commit or conspiracy to commit any of the above mentioned offenses, or any other crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, moral turpitude or an act of violence or when the prosecution accepted a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a charge of a violation of California Penal Code Sections 415, 602 or any lesser included or related offense, in satisfaction of, or as a substitute for, any of the previously listed crimes, or any crime committed while engaged in the ownership of a massage establishment or the practice of massage,

        b.     A violation of Health and Safety Code Section 11550 or any offense involving the illegal sale, distribution or possession of a controlled substance specified in Health and Safety Code Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058, or

        c.     Any offense in any other state, which is the equivalent of any of the above-mentioned offenses;

        3.     That the applicant has committed an act in another jurisdiction, which, if committed in this state, would have been a violation of law and, which, if done by a permittee under this chapter, would be grounds for denial, suspension or revocation of the permit;

        4.     That the applicant has engaged in conduct which would constitute grounds for suspension or revocation under Section 5.28.300 of this chapter;

        5.     The applicant has had a massage operator or massage technician permit or other similar license or permit denied, suspended or revoked for cause by the city, any state, local agency or other licensing authority, or has had to surrender a permit or license as a result of pending criminal charges or in lieu of said permit or license being suspended or revoked within eight years prior to the date of the application;

        6.     The applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement or omission of fact to the city in the permit application process;

        7.     The application does not contain the information required by Section 5.28.170;

        8.     The applicant is not at least eighteen years of age;

        9.     The applicant has not paid the required fee(s) and/or satisfied all other requirements of this chapter in the time specified.

        B.     If the application is denied for failure to comply with subsection (A)(5) or (A)(6) of this section, the applicant may not reapply for a period of six months from the date the application was denied.

        C.     If the chief of police, upon completion of the investigation, determines that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this chapter, the chief of police shall deny said application by dated written notice to the applicant. The applicant shall have the right of appeal as set forth in Section 5.28.280. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 2009)

 

5.28.200 Massage technician permit/massage certificate—General conditions.
        All massage technicians shall comply with the following conditions and any other conditions specified by the chief of police on issuance of the massage technician’s permit (the following conditions also apply to massage certificate holders):

        A.    Except to the extent required, in writing, by a state-licensed medical practitioner, no massage technician shall massage or allow a massage technician aide, or employee to massage the genitals, gluteal fold, or anal area of any patron or the breasts of any female patron. Nor shall any massage technician, massage technician aide or employee solicit or allow a patron to touch or massage in any manner the genitals, gluteal fold, or anal area of a massage technician, massage technician aide or employee, or the breasts of any female massage technician, massage technician aide or employee. A massage shall not be given and no patron shall be in the presence of a massage technician, massage technician aide, operator, manager or other employee of a massage establishment unless the patron’s genitals, gluteal fold, anus, and, if a female patron, the female patron’s breasts, are fully covered by a nontransparent covering.

        B.     The massage technician shall wear a photo identification card prepared and issued by the city at all times when present in the massage establishment. Such identification shall be provided to the chief of police upon demand. The identification card shall be worn on outer clothing with the photo side facing out. If a massage technician changes his or her business address, he or she shall, prior to such change, obtain from the chief of police a new photo identification card and advise the police department, in writing, of the new business address.

        C.     Massage technicians shall not perform any massage at any location other than the location specified on the permit, unless performing an out call massage pursuant to a separate permit.

        D.    While on duty, the massage technician shall not use any name or designation or conduct business under any other name or designation than the name specified in his or her permit and photo identification card.

        E.     Massage attendants, at all times while on the business premises, shall wear clean, nontransparent outer garments solidly covering the shoulders to four inches or less above the knees. Under no circumstances shall these garments permit the genitals, pubic area, buttocks or chest to be exposed. Massage technicians shall maintain the massage technician permit visibly on their person affixed to the right front of their required smock at all times during business hours.

        F.     A massage technician shall consent to, and shall not prevent, delay or interfere with an inspection of the massage establishment by the city’s community development services, fire department, police department and the health department for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this chapter or other applicable laws or regulations are met. The massage technician shall consent to the inspection of the occupied massage rooms by the police department for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this chapter are met. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 2009)

5.28.210—5.28.250

5.28.210 Massage technician permit—Nonassignability.
        No massage technician permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by a permittee, or any operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit and such permit shall thereafter be null and void. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 2009)

 

5.28.220 Massage technician—Additional or change in location.
        In the event a massage technician currently licensed by the city seeks employment at a massage establishment in addition to or different from the establishment indicated on the original application, the permitee shall notify the city in writing within ten calendar days from the date the permittee is employed by the establishment where the permittee is to provide massage services. No additional fee shall be required. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 2009)

 

5.28.230 Applicability to existing massage technicians.
        A.    Commencing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, all permits for a massage technician are to be issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

        B.     The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and businesses described herein whether the described activities were established before or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, except as follows:

        Any massage technician applying for a renewed permit and who has less than five hundred hours of on-premises training, shall have two years, from the date a license is set for renewal, to complete the on-premises training required by Section 5.28.170(I). All massage technicians applying for renewed permits must pass the examinations as set forth in Section 5.28.180 of this chapter. The additional hours of on-premises training to comply with the training required by Section 5.28.170(I) shall apply toward the requirements of Section 5.28.250(E)(2) for the two-year period during which the hours of additional training are required. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 2009)

 

5.28.240 Out call massage unlawful.
        It is unlawful for any massage establishment or massage technician to provide, or to offer to provide, massage at any location except at the place of business approved in the permit for a massage establishment or massage technician. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 2009)

5.28.250 Permit term and renewal.
        A.    Permits for massage establishments and/or massage technicians shall be for a period of one year, unless sooner revoked as set forth in this chapter.

        B.     No permit granted herein shall confer any vested right to any person or business for more than the permit period. All massage operators and technicians subject to this chapter shall comply with the provisions of this chapter as they may be amended hereafter.

        C.     Applications for the renewal of a permit shall be filed with the chief of police at least sixty calendar days before the expiration of the then current permit to be renewed. Temporary permits will not be issued. Any permittee allowing his or her permit to lapse, or which permit expires during a suspension, shall be required to submit a new application and pay the corresponding original application fees.

        D.    Any person desiring to obtain a renewal of his or her respective permit shall file a written application under penalty of perjury on the required form with the chief of police, who shall conduct an investigation. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee established by separate resolution of the city council to help defray the cost of the investigation required by this chapter. An applicant shall be required to update the information contained in his or her original permit application and provide any new and/or additional information as may be reasonably required by the chief of police in order to determine whether said permit should be renewed.

        E.     A massage technician permittee shall also be required to submit with his or her renewal application proof of completion of at least twenty hours of continuing education courses in massage from a recognized school of massage or a qualified massage association. Failure to provide this documentation shall be grounds for nonrenewal of the massage technician’s permit.

        F.     The chief of police shall have sixty calendar days to investigate the renewal application and shall render a decision within said sixty calendar days, but no later than the date of expiration of the permit. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 2009)

5.28.260—5.28.270

5.28.260 Suspension, revocation, denial and appeal.
        A.    Violation and Noncompliance. Failure of a permittee to comply with any requirement imposed by this chapter or any other conditions imposed pursuant to the permit shall be grounds for nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of the permit.

        B.     Suspension, Nonrenewal or Revocation of Operator’s Permit. The chief of police may suspend, revoke or refuse to renew an operator’s permit if any of the following conditions exists:

        1.     A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or if an operator or manager has been convicted of any law specified in Section 5.28.070(A).

        2.     The chief of police makes any of the findings necessary to deny a permit under Section 5.28.070.

        3.     If there have been repeated violations of the provisions of this chapter which require ongoing supervision or action by law enforcement officers which demonstrate that the operator and/or manager is unable to operate or manage the massage establishment in a law abiding manner.

        C.     Suspension, Nonrenewal or Revocation of Massage Technician or Out Call Massage Permit. The chief of police may suspend, revoke or refuse to renew a massage technician or out call massage permit if any of the following conditions exists:

        1.     A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or if a massage technician has been convicted of any law specified in Section 5.28.190(A); or

        2.     The chief of police makes any of the findings necessary to deny a permit under Section 5.28.190. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 2009)

 

5.28.270 Notice.
        When the chief of police concludes that grounds for denial, suspension, revocation or refusal to renew a permit exist, the chief of police shall serve the applicant or permit holder, either personally or by certified mail addressed to the address listed on the application, with a notice of denial, nonrenewal or notice of intent to suspend or revoke a permit (the “notice”). This notice shall state the reasons for the proposed action, the effective date of the decision, the right of the applicant or permit holder to appeal the decision to the city manager and that the chief of police’s decision will be final if no appeal is filed within the time stated. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 2009)

5.28.280—5.28.300

5.28.280 Appeal.
        A.    The right to appeal to the city manager shall terminate upon the expiration of fifteen calendar days from the date of personal service or the date of acknowledgment on the certified mail of the above notice. The appeal shall be personally delivered to or sent by certified mail to the chief of police.

        B.     In the event an appeal is timely filed, the suspension or revocation shall not become effective until a final decision has been rendered by the city manager. If no appeal is filed, the suspension or revocation shall become effective upon the expiration of the period for filing appeals.

        C.     The city manager shall set a date, time and place for a hearing on appeal and shall notify the appellant of such date, time and place of the hearing. Said notice shall be sent by certified mail with proof of service attached, to the appellant, applicant or permittee at least ten calendar days prior to the date of the hearing, addressed to the address listed on the respective application or, the address given in the notice of appeal. The appellant, applicant or permittee shall be entitled to notice of the basis for the proposed action, a copy of the documents upon which the notice was based and will have the opportunity to present contrary evidence at the hearing.

        D.    The city manager, in his or her sole discretion, may grant or deny a request for a continuance.

        E.     The city manager shall preside over the hearing on appeal or, in the alternative, the city manager may appoint a hearing officer to conduct the hearing and receive relevant evidence. The city manager or designee shall render a written decision within forty-five calendar days from the date of the hearing. The decision of the city manager or designee shall be final.

        F.     The following rules of evidence shall apply at the hearing:

        1.     Oral evidence shall be taken only under oath or affirmation. The city manager or designee shall have authority to administer oaths, and to receive and rule on admissibility of evidence.

        2.     Each party shall have the right to call and examine witnesses, to introduce exhibits, and to cross-examine opposing witnesses who have testified under direct examination. The city manager or designee may also call and examine any witness.

        3.     Technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses shall not apply to hearings provided for in this chapter. Any relevant evidence may be admitted if it is material and is evidence customarily relied upon by responsible persons in the conduct of their affairs regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make admission of such evidence improper over objection in civil actions. Hearsay testimony may be admissible and used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any evidence given in direct examination, but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless such testimony would be admissible over objection in civil actions. The rules of privilege shall be applicable to the extent they are now, or are hereafter permitted in civil actions. Irrelevant, collateral, undue, and repetitious testimony shall be excluded. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 2009)

 

5.28.290 New application after denial or revocation of permit.
        A person may not apply for a permit pursuant to this chapter within one year from the denial or revocation of such permit. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 2009)

 

5.28.300 Surrender of permit.
        Any person to whom a permit has been issued pursuant to this chapter shall immediately surrender his or her permit to the chief of police upon its suspension or revocation. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 2009)

5.28.310—5.28.330

5.28.310 Permissible locations.
        A massage establishment shall not be located within a two hundred fifty feet radius of a residentially zoned property. The distance between a proposed massage establishment and a residential zone shall be measured from property line to property line, along a straight line extended between the two points. This requirement shall not apply to massage establishments legally existing on or before January 1, 2009. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 2009)

 

5.28.320 Fees.
        The city council shall establish by resolution, and from time to time may amend, the fees for the administration of this chapter. The city shall include in this resolution a health services fee schedule prescribing annual fees to be paid by the operator of each massage establishment, such fees to be paid directly to the county of Orange health department and retained by the county as reimbursement for said services related to this chapter. Fees required by this chapter shall be in addition to any other fees that may be required under any other chapter of this code. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 2009)

 

5.28.330 Violation and penalty.
        A.    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.

        B.     Any massage establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be, and the same is declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance, and the city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law, and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such massage establishments and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a massage establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter.

        C.     The penalties set forth herein, including, but not limited to, the requirement for posting the notice described in Section 5.28.100(Q), are cumulative and in addition to all other remedies, violations and penalties set forth in this chapter, or in any other ordinances, laws, rules or regulations of the city of La Habra, county of Orange and the state of California. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 2009)

Chapter 5.32 ENTERTAINMENT, AMUSEMENT AND DANCE PERMITS
Note
*       Editor’s Note: Former §§ 5.32.040—5.32.100 renumbered to be    §§ 5.32.050—5.32.110 during 8-94 supplementation.

 

5.32.005 Definitions.
        The terms defined in this section, as used in this chapter, shall be defined as follows:

        “City manager” means and includes the city manager or someone designated by the city manager to act on his or her behalf, for the purposes of this chapter.

        “Director” means the director of community and economic development of the city of La Habra, and shall include his or her designee.

        “Entertain” and “entertainment” mean and include, but are not limited to, the playing of live or recorded music, dancing, any act, play, burlesque show, revue, pantomime, cabaret, fashion or style show, or other live or recorded performances conducted for the entertainment of patrons of a commercial establishment, and the use of electronic games, pool, billiards, darts, or similar game tables. Entertainment, as that term is used in this chapter, however, does not include entertainment distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” as defined in Section 18.60.010, which entertainment shall be regulated by Chapter 18.56 of this code.

        “Entertainer” means any person who is an agent, employee or independent contractor of an entertainment business, and who, with or without any compensation or other form of consideration, performs live entertainment for patrons of such business. Entertainer does not include a patron. Entertainer includes those agents, employees or independent contractors who wait on, serve, or socialize with patrons, if such agent, employee or independent contractor, at any time while present on the premises, while in the capacity of agent, employee, or independent contractor, performs, performed, or will perform live entertainment.

        “Licensing administrator” means and includes the city council or the police department, as designated by Section 5.32.010(B) in evaluating a permit application pursuant to this chapter.

        “Police department” means and includes the police chief or someone designated by the police chief to act on his or her behalf, for the purpose of this chapter.

        “Specified anatomical areas” means and includes the following:

        1.     Human genitals, pubic region;

        2.     Buttock; or

        3.     Female breast.

        “Specified sexual activity” means and includes the following:

        1.     Acts of human masturbation, sexual stimulation or arousal, ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; and/or

        2.     Human excretion, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation; and/or

        3.     Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast. (Ord. 1757 § 2, 2015; Ord. 1719 § 1 (Exh. B), 2010; Ord. 1548 § 1, 1999; Ord. 1547 § 1, 1999)

 

5.32.010 Permit—Required—Application and determination.
        A.    It is unlawful for any person to open, manage or conduct within the city for commercial purposes or where alcohol or spirits of any nature may be served or sold, a facility where entertainment is provided at a business establishment that is open to the public and such entertainment is available for patrons or users of the facility; unless and until such time as such person shall have first procured a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to open, manage or conduct such activity.

        B.     Such permit application shall be submitted to the director. The director shall then direct the application to the appropriate department/entity, according to the following guidelines, for approval or denial by that department/entity:

        1.     An application for any proposed use(s) including live entertainment by entertainers and karaoke shall be directed to the city council, notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (B)(2) of this section, and shall be called a “live entertainment permit,” unless such application includes a proposed modification to, or initial application for, a conditional use permit, in which case a business must comply instead with the provisions of Chapter 18.66 of this code regarding conditional use permits, except that the applicant may request that a live entertainment permit be evaluated separately from the application for a conditional use permit, in which case the live entertainment permit will be issued or denied pursuant to this chapter and the conditional use permit shall be evaluated pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18.66.

        2.     An application containing only one or more of the following proposed use(s) shall be directed to the police department: dancing for patrons only; any games, including but not limited to pool/billiards, electronic arcade games, darts, or any other game tables for use by patrons; and/or juke boxes, or any other recorded music, and shall be called an “amusement device or dance floor entertainment permit,” unless such application includes a proposed modification to, or initial application for, a conditional use permit, in which case a business must comply instead with the provisions of Chapter 18.66 of this code regarding conditional use permits.

        C.     An application shall be determined by the director to be complete within five working days of its submittal to the director. If it is determined that the application is not complete, the applicant shall be notified in writing that the application is not complete and the reasons therefor, including any additional information necessary to render the application complete. Such writing shall be deposited in U.S. mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant. Within five working days following the receipt of an amended application or supplemental information, the director shall again determine whether the application is complete in accordance with the procedures set forth above. Evaluation and notification shall occur as provided above until such time as the application is found to be complete. (Ord. 1757 § 3, 2015)

 

5.32.015 Permit—Exempt activities.
        The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to require a permit for the following:

 

        A.    For the use of a radio, or other electronic play-back device that is not coin-operated or otherwise designed to produce revenue, in any estab-lishment, except when utilized by an announcer or “disc jockey” who at any time provides any form of vocal entertainment, including the announcing of song titles or artists’ names in conjunction therewith;

        B.     For entertainment conducted in connection with a regularly established motion picture theater, recreation park, circus or fairground;

        C.     For entertainment conducted by or sponsored by any bona fide club, society or association, organized or incorporated for benevolent, charitable, dramatic or literary purposes, having an established membership, and which holds meetings at regular intervals of not less than once per three-month period, when proceeds, if any, arising from such entertainment are used for the purpose of such club, society or association;

        D.    For entertainment conducted solely on or at any premises or location which is owned or operated by, or leased by, to or from the United States, state of California, county of Orange, or any agency or subdivision thereof. (Ord. 1548 § 3, 1999; Ord. 1547 § 3, 1999)

 

5.32.020 Permit—Application—Contents—Filing.
        The applicant shall be at least eighteen years of age. The applicant shall set forth, in substantially the following order, the following information:

        A.    The name of the owner of the premises in or upon which the proposed activity is to be established;

        B.     The address, location and general dimensions as to size of room(s) wherein such business is to be conducted;

        C.     The name and mailing address of the owner of the lease, if any, upon the premises, under or by the provisions of which such business is to be operated or maintained;

        D.    If the application involves the use of equipment, electronic games, musical instruments, pool, billiards or other similar game tables, jukebox, karaoke machine or other dance, amusement or entertainment-related equipment, the name of the owner of such equipment, a description of the equipment including size, type and quantity and a diagram of the proposed location of the equipment within or upon the facility;

        E.     The name and address of the person or persons who will operate, manage or conduct the business within or upon the premises, such address to be the place where the applicant desires notices to be mailed pursuant to this chapter;

        F.     The name of such additional or other lines of business as will be conducted in conjunction with the maintenance or operation of the business within or upon the premises;

        G.    A description of any security measures that the applicant intends to implement at the business;

        H.    A list of all other licenses and/or permits issued to and/or revoked from the applicant, in the three years prior to the year of the permit application, such other license and/or permit relating to similar business activities as in the permit application, including the type, current status, and issuing agency for each license/permit;

        I.      A list of the names of all employees at the business, such list to be updated in writing to the city by the permittee each quarter from the date of the issuance of a permit pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1548 § 4, 1999; Ord. 1547 § 4, 1999)

 

5.32.030 Permit—Application under penalty of perjury—Appearance before licensing administrator may be required.
        The application for a permit required by this chapter shall be signed and attested to by the applicant under penalty of perjury. At the time the application is presented to the licensing administrator according to the provisions of this chapter, the applicant shall, if so required by the licensing administrator, personally appear before the licensing administrator and answer any and all such questions or provide necessary additional information per-

taining to the conduct of the business as may be required of him or her. (Ord. 1757 § 4, 2015)

 

5.32.040 Permit—Decision to grant or deny.
        A.    The licensing administrator shall grant, conditionally grant or deny an application for a permit sought under this chapter according to the guidelines set forth in Section 5.32.050 of this code.

        B.     Upon the filing of a completed application, the licensing administrator shall cause to be made an appropriate investigation, including consultation with the building, police, fire and/or health departments and inspection of the premises as needed. Consultation is not grounds for the city to unilaterally delay in reviewing a completed application, nor is it grounds to extend any time periods, provided for in this chapter, to render a decision on an application.

        C.     The licensing administrator shall consider the application and shall grant, conditionally grant, or deny the application within thirty days of the submission by the applicant of a completed application. So far as the orderly conduct of public business allows, any interested person may appear before the city council for the presentation, adjustment or determination of an issue, request, or controversy related to the application for a live entertainment permit.

        D.    The licensing administrator shall render a written decision on the application for a permit sought under this chapter within five business days of the time the decision is made pursuant to this section, unless the applicant stipulates to a later date.

        1.     If such decision is made by the city council, acting as licensing administrator for a live entertainment permit application, such decision shall be final.

        2.     If such decision is made by the police department, acting as licensing administrator for an amusement device or dance floor entertainment permit application, then such decision shall be appealable to the city manager, as provided for in subsection G of this section.

        E.     In reaching a decision on the issuance or denial of an application for a permit pursuant to this chapter, the licensing administrator shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence.

        F.     The failure of the director and/or the licensing administrator to render any decision within the time frames established in any part of this section shall be deemed to constitute a denial of a permit sought by an applicant under this section, except as such deviation is stipulated to by the applicant. Extensions of time sought by applicants shall not be considered delay on the part of the city or constitute failure by the city to provide for prompt decisions on applications.

        G.    Any person aggrieved by any decision of the police department acting as licensing administrator with respect to the issuance or denial of an amusement device or dance floor entertainment permit may appeal to the city manager by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fourteen days of the date of the written findings and decision made pursuant to this section. The city manager shall give immediate notice of such written appeal to the city council. The clerk shall thereafter give notice to the appellant of the time and place for the hearing of such appeal and the following provisions shall apply to the hearing conducted by the city manager:

        1.     The city manager shall have authority to determine all questions raised on such appeal.

        2.     Witnesses need not be sworn.

        3.     The proceeding shall be tape recorded.

        4.     The formal rules of evidence shall not apply.

        5.     The person appealing and the police department shall be given an opportunity to present their positions by calling witnesses and presenting evidence and/or argument challenging the issuance or denial.

        6.     A written notice of the decision by the city manager on the appeal of the issuance or denial of a permit pursuant to this chapter shall be mailed to the person appealing and the applicant within fourteen days of the hearing and shall in-

clude both the findings upon which the decision is based, as well as citation to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 and 1094.6. Such decision by the city manager of the appeal of an issuance or denial of an entertainment permit shall be final.

        H.    The following provision shall apply to any applicant for a live entertainment permit whose permit has been denied or conditionally approved, including conditions to which the applicant objects, pursuant to this chapter:

        1.     Such live entertainment applicant shall be afforded prompt judicial review of that decision as provided by law pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5, 1094.6 and 1094.8.

        2.     The city shall make all reasonable efforts to expedite such review and shall comply with the provisions of California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8 and/or any subsequent, applicable statutes or rules of the courts or law of the state or nation which specify the prompt judicial review to be provided to a permit applicant. (Ord. 1757 § 5, 2015; Ord. 1575 §§ 2, 3, 2000; Ord. 1548 § 6, 1999; Ord. 1547 § 6, 1999)

 

5.32.050 Permit—Issuance or denial.
        The licensing administrator shall consider in the granting or denial of a permit the following criteria:

        A.    Compliance with all provisions of this chapter by the applicant;

        B.     Any conviction, forfeiture of bond, or plea of nolo contendere upon any criminal conviction or city ordinance violation (except minor traffic violations), within a five-year period, and, if so, the place and court in which such conviction, plea or forfeiture was heard, the specific charge and the sentence imposed as a result thereof;

        C.     The number and types of police reported/documented violations of law occurring at the facility at which the entertainment activity is to occur, including, but not limited to, disturbances of the peace, illegal drug activity, public drunkenness, drinking in public, harassment of passersby, gambling, prostitution, sale of stolen goods, public urination, theft, assaults, batteries, acts of vandalism, loitering, excessive littering, illegal parking, excessive loud noises, especially in the late night or early morning hours, traffic violations, lewd conduct, or police detention and arrests, and/or if caused by the operation of the facility, the number and types of violation of enumerated laws occurring adjacent to the proposed location for the permit for the past three years;

        D.    Substantial impact of the issuance of the permit to any residential zone, single-family or multiple-family dwelling within five hundred feet of the proposed location of the permit. The kinds of impacts which are to be considered are parking availability, noise levels, criminal activity, traffic, hours of operation and other similar secondary impacts;

        E.     Substantial impact of the issuance of the permit to all properties adjacent to the proposed location of the permit, in particular, parking availability, noise levels, hours of operation, traffic and other similar secondary effects;

        F.     In determining the weight to be given, in the granting or denying of an application for an entertainment permit, to any criminal convictions, city ordinance violations, and illegal activity at the business facility, at which the entertainment activity is to be offered, consideration shall be given to evidence of rehabilitation, efforts to correct violations, the nature of the conviction(s), the nature of the violation or alleged violation of law(s), enforcement of existing penal laws and matters such as remoteness in time, continuing course of conduct. The degree of detrimental impact required to deny a permit for a proposed facility must be substantial;

        G.    Compliance with all local, state and federal laws including all fire and health code requirements. (Ord. 1548 § 7, 1999; Ord. 1547 § 7, 1999)

 

5.32.055 Operational requirements for all entertainment permits.
        A.    Every business which provides a dance floor for patrons only, whether or not accompanied by live or recorded music, shall provide an appropriate location of the dance floor for patrons such that it does not create a hazard to the safety of persons on the premises, including, but not limited to, the obstruction or interference of the dance floor with the movement of persons through passageways to restrooms or exits.

        B.     It is unlawful for any person in charge of an entertainment business subject to this chapter to allow or permit the same to be or remain open between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. of any day, or to allow entertainment, as defined in this chapter, to be conducted therein during such period.

        C.     It is unlawful for any person or persons in charge of any public dancehall or place open to the public where public dances are held, to allow or permit any person under the age of sixteen years in such public dancehall, or to attend such public dances, unless such person shall be, during all of the time, while in such public dancehall or attending such dance, under the escort of an adult person.

        D.    A responsible person who shall be at least eighteen years of age shall be on the premises of an entertainment business which does not sell alcoholic beverages to act as manager at all times during which the business having a permit under this chapter is open. A responsible person who shall be at least twenty-one years of age shall be on the premises of an entertainment business which does sell alcoholic beverages to act as manager at all times during which the business having a permit under this chapter is open. The individual designated as the on-site manager shall be registered with the city by the owner within twenty-four hours of employment of such designated manager at the business establishment with a permit pursuant to this chapter. Registration of designated manager(s) shall be made directly to the police department by the owner of said business. The owner is to provide all on-site designated managers with a copy of all rules, regulations and conditions of the entertainment permit. Such designated manager shall receive all complaints and be responsible for all violations taking place on the premises and/or parking lot area(s) of the business. Criminal activity and/or illegal conduct by patrons and/or employees shall be immediately reported to the police department by the on-duty manager.

        E.     Any manager designated pursuant to subsection D of this section shall be responsible for immediately reporting any known illegal activity on the premises of the business establishment to the La Habra police department. Any owner of a business establishment with an entertainment permit pursuant to this chapter shall also be responsible for immediately reporting any known illegal activity occurring on the premises of the business establishment to the La Habra police department. Only one report to the police department regarding any particular incident at a business establishment is necessary pursuant to this section, except that the owner shall be responsible if no report is made pursuant to this section.

        F.     For businesses that have an entertainment permit pursuant to this chapter, which are licensed by the Alcohol Beverage Control Department to serve alcoholic beverages on the premises, and whose primary source of income or revenue is from the sale of alcohol, the following provisions shall apply:

        1.     The business shall provide a security system that visually records and monitors all parking lot areas, or in the alternative, provide security guards to patrol and monitor the parking lot areas. Video security systems shall be maintained in good working order at all times and subject to periodic inspection by the police department upon request. Video tapes of daily business operations shall be kept a minimum of seven days prior to reuse or destruction of such video tapes.

        2.     The city shall require security officers to be provided by the applicant during the hours of operation of the establishment for which the permit is sought, if such officers are necessary to maintain the peace and to enforce all statutes, ordinances and conditions of the permit.

        3.     A security officer required and/or provided by the entertainment business shall comply with the provisions of California Business and Professions Code Section 7582, et seq.

        G.    The licensing administrator has the discretion to add appropriate and narrowly tailored conditions to the granting of a permit pursuant to this chapter, should the particular facts and/or circumstances of a proposed use so justify. (Ord. 1548 § 8, 1999; Ord. 1547 § 8, 1999)

 

5.32.056 Operational requirements for certain live entertainment permits only.
        An entertainment business having on its premises entertainers dancing or performing other related forms of entertainment, wherein performances are being offered by entertainers for the viewing of patrons of the establishment, must satisfy the following requirements at all times:

        A.    A stage area for the entertainers with a minimum size of one hundred square feet.

        B.     A minimum distance of six feet between the stage area and the nearest area occupied by patrons of the establishment shall be maintained.

        C.     No patron shall be permitted within six feet of the stage while the stage is occupied by entertainer(s).

        D.    No entertainer shall perform within six feet of a patron.

        E.     Separate dressing room facilities shall be provided for entertainers, where patrons are not permitted entry, and such dressing rooms shall also be separated by the gender of the entertainers.

        F.     No entertainer shall have physical contact with any patron, and no patron shall have physical contact with any entertainer, while the entertainer and patron are on the premises, including contact with or between the specified anatomical parts of the entertainers and patrons respectively. This prohibition does not extend to incidental touching. Patrons shall be advised of the separation and no-touching requirements by obvious and visible signs placed at the entertainment business establishment and, if necessary, by employees of the establishment.

        G.    If patrons wish to tip entertainers, tips shall be placed in receptacles which shall be located at least six feet from the entertainers and the performing area. Patrons shall not be permitted to throw tips to entertainers, hand tips directly to the entertainers, or place tips in the entertainers’ costumes.

        H.    The entertainment business shall provide an entrance/exit to the premises for entertainers which is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons.

        I.      If the entertainment business provides restrooms for patron use, it shall provide separate restroom facilities for male and female patrons. The restrooms shall be free from sexually oriented materials and sexually oriented merchandise. Only one person shall be allowed in each restroom at any time, unless otherwise required by law, if the entertainment business has restroom facilities designed for use by only one person at a time. If the entertainment business has restroom facilities designed for use by more than one person at a time, then the entertainment business shall employ a restroom attendant of the same sex as the restroom users, who shall be present in the public portion of the restroom during the period one hour before through one hour after the time when the entertainment business shall have entertainers dancing or performing other related forms of entertainment for the viewing of patrons. No person of the opposite sex for which the restroom is designated shall be permitted into that restroom, and not more than one person is permitted to enter a restroom stall, unless otherwise required by law, and, with the exception of urination, no persons shall engage in any specified sexual activity in the public portion of the restroom. The restroom attendant shall have the duty to inform the owner or manager of any violations of this section. Such owner or manager with knowledge of such violations shall have the responsibility of insuring that such violations do not occur and/or continue.

        J.      There shall be no physical contact between patrons which contact involves the touching of specified anatomical areas. This prohibition does not extend to incidental touching. Patrons shall be advised of the no-touching requirements by signs at the entertainment business and, if necessary, by employees of the establishment. (Ord. 1548 § 9, 1999; Ord. 1547 § 9, 1999)

 

5.32.060 Permit—Fees.
        A.    Live Entertainment Permit. The initial application for a live entertainment permit and any subsequent annual renewal shall be accompanied by a live entertainment permit fee, as established by resolution of the city council, to defray the costs to the city of conducting investigation of the matters contained in the application and of the fitness of the premises. The fees provided by this subsection are in addition to any business license fees or building department or fire department inspection fees.

        B.     All Other Forms of Entertainment Requiring Permits. The initial application for an amusement device or dance floor entertainment permit and any subsequent annual renewal shall be accompanied by an amusement device or dance floor entertainment permit fee, as established by resolution of the city council, to defray the costs to the city of conducting an investigation of the matters contained in the application and of the fitness of the premises. The fees provided by this section are in addition to any business license fees or building department or fire department inspection fees.

        C.     Any ownership transfer of the business conducted on the premises issued a permit under this section in which the new owner seeks a live entertainment or an amusement device or dance floor entertainment permit shall require an application by the new owner and a reinspection. New owners shall be subject to the same application requirements and permit fees as any new applicant.

        D.    Any change in the type of entertainment conducted on the premises issued a permit under this chapter will require an application for a new permit and a reinspection. The changed use will require the payment of the same fees applicable to a new permit.

        E.     All permit fees are nonrefundable.

        F.     Any review of an existing and currently active permit, if ordered by the licensing administrator, shall require the payment of a permit review fee, the amount of which shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1548 § 10, 1999; Ord. 1547 § 10, 1999)

 

5.32.070 Payment of business license tax does not waiver permit requirements.
        The payment of a business license to the city shall not, in any event, be deemed or considered as a license or right to conduct such business within the city, without permit having been granted, as provided in this chapter, and nothing in this chapter shall in any way relieve any person conducting such business in the city from paying such regular business or other license as from time to time may be fixed and required to be paid, pursuant to ordinances of the city. (Ord. 19 § 6, 1925)

 

5.32.080 Permits—Duration.
        All permits granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance and will automatically expire, unless renewed, pursuant to the provisions of Section 5.32.085 of this chapter on or before the anniversary date of issuance of the original permit. No permit issued hereunder shall be valid for more than a one-year period of time, nor may the same be assigned or transferred. (Ord. 1548 § 11, 1999; Ord. 1547 § 11, 1999)

 

5.32.085 Permits—Renewal.
        A permit holder must file a new application pursuant to this chapter at least thirty days, but no more than sixty days prior to the expiration of a current application, or must file a sworn, written statement that no information on the prior permit application has changed, in order to be considered for permit renewal, according to the same provisions as an initial application, as set forth in Sections 5.32.010 through 5.32.050 of this chapter. (Ord. 1548 § 12, 1999; Ord. 1547 § 12, 1999)

 

5.32.087 Existing entertainment businesses.
        All persons engaged in providing entertainment in the city, prior to the enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter as amended, shall have to and including December 1, 1999, to file an application for an entertainment permit under this chapter or shall have to and including the anniversary date of the issuance of the most recent entertainment permit, whichever occurs first. (Ord. 1548 § 13, 1999; Ord. 1547 § 13, 1999)

 

5.32.090 Permit—Revocation—Hearing—Determination—Appeal.
        A.    The police department or city manager, according to the provisions of subsections B and C of this section, shall have the right to revoke and cancel any permit previously granted, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

        B.     Prior to any revocation of any amusement device or dance floor entertainment permit issued pursuant to this chapter the following provisions shall apply:

        1.     Written notice from the police department shall be personally delivered or mailed to the holder of the permit fourteen days prior to the date the revocation is to become effective, such notice to contain a statement of the specific grounds upon which the revocation is based. Such revocation is effective with no further notice to the applicant, unless the permittee makes a written request to the city clerk for a hearing with the city manager or his/her designee by the date that the revocation is to take effect.

        2.     If the permittee makes a request for such a hearing by the city manager, such hearing shall be conducted within thirty days of the filing of the written request with the city clerk, and the hearing shall be conducted according to the following provisions:

        a.     The city manager shall give immediate notice of the appeal to the city council.

        b.     The city clerk shall ensure that notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing is sent to the appellant at least fifteen days prior to the hearing date.

        c.     Witnesses are not required to be sworn.

        d.     The hearing shall be tape recorded.

        e.     The hearing shall be an administrative proceeding wherein the formal rules of evidence shall not apply. Hearsay can be presented to supplement and/or explain direct evidence, as provided in California Government Code Section 11513(c). Police reports shall be admissible, even if they are unsworn.

        f.      The permittee and the city shall have an opportunity to present witnesses, to present his/her position through evidence and argument, and to respond to the police department’s reasons for revocation.

        g.     The city manager shall make his/her review of the decision to revoke, not revoke, or not revoke but add additional conditions to the permit, within fourteen days of the hearing. Such decision shall be final and shall take effect immediately upon its issuance. Notice of the city manager’s decision shall be in writing, shall be immediately mailed to the permittee, shall include citation to California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6, and shall be accompanied by the findings upon which the decision is based.

        C.     Prior to revocation of a live entertainment permit issued pursuant to this chapter the following provisions shall apply:

        1.     Written notice from the city manager shall be mailed to the holder of the permit fourteen days prior to the date the revocation is to become effective, such notice to contain the specific grounds upon which the revocation is based. Such revocation is effective with no further notice to the applicant, unless the permittee makes a written request to the city clerk for a hearing with the city council by the date that the revocation is to take effect.

        2.     If the permittee makes a request for such a hearing by the city council, such hearing shall be conducted within thirty days of the filing of the written request with the city clerk and the hearing shall be conducted according to the following provisions:

        a.     A written notice shall be sent to the permittee with the date, time and place of the hearing at least fifteen days prior to the date of the hearing.

        b.     The hearing shall be an administrative proceeding wherein the formal rules of evidence shall not apply. Hearsay can be presented to supplement and/or explain direct evidence, as provided in California Government Code Section 11513(c). Police reports shall be admissible, even if they are unsworn.

        c.     Witnesses shall be sworn.

        d.     The public may address the city council without being sworn and/or cross-examined. However, the permittee and the city may still present evidence and/or argument to rebut such information presented by the public.

        e.     The permittee and the city shall have an opportunity to present witnesses, to present his/her position through evidence and argument, and to respond to the city manager’s reasons for revocation.

        f.      The proceeding shall be tape recorded or a court reporter, who shall record and transcribe the proceeding, shall be present during the proceeding.

        g.     Upon such appeal hearing being conducted, the decision of the city council as to such revocation shall be final and conclusive.

        h.     The council shall make its decision to revoke, not revoke, or not revoke but add additional conditions to the permit within fourteen days of the hearing. Notice of the council’s decision shall be immediately mailed to the applicant. Such notices shall include citation to California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.8. In all cases, the city clerk shall be responsible for preparing a certificate of mailing. The council’s decision shall be effective on the fifth day after the date on such certificate of mailing. If a judicial action, challenging the revocation, is commenced within thirty days of the effective date of the revocation, however, the status quo of the permit prior to revocation shall be maintained until such time as a judicial decision is rendered from the court in which the action is filed.

        3.     Any permittee whose live entertainment permit has been revoked or conditioned, including conditions to which the applicant objects pursuant to this section, shall be afforded prompt judicial review of that decision as provided by law, pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5, 1094.6 and 1094.8. The city shall make all reasonable efforts to expedite such review and shall comply with the provisions of California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8 and/or any subsequent, applicable statutes or rules of courts or law of the state or nation which specify the prompt judicial review to be provided to a permit applicant.

        D.    The permittee and the police department or city manager, as specified in subsection B or C of this section, shall both have the right and full opportunity to present witnesses, evidence and to confront adverse witnesses.

        E.     The city shall provide disclosure to the permit holder of the specific evidence supporting the revocation at least seven days prior to the date of the hearing.

        F.     Nothing may be treated as evidence which has not been introduced as such.

        G.    The criteria by which a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be considered for revocation shall be any of the following:

        1.     Whether the establishment or activity constitutes a public nuisance;

        2.     Whether the operation of the establishment or activity has resulted in repeated police reported/documented violation of laws occurring at the facility including but not limited to disturbances of the peace, illegal drug activity, public drunkenness, drinking in public, harassment of passersby, gambling, prostitution, sale of stolen goods, public urination, theft, assaults, batteries, acts of vandalism, loitering, excessive littering, illegal parking, excessive loud noises, especially in the late night or early morning hours, traffic violations, lewd conduct, or police detention and arrests, and/or if caused by the operation of the facility, the number and types of violation of enumerated laws occurring adjacent to the facility;

        3.     That the business establishment or activity has been conducted in a manner which violates one or more of the conditions imposed upon the issuance of the permit or which fails to conform to the plans and procedures described in the application, or which violates the occupant load limits set by the fire department;

        4.     That the business establishment or activity is operated in violation of this chapter, or any other local, state or federal regulation;

        5.     That the permittee has failed to obtain or maintain all required city, county and state licenses and permits;

        6.     That the permit is being used to conduct an activity different from that for which it was issued;

        7.     That the permittee has misrepresented a material fact in the application for permit or has not answered each question therein truthfully;

        8.     That due to changes in on-site conditions, the business lacks sufficient on-site parking area for employees and the public under the standards set forth in the city’s parking code, except for an existing use that is legal and nonconforming with respect to parking;

        9.     That the building or structure in which the business is conducted is hazardous to the health or safety of the employees or patrons of the business or of the general public, under the standards set forth in the Uniform Building, Uniform Plumbing or Uniform Fire Code;

        10.   That the permitted business creates sound levels which violate the noise control ordinance of the city;

        11.   That the security measures provided by the permittee are inadequate to deter unlawful conduct on the part of employees or patrons, or to promote the safe and orderly assembly and movement of persons and vehicles, or to prevent disturbance of the neighborhood by excessive noise created by patrons entering or leaving the premises where the business operates;

        12.   That the use for which the approval was granted has ceased to exist or has been suspended for six months or more.

        H.    In determining the weight to be given to any criminal convictions, city ordinance violations, and illegal activity at the facility, at which the entertainment activity occurred, in the revocation of an entertainment permit, consideration shall be given to evidence of rehabilitation, efforts to correct violations, the nature of the conviction(s), the nature of the violation or alleged violation of law(s), enforcement of existing penal laws, and matters such as remoteness in time and continuing course of conduct. The degree of detrimental impact required to deny a permit for a proposed facility must be substantial. (Ord. 1575 §§ 4, 5, 2000; Ord. 1548 § 14, 1999; Ord. 1547 § 14, 1999)

 

5.32.100 Conduct constituting a public nuisance.
        The conduct of any business within the city in violation of any of the terms of this chapter is found and declared to be a public nuisance, and the city attorney or the district attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or proceeding for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law; and shall take other steps and shall apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as well as abate or remove such entertainment, amusement, or dance establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from conducting, operating or maintaining an entertainment, amusement, or dance establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1575 § 6, 2000)

 

5.32.110 Severability.
        Should any section, subsection, clause or provision of this chapter for any reason be held to be invalid or facially unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remaining portions of this chapter, it being hereby expressly declared that this chapter, and each and every section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase hereof would have been prepared, proposed, approved, adopted and/or ratified irrespective of the fact that any one or more section, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this chapter be declared invalid or unconstitutional, including, but not limited to, the operational requirements contained in Sections 5.32.055 and 5.32.056. (Ord. 1548 § 16, 1999; Ord. 1547 § 16, 1999)

 

5.32.120 Violations—Penalties.
        Any person who violates any section of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of one thousand dollars and/or imprisonment in the county jail for a period of up to six months. (Ord. 1575 § 7, 2000)

Chapter 5.36 ALARM SYSTEMS
5.36.010 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall be construed herein as set forth in this section unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:

        A.    “Alarm agent” means any person employed by an alarm business whose duties include the altering, maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing, selling, servicing, responding to or causing others to respond to an alarm system, in or on any building, structure or facility.

        B.     “Alarm business” means the business carried on by any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system, or causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved or installed any alarm system in or on any building, structure or facility.

        C.     “Alarm system” means any mechanical or electrical device which is designed or used for the detection of fire, intrusion into a building, structure or facility or for alerting others of an event within a facility, or both, which event causes a local audible alarm or transmission of a signal or message. Alarm systems include, but are not limited to, direct dial telephone devices, audible alarms and proprietor alarms. Devices which are not designed or used to evoke a police or fire response, or used to register alarms that are intended to be audible, visible or perceptible outside of the protected building, structure or facility are not included within this definition, nor are auxiliary devices installed by a telephone company to protect its systems which might be damaged or disrupted by the use of an alarm system.

        D.    “Appellant” means a person who perfects an appeal pursuant to Section 5.36.080.

        E.     “Applicant” means a person, firm or corporation who file an application for a permit as provided in this chapter.

        F.     “Audible alarm” means a device designed for the detection of fire or of an intrusion on premises, which generates an audible sound on the premises when it is actuated.

        G.    “City” means the city of La Habra.

        H.    “Day” means a calendar day.

        I.      “Direct alarm” means any alarm system connecting an authorized source to the La Habra police department by a leased telephone line or any other direct line that has no intermediate station and terminates at an independent monitor module at the police department.

        J.      “Direct-dial telephone device (automatic dialing service)” means any device which is interconnected to a voice-grade telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit by prerecorded voice message or code signal an emergency message indicating a need for emergency response.

        K.    “False alarm” means the activation of an alarm system, whether or not the system is a direct system, through mechanical failure, accidental tripping, misoperation, malfunction, misuse, or the neglect of the owner or lessee of an alarm system, or of his employees or agents. Upon failure of the police department or fire department to find any evidence of intrusion, fire or other need or cause for activating an alarm system, a conclusive presumption of false alarm will be made. False alarm shall not include alarms caused by earthquakes, violent winds, malfunction of telephone line circuits, or external causes beyond the control of the owner or lessee of the alarm system.

        L.     “Permit revocation” means the permittee can no longer maintain an alarm which emits a sound, signal or message to which the police are expected to respond.

        M.    “Person” means a person, firm, corporation, association, partnership, individual, organization or company.

        N.    “Police chief” means the chief of police of the city of La Habra or his designee.

        O.    “Police response” means any individual police officer or group of officers arriving at the alarm location to investigate an alarm and report their findings.

        P.     “Proprietor alarm” means an alarm which is not regularly serviced by an alarm business.

        Q.    “Terminal monitor module” means a device installed at the police facility to which direct alarms are connected by means of a telephone lease line and which is maintained by the city or its licensee. (Ord. 1424 § 1, 1992; Ord. 1043 § 1, 1978)

 

5.36.020 Registration of alarm agents required.
        No person shall engage in, conduct or operate as an alarm agent without registering his name and filing a copy of his state identification card with the chief of police. No fee or application shall be required for such registration. (Ord. 1043 § 1, 1978)

 

5.36.030 Alarm permit—Required.
        No person shall install, or cause to be installed, use, maintain, or possess an alarm system on any business premises or residential premises owned or in the possession or control of such person within the city without first having obtained an alarm user’s permit from the finance director in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 1424 § 2, 1992; Ord. 1043 § 1, 1978)

 

5.36.040 Alarm permit—Application—Filing—Fee.
        Application for an alarm permit shall be filed with the finance director on forms provided by the city and shall be accompanied by the required initial and annual renewal fee established by resolution of the city council. The fee is established to cover the cost of investigating and processing the applications and permits and is not refundable. The application shall be signed and verified by the applicant and shall contain such information as may be deemed necessary by the chief of police or his designee. Permits provided for in this chapter shall be issued by the finance director and shall be nontransferable. (Ord. 1434 § 3, 1992; Ord. 1043 § 1, 1978)

 

5.36.050 Alarm permit—Application—Emergency contact information required—Posting and keeping.
        The applicant shall supply on his application for an alarm permit the following information:

        A.    The names, addresses and phone numbers of the selling or installing alarm company, or if the permittee is not under a service contract with an alarm business who will render service or repairs during any hour of the day or night, at least two persons to call in event of an emergency who have a key to the premises;

        B.     The name of the business, and address and telephone numbers where the alarm was installed for the purpose of providing coverage;

        C.     The type of alarm installed;

        D.    In the event the names, addresses or telephone numbers change, the applicant or permittee shall give written notice thereof to the finance director with the changes within twenty days from the date of the changes. The finance director shall provide the police department communications center with a copy of the written notice which provides/states the changes. No additional fees shall be imposed for changes to alarm registration information required by this subsection;

        E.     All alarm permits must be kept and posted in a conspicuous place on the premises where the alarm location is located and shall be presented upon demand by a police officer, firefighter or other designee of the chief of police. No permit shall be issued, reinstated or renewed until all alarm system permit fees are paid. (Ord. 1424 § 4, 1992; Ord. 1043 § 1, 1978)

 

5.36.060 Alarm permit—Application—Investigation.
        Upon receiving an application from any person for a direct alarm permit, the chief of police shall cause an investigation to be made of the system to be installed to determine if the system complies with the requirements of this chapter. If the proposed system complies with this chapter, the finance director shall cause a permit to be issued. An alarm permittee may be allowed a direct connection to the police department alarm system, provided facilities are available for direct connection. Each alarm permit holder whose system directly connects with the police department shall pay the city on or before January 1st of each year, a monitoring fee set forth by resolution of the city council. This section shall not be construed to permit telephonic alarm systems which are prohibited pursuant to this chapter. Costs of connection of the direct alarm system shall be paid by the permittee. (Ord. 1043 § 1, 1978)

 

5.36.070 Alarm permit—Revocation—Notification.
        A.    If at any time it shall come to the attention of the chief of police that the holder of a permit issued under this chapter has violated any provisions of this chapter, or rules or regulations made pursuant to this chapter, including, but not limited to, nonpayment of fees required by this chapter, refusal to pay false alarm fees as provided in Section 5.36.090, or false alarms which exceed the numbers permitted pursuant to Section 5.36.090, the chief of police, in the exercise of sound discretion and without liability for so doing, suspend or revoke the permit, and place the alarm system on a “nonresponse” status. The chief of police may terminate the “nonresponse” status based upon convincing evidence that the alarm owner has corrected all problems relating to the alarm and has paid all fees and charges due.

        B.     If an alarm permit is to be revoked, as provided in subsection A of this section, the chief of police shall give the permittee ten days’ notice of his intention to revoke the permit by personal service or by registered mail addressed to permittee at the address set forth on the permit application. The notice shall require permittee to cause the alarm system to be repaired, or properly used and operated or fees paid and proper or the corrections to be made within ten days of the date of the notice and that failure to comply with the notice will cause disconnection of the system from the police department terminal. The notice shall also provide that permittee may appeal the revocation to the city council as provided in Section 5.35.080. Failure to timely comply with the notice shall result in disconnection of the direct alarm system without further notice, in addition to any other penalty provided by this chapter. (Ord. 1424 § 5, 1992; Ord. 1043 § 1, 1978)

 

5.36.080 Alarm permit—Revocation—Appeal.
        A.    In the event a permit is revoked, or notice of revocation is given as provided in Section 5.36.070, the permittee may appeal and request a hearing, by filing with the city clerk a statement addressed to a hearing officer who shall be appointed by the city manager. The statement shall set forth the facts and circumstances regarding the action of the chief of police within the time limits specified in this section. The right to appeal from an action of the chief of police shall terminate upon the expiration of ten days following the deposit of the notice of intent to revoke in the United States Post Office or personal service of the notice.

        B.     If a hearing is requested, written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be served on the permittee by the chief of police by certified mail or by personal delivery at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing.

        C.     The permittee shall have the right to present written and oral evidence, subject to the right of cross-examination. The hearing officer shall consider the appeal and may affirm, overrule or modify the decision of the chief of police. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final upon the issuance of written findings.

        D.    An alarm user shall immediately discontinue use of the alarm system upon being notified by certified mail of the revocation of the permit.

        E.     An alarm user whose permit has been revoked may apply for a new permit as provided in Section 5.36.040. Once a permit is revoked, the chief of police may impose reasonable restrictions and conditions upon the user, before a new permit is issued. Any restrictions and conditions imposed shall be written on the permit.

        F.     All monitoring fees paid by the permittee as provided by this chapter shall be forfeited in the event of revocation. When an appeal is filed, the direct alarm  system shall not be disconnected and the order of revocation shall be stayed until such time as the appeal process is completed and a final decision is rendered. (Ord. 1424 § 6, 1992; Ord. 1043 § 1, 1978)

 

5.36.090 False alarms—Prevention fee.
        A.    When emergency messages are received by the police department that evidence a failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter or a permit issued hereunder, the chief of police is authorized to demand that the owner or lessee of the alarm system initiating such messages, or his representative, disconnect the alarm system until it is made to comply with the requirements.

        B.     The owner or lessee of any alarm system shall be assessed a fee as established by resolution of the city council for each false alarm in excess of three during any calendar year period beginning January 1 and ending on December 31 of the same year, paid to the finance director for deposit in the general fund.

        C.     An alarm permit may be suspended or revoked as provided in Section 5.36.070, in addition to the payment of the prevention payment as provided in this section, or in the event of failure to pay the false alarm fees. (Ord. 1810 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1424 § 7, 1992; Ord. 1411, 1991; Ord. 1043 § 1, 1978)

 

5.36.100 Standards and regulations.
        All alarm systems and appurtenant equipment in-stalled within the city shall meet or exceed the highest standards which may hereafter be established by the city. Fire alarm systems shall be approved by the State Fire Marshal when the systems are of a type subject to Fire Marshal’s approval. The city reserves the right to inspect all alarm systems subject to all applicable laws including Code of Civil Procedure Section 1822.50, et seq. (Ord. 1424 § 8, 1992; Ord. 1043 § 1, 1978)

 

5.36.110 Automatic shutoff requirements for audible alarms.
        All audible alarm systems, excluding the fire alarms which sound indicating the functioning of an automatic fire sprinkler system shall include an automatic shutoff feature designed to cut off sound within fifteen minutes in the residential area and within twenty minutes within the commercial area maximum after activation. The systems, however, shall include an automatic resetting device which shall cause the subject system to be rearmed upon automatic shutoff. A battery backup power supply must maintain the alarm system for a minimum of four hours in case of power failure. (Ord. 1424 § 9, 1992; Ord. 1043 § 1, 1978)

 

5.36.120 Burglary detection alarm delay device requirements.
        All burglary detection alarm systems that directly transmit a signal to the police facility shall include a device which will provide a minimum of a thirty-second delay of the original transmission and activate a signal immediately in such a manner as to be perceptible to a person lawfully entering, leaving or occupying the premises. Such a device is intended to provide an opportunity for the person having lawful control of the alarm system to terminate its operation after activation, but prior to the transmission of a false alarm. (Ord. 1043 § 1, 1978)

5.36.130 Prohibitions.
        A.    It is unlawful to install or use an alarm system which upon activation emits a sound similar to sirens in use on emergency vehicles or for civil defense purposes.

        B.     No person shall use, permit or cause to be used any telephone device or telephone attachment that automatically selects a public primary trunk line of the city or police department and then reproduce any prerecorded message to report any burglary, robbery or other emergency.

        C.     No person shall use, or allow to be used, any direct-dial telephone device which automatically dials a city or police department telephone number. (Ord. 1424 § 10, 1992; Ord. 1043 § 1, 1978)

 

5.36.140 Fees—Deemed in addition to other fees imposed by city.
        Fees prescribed in this chapter shall be in addition to any other lawful fees imposed by the city for doing or conducting business within the city. (Ord. 1043 § 1, 1978)

 

5.36.150 Fees—Connection to police department monitor module.
        Subscribers of direct alarms terminating at the monitor module at the police department shall pay a one-time fee to the city’s finance director for application investigation costs. (Ord. 1043 § 1, 1978)

 

5.36.160 Fees—Monitoring service.
        Subscribers of direct alarms terminating at the monitor module at the police department shall pay a yearly monitoring fee as determined by the city’s fee schedule. The fee for the applicable year shall be paid on or before January 1st of the applicable year, or upon connection of the system. Monitoring fees are nonrefundable in the event the system is disconnected. (Ord. 1043 § 1, 1978)

 

 

5.36.170 Applicability of fee provisions.
        The permit fees established by resolution of the city council shall apply to any direct alarm systems installed. The permit fees shall apply to all businesses and residents with both existing alarms and those installed after the resolution date. The monitoring fee established by this chapter shall apply to all systems, irrespective of when the system is in-stalled or connected. (Ord. 1424 § 11, 1992; Ord. 1043 § 1, 1978)

 

5.36.180 Limitation on city’s liability.
        The city is under no obligation or duty to any permittee or any other person by reason of any provision of this chapter, or the exercise of any privilege by any permittee hereunder, including, but not limited to, any defects in a police or fire alarm system, any delay in transmission of an alarm message to any alarm by any city office, employee or agent. (Ord. 1043 § 1, 1978)

 

5.36.190 Violation—Penalty.
        A.    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of five hundred dollars or imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding six months. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person.

        B.     Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter who has previously been found guilty of a misdemeanor under this chapter for violation of the same section within the past twelve-month period, may be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both such fine and imprisonment.

        C.     The operation of any alarm system contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be, and is hereby deemed to be, unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may commence an action at law or in equity in any court of competent jurisdiction against such violator to compel compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1424 § 12, 1992; Ord. 1043 § 1, 1978)

Chapter 5.40 TOWING SERVICES
5.40.010 Definitions.
        The following words shall have the following meanings:

        A.    “Public automobile storage facility” means any vehicle storage facility which provides to the public the service of storing or holding vehicles.

        B.     “Illegally parked vehicles” means any vehicle parked in violation of the laws of the city of La Habra, the county of Orange and the state of California.

        C.     “Tow service” means any service whereby vehicles are towed or otherwise removed from one place to another.

        D.    “Tow truck” means any vehicle or device used to tow or otherwise remove vehicles from one place to another. (Ord. 1211, 1983)

 

5.40.020 Permit—Required.
        No person, association, firm or corporation shall engage in, conduct or carry on, the business of towing or impounding vehicles from a public or private property location within the city without first having obtained a permit pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1406 § 1, 1991; Ord. 1211, 1983)

 

5.40.030 Permit—Application—Fee.
        A.    Any person desiring to obtain or renew a permit to tow or impound illegally parked vehicles from private property locations within the city shall make application pursuant to Section 5.40.050.

        B.     Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee as set by resolution, which may be adjusted from time to time by council resolution. (Ord. 1213 §§ 2, 3, 1983; Ord. 1211, 1983)

 

5.40.040 Permit—Application—Contents.
        An applicant for a permit shall submit the following information:

        A.    The full name, business and residence address of the applicant;

        B.     The location, description and hourly availability of the tow trucks owned or operated by the applicant;

        C.     The addresses of the available public automobile storage facilities that the applicant will use for housing all vehicles towed from private property;

        D.    Written proof that the applicant is over eighteen years of age;

        E.     The names, addresses and driver’s license numbers of all tow truck operators employed by the applicant. Applicant will provide this information for any employees hired after issuance of the permit;

        F.     The business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application;

        G.    The business license and permit history of the applicant, owner or profit interest holder in the tow service;

        H.    All criminal convictions of applicant, including vehicle code violations;

        I.      Such other identification and information reasonably necessary. (Ord. 1211, 1983)

 

5.40.050 Permit—Application—Form—Investigation—Determination.
        A.    An applicant for a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall obtain the form from the chief of police or his designee and complete and return it to him. The police department will thereafter notify the permit applicant of a date and time in which to personally appear at the police department. The department shall have a reasonable time in which to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Based upon such investigation, the chief of police, or his designee, shall approve or deny the permit.

        B.     The city building department and the fire department may, on the request of the chief of police, inspect the premises proposed to be devoted to that of an automobile storage facility and shall make recommendations to the chief of police.

        C.     The chief of police shall not grant a permit if, based upon his investigation, he finds any one or more of the following:

        1.     Evidence showing that the permit applicant has deliberately falsified the application; or

        2.     The permit applicant fails to furnish the information and documents required by this chapter; or

        3.     It determines that an inspection or investigation by the city building department, police department or fire department reveals a deficiency, violation of course of conduct that endangers the peace, health, safety and general welfare of the public; or

        4.     The operation as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, this code; or

        5.     The applicant is not of the age of eighteen years, or older; or

        6.     The applicant’s fee schedules are more than fifty percent above rates charged by the city contracted police towing service.

        D.    The chief of police, after receiving the information described in subsections A, B and C of this section, may, in his discretion and judgment, grant or deny a permit. In the event the permit is denied, written notice of such denial shall be given to the applicant specifying the grounds for such denial. Notice of the denial of the permit shall be deemed to have been served upon personal service of applicant or when deposited in the United States mail with postage prepaid and addressed to the applicant at his last known address. Such refusal to issue a permit may be appealed to the city council under the procedures as set in Section 5.40.100. (Ord. 1211, 1983)

 

5.40.060 Permit—Drivers required to carry.
        Every tow truck operator and driver performing towing services of illegally parked vehicles from private property in the city shall have on his person a valid permit or copy thereof issued pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1211, 1983)

 

5.40.070 Permit—Nontransferable.
        Upon the sale or transfer of any ownership or profit interest whether present or prospective in a tow service, the permit issued under this chapter shall be null and void. A new application shall be made deleting the person who no longer holds any ownership or profit interest and naming the person who has been sold or transferred ownership or profit interest in the tow service. A fee of one hundred dollars shall be payable for the application and all the provisions of this chapter shall apply to such new application. The fee may be adjusted by resolution. (Ord. 1211, 1983)

 

5.40.080 Permit—Term—Renewal.
        Subject to revocation or suspension, the permit shall expire after a term of two years. The permit may thereafter be renewed. Applications for renewal shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1211, 1983)

 

5.40.090 Permit—Revocation—Hearing—Notification.
        A.    The chief of police may suspend or revoke the permit issued under this chapter when he determines that:

        1.     The permit holder, his agent or employee was on notice or knew of, or should have known of, a violation of this code; or

        2.     An inspection or investigation by the city building department, police department or fire department reveals a deficiency, violation or unethical course of conduct that endangers the peace, health, safety and general welfare of the public.

        B.     No permit shall be suspended or revoked unless hearing and notice thereof be given. Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing and served at least five days prior to the date of hearing thereon. The notice shall state the grounds of the complaint against the holder of such permit, or against the business carried on by the permittee at the tow service, and shall state the time and place where such hearing will be held.

        C.     This notice shall be served upon the permit holder by delivering the same to such person or by leaving such notice at the place of business or residence of the permit holder. If the permit holder cannot be found with due diligence and the service of such notice cannot be made in the manner herein provided, a copy of such notice shall be mailed, postage fully prepaid, addressed to the permit holder at his place of business or residence at least five days prior to the date of such hearing.

        D.    It is unlawful for any person to conduct or carry on the business of towing illegally parked vehicles from private property until a permit, suspended or revoked, has been reinstated by the chief of police. (Ord. 1211, 1983)

 

5.40.100 Permit—Denial or revocation—Appeal.
        A.    Within ten days from the date of notification of the police chief’s denial of a permit or the police chief’s imposition of a suspension or revocation pursuant to these provisions, the affected permit applicant or holder may appeal in writing by notice to the city clerk. The written appeal is to include the reasons the police chief’s decision should be reversed. The city clerk shall schedule the appeal for a public hearing before the city council.

        B.     The city council may uphold or reverse the police chief’s decision, and such decision shall be final upon the applicant or permit holder. Also, the city council may elect to review any determination of the grant or denial of a permit or, of a suspension or revocation. (Ord. 1211, 1983)

 

5.40.110 Towing from private property—Warning signs required.
        The permittee shall not tow from private property unless the private property has displayed signs visible from twenty-five feet at each vehicular entrance and exit. There shall also be displayed one additional sign, visible from twenty-five feet, for each twenty-two thousand five hundred square feet of parking area. Each sign shall contain the following message:

 

Private Property

 

  No Parking—Unauthorized Vehicles Subject to tow-away at owner’s expense.

  La Habra Police Department

  Telephone: 691-0941

 

        The words “Private Property” must be printed in red on a white background. The size of each letter in the words “Private Property” must be two inches in height, two inches in width, and must be printed with at least one-fourth-inch brush strokes (width). All other lettering and numbers must be at least one inch in height, three-fourths inch wide, and with a three-sixth wide brush stroke.

        A.    Owners of private property open to the public for parking shall not remove a vehicle until parked over one hour.

        1.     Property owner liable for double storage cost if waiting period violated. (Ord. 1262, 1986; Ord. 1211, 1983)

 

5.40.120 Towing from private property—Notification of police department required.
        A.    Before authorizing a tow service to remove any illegally parked vehicle from private property the owner or person in lawful possession of the private property must notify the police department of the following:

        1.     The name, address and phone number of the person authorizing removal of the illegally parked vehicle from private property;

        2.     The location of the private property from which the vehicle is to be removed;

        3.     The name, address and telephone number of the location where the vehicle is to be stored;

        4.     The license number, model and color of the vehicle to be removed;

        5.     The name and address of the person reporting the private property impound.

        B.     It is the responsibility of the tow service operator to ensure that the police department is notified by the owner or person in lawful possession of the private property prior to the tow service operator removing any illegally parked vehicle. (Ord. 1211, 1983)

 

5.40.130 Storage of cars towed from private property.
        The illegally parked vehicle removed from private property shall be towed or otherwise transported to the nearest available public automobile storage facility. The “nearest available public automobile storage facility” is defined as that facility which is closest to the private property from which the illegally parked vehicle was towed or otherwise removed, or the storage lot of the permittee if approved by the chief of police. (Ord. 1211, 1983)

 

5.40.140 Rates.
        The permittee shall maintain on file with the police department a current rate schedule indicating all charges for towing and storage services. The charges for towing and storage service of illegally parked vehicles removed from private property shall be assessed according to the rate schedule on file at the police department.

        A.    If the vehicle owner returns before their vehicle is removed from private property, the maximum fee the tow service can impose is twenty dollars.

        B.     Tow companies or storage facility where vehicles are stored must accept valid bank credit cards or cash and must have sufficient money transaction.

        C.     Tow services who charge excessive fees (higher than indicated in contract with the police department) will be liable to vehicle owner for four times the amount charged.

        D.    Tow companies will be responsible for damage to vehicles removed from private property and liable for wrong vehicles removed. (Ord. 1262, 1986; Ord. 1211, 1983)

 

5.40.150 Business license requirements not waived by chapter provisions.
        Nothing in this chapter shall constitute a waiver of the requirements for the issuance and possession of a business license. (Ord. 1211, 1983)

 

5.40.160 Applicability of provisions to existing businesses.
        The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and businesses described in this chapter whether the activities described herein were established before or after the effective date of this chapter, except that those in business as of the date of enactment of this chapter shall have ten days to make application for a permit. (Ord. 1211, 1983)

 

5.40.170 Violation—Penalty.
        Every person, whether acting as an individual owner, employee of the owner, operator or employee of the operator, or whether acting as a mere helper for the owner, employer or operator, or whether acting as a participant or worker in any way, who operates or conducts a towing service without first obtaining a permit and paying for a license to do so from the city, or shall violate any provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1211, 1983)

Chapter 5.44 FRANCHISES FOR COLLECTION OF COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND RESIDENTIAL REFUSE
5.44.010 Definitions.
        For the purpose of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations, and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number:

        A.    “City” means the city of La Habra, a municipal corporation of the state of California, in its present incorporated form or in any later recognized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form.

        B.     “Collection” means the operation of gathering together and transporting of refuse to the point of disposal.

        C.     “Council” means the present governing body of the city or any future board constituting the legislative body of the city.

        D.    “Director of public works” means the director of public works of the city or duly authorized representatives.

        E.     “Franchise” means and includes any authorizations granted under this chapter in terms of a franchise, privilege, permit, license, or otherwise, to collect and transport commercial, industrial and residential refuse in the city.

        F.     “Grantee” means the person, firm or corporation to whom or which a franchise as defined in subsection E of this section is granted by the council under this chapter and the lawful successor, transferee, or assignee of the person, firm or corporation.

        G.    “Gross annual receipts” means any and all compensation and other consideration in any form whatever and any contributing grant or subsidy received directly or indirectly by a grantee from subscribers or users in payment for collection of refuse. Gross annual receipts shall not include any taxes on services furnished by the grantee imposed directly on any subscriber or user by any city, state or other governmental unit and collected by the grantee for such governmental unit.

        H.    “Property of grantee” means all property owned, installed or used by a grantee in the conduct of refuse collection under the authority of a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter.

        I.      “Refuse” means and includes table refuse, swill, offal, and every accumulation of animal, vegetable and other matters, consumption decay, dealing in or storage of meats, fish, fowls, fruits, vegetables or other food, all commercial or industrial waste from or intended for use as food and all vegetable trimmings from markets or stores, including paper, pasteboard, magazines, books, rags, rubber, carpets, boots, shoes, hats, straw, packing boxes and cartons, crates, packing material, broken crockery, broken glass, ashes, cinders, shells, bottles, tin cans, metals and other kind of rubbish, trash or waste materials which normally accumulates in the operation of commercial or industrial establishments and generated by residential use.

        J.      “Refuse bin” means a steel container, having wheels and a steel and hinged lid, of one and one-half cubic yards to three cubic yards in size. All bins shall have the name, address and phone number of the owner legibly painted on at least one side.

        K.    “Subscriber” means any person or entity receiving the refuse collection services of the grantee. (Ord. 1723 §§ 1, 2, 2011; Ord. 787 § 1, 1970)

 

5.44.020 Council’s authority to grant.
        An exclusive or nonexclusive franchise to collect commercial, industrial and/or residential refuse within any or all portions of the city may be granted by the council to any person, firm or corporation, whether operating under an existing franchise or not, who or which offers to furnish and provide such collection under and pursuant to the terms and provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1723 § 3, 2011; Ord. 787 § 1, 1970)

 

5.44.030 Required.
        From and after January 1, 1971, it is unlawful for any person to establish, operate or to carry on the business of refuse collection unless a franchise therefor has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. (Ord. 787 § 1, 1970)

 

5.44.040 Exclusion of gardeners.
        This chapter does not require a franchise for the hauling or disposal of grass cuttings, prunings, manure, or other rubbish, not containing garbage, to or at a legal place of disposal as a part of gardening, landscaping or lot cleaning. (Ord. 787 § 1, 1970)

 

5.44.050 Application—Fee—Contents.
        A.    Application for a franchise under this chapter shall be in writing and accompanied by an application fee as set by resolution, shall be filed with the city clerk and shall contain the following information:

        1.     The name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the name and address of each partner shall also be set forth. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall also state the names and addresses of its directors, main offices, major stockholders and associates, and the names and addresses of parent and subsidiary companies;

        2.     A statement or schedule, in a form approved by the director of public works, of proposed rates and charges to subscribers for services, and a copy of proposed service agreement between the grantee and its subscribers shall accompany the application. For remote, relatively inaccessible subscribers within the city, service may be made available on the basis of cost of labor required by the grantee;

        3.     A statement setting forth all agreements and understandings, whether written or oral or implied, existing between the applicant and any person, firm or corporation with respect to the proposed franchise of the proposed refuse collection operation. If a franchise is granted to a person, firm or corporation posing as a front or as the representative of another person, firm or corporation, and such information is not disclosed in the original application, such franchise shall be deemed void and of no force and effect whatsoever;

        4.     A financial statement prepared by a certified public accountant, or person otherwise satisfactory to the council, showing applicant’s financial status and his or her financial ability to perform the collection;

        5.     The council may at any time demand, and applicant shall provide, such supplementary, additional, or other information as the council may deem reasonably necessary to determine whether the requested franchise should be granted.

        B.     Upon consideration of any such application, the council may refuse to grant the requested franchise or the council may, by ordinance, grant a franchise for refuse collection to any such applicant as may appear from the application to be, in its opinion, best qualified to render proper and efficient service to subscribers in the city. The council’s decision in the matter shall be final. If favorably considered, the application submitted shall constitute and form part of the franchise as granted.

        C.     Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall include the following condition:

 

The refuse condition herein franchised shall be used and operated solely and exclusively for the purpose expressly authorized by ordinance of the City of La Habra and no other purpose whatsoever.

 

        Inclusion of the foregoing statement in any such franchise shall not be deemed to limit the authority of the city to include any other reasonable condition, limitation or restriction which it may deem necessary to impose in connection with such franchise pursuant to the authority conferred by this chapter. (Ord. 1213 §§ 2, 3, 1983; Ord. 787 § 1, 1970)

 

5.44.060 Renewal.
        Any franchise granted under this chapter is renewable at the application of the grantee, in the same manner and upon the same terms and conditions as required herein for obtaining the original franchise, except those which are by their terms expressly inapplicable; provided, however, that the council may, as its option, waive compliance with any or all of the requirements of Section 5.44.050. (Ord. 787 § 1, 1970)

 

5.44.070 Acceptance and effective date.
        A.    No franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall become effective unless and until the ordinance granting same has become effective and, in addition, unless and until all things required in this ordinance are done and completed, all of such things being declared to be conditions precedent to the effectiveness of any such franchise granted under this chapter. In the event any of such things are not done and completed in the time and manner required, the council may declare the franchise null and void.

        B.     Within thirty days after the effective date of the ordinance awarding a franchise, or within such extended period of time as the council in its discretion may authorize the grantee shall file with the city clerk his or her written acceptance, in form satisfactory to the city attorney, of the franchise, including a two hundred dollar fee, together with the bond and insurance policies required by Section 5.44.140, and his or her agreement to be bound by and to comply with and do all things required of him or her by the provisions of this chapter and the franchise. Such acceptance and agreement shall be acknowledged by the grantee before a notary public, and shall be in form and content satisfactory to and approved by the city attorney. (Ord. 787 § 1, 1970)

 

5.44.080 Duration.
        A.    No franchise granted by the council under this chapter shall be for a term longer than ten years following the date of acceptance of such franchise by the grantee or the renewal thereof.

        B.     Any such franchise granted under this chapter may be terminated prior to its date of expiration by the council, in the event that the council shall have found, after ninety days’ notice of any proposed termination and public hearing that:

        1.     The grantee has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter or has, by act or omission, violated any term of condition of any franchise or permit issued under this chapter; or

        2.     Any provision of this chapter has become invalid or unenforceable, and that council further finds that such provision further constitutes a consideration material to the grant of the franchise. (Ord. 1712 § 1, 2010; Ord. 787 § 1, 1970)

 

5.44.090 Payments.
        A.    Any grantee granted a franchise under this chapter shall pay to the city during the life of such franchise a fee as set forth from time to time by resolution of the city council.

        B.     Within sixty days of the end of each calendar year, any grantee granted a franchise under this chapter shall file with the city a verified statement of its gross annual receipts derived from all of the grantee’s operations within the city pursuant to the franchise. (Ord. 1656, 2005)

 

5.44.100 Limitations.
        A.    No privilege or exemption shall be granted or conferred by any franchise granted under this chapter except those specifically prescribed herein.

        B.     Any such franchise shall be a privilege to be held in personal trust by the original grantee. It cannot, in any event, be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of in whole or in part, either by force or involuntary sale or by voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, without the prior consent of the city expressed by resolution, and then only under such conditions as may herein be prescribed. However, no such consent shall be required for a transfer in trust, mortgage or other hypothecation as a whole, to secure an indebtedness.

        C.     Time shall be of the essence of any franchise granted under this chapter. The grantee shall not be relieved of his obligation to comply promptly with any of the provisions of this chapter or by any failure of the city to enforce prompt compliance.

        D.    Any right or power in, or duty impressed upon, any officer, employee, department or board of the city shall be subject to transfer by the city to any other officer, employee, department or board of the city.

        E.     The grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city for loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of this chapter or of any franchise issued hereunder or because of its enforcement.

        F.     The grantee shall be subject to all requirements of city ordinances, rules, regulations and specifications heretofore or hereafter enacted or established.

        G.    Any franchise granted under this chapter shall be in lieu of any and all other rights, privileges, powers, immunities and authorities owned, possessed, controlled or exercisable by grantee or any successor to any interest of grantee in the city; and the acceptance of any franchise hereunder shall operate as between the grantee and the city, as an abandonment of any and all of such rights, privileges, powers, immunities and authorities within the city, to the effect that, as between the grantee and the city, any and all operation by a grantee of any commercial and industrial refuse collection in the city shall be, and shall be deemed and construed in all instances and respects to be, under and pursuant to the franchise, and not under or pursuant to any other right, privilege, power, immunity or authority whatsoever.

        H.    The grantee shall maintain an office within the city limits or at a location where subscribers may call without incurring added message or toll charges so that refuse collection service shall be promptly available to subscribers.

        I.      No person, firm or corporation in the existing service area of the grantee shall be arbitrarily refused service; provided, however, that the grantee shall not be required to provide service to any subscriber who does not pay the applicable fees or monthly service charges. (Ord. 787 § 1, 1970)

 

5.44.110 Uses permitted by grantee.
        A.    Any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall authorize and permit the grantee to engage in the business of collecting commercial, industrial and/or residential refuse in the city, and for the purpose of transporting the refuse, to travel upon the streets, alleys, and public ways and places now laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof and additions thereto in the city.

        B.     The right to use the streets, alleys, and public ways and places for the purposes set forth may be exclusive or nonexclusive and the city reserves the right to grant a similar use of the streets, alleys, public ways and places to any person at any time.

        C.     The grantee shall at all times during the life of its franchise, be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power by the city and to such reasonable regulation as the city shall hereafter, by resolution or ordinance, provide. (Ord. 1723 § 4, 2011; Ord. 787 § 1, 1970)

 

5.44.120 Rights reserved to city.
        A.    There is reserved to the city every right and power which is required to be herein reserved or provided by any ordinance of the city, and the grantee, by its acceptance of any franchise, agrees to be bound thereby and to comply with any action or requirements of the city in its exercise of such rights or power, heretofore or hereafter enacted or established.

        B.     Neither the grant of any franchise under this chapter nor any of the provisions contained herein shall be construed to prevent the city from granting any identical or similar franchise to any person, firm or corporation within all or any portion of the city.

        C.     There is reserved to the city the power to amend any section or part of this chapter so as to require additional or greater standards of operation, maintenance, or otherwise, on the part of the grantee.

        D.    Neither the granting of any franchise nor any provision hereof shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power of the city.

        E.     The council may do all things which are necessary and convenient in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this chapter and may determine any questions of fact which may arise during the existence of any franchise granted under this chapter. The director of public works is authorized and empowered to adjust, settle or compromise any controversy or charge arising from the operation of any grantee under this chapter, either on behalf of the city, the grantee or any subscriber in the best interest of the public. Either the grantee or any member of the public who may be dissatisfied with the decision of the director of public works may appeal the matter to the council for hearing and determination. The council may adjust, settle or compromise any controversy or cancel any charge arising from any provision of this chapter.

        F.     At the time of the granting of any franchise, the city council may  establish or approve all rates and charges allowable to grantee, and no such rates or charges shall be increased at any time after the granting of a franchise, except by authority of the council and upon written request of the grantee. (Ord. 787 § 1, 1970)

 

5.44.130 Bond requirements.
        A.    The grantee shall, concurrently with the filing of an acceptance of award of any franchise granted under this chapter, file with the city clerk, and at all times thereafter maintain in full force and effect for the term of such franchise or any renewal thereof, at grantee’s sole expense, a corporate surety bond, in a company and in a form approved by the city attorney, in the amount of ten thousand dollars, renewable annually, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of grantee, and upon further condition that in the event grantee shall fail to comply with one or more of the provisions of this chapter, or of any franchise issued to the grantee hereunder, there shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety of such bond any damages or loss suffered by the city as a result thereof, including the full amount of compensation indemnification, or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the grantee as prescribed hereby which may be in default plus a reasonable allowance for attorney’s fees and costs, up to the full amount of the bond; the condition to be a continuing obligation for the duration of such franchise and any renewal thereof and thereafter until the grantee has liquidated all of its obligations with the city that may have arisen from the acceptance of the franchise or renewal by the grantee or from its exercise of any privilege therein granted. The bond shall provide that sixty days prior written notice of intention not to renew, cancellation, or material change be given to the city.

        B.     Neither the provisions of this section nor any bond accepted by the city pursuant thereto, nor any damages recovered by the city thereunder shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the grantee or limit the liability of the grantee under any franchise issued hereunder or for damages, either to the full amount of the bond or otherwise. (Ord. 787 § 1, 1970)

 

5.44.140 Protection of city against liability required.
        A.    Indemnification. The grantee shall indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, bodies, commissions, agents and employees against and from any and all claims, demands, actions, suits, liabilities and judgments of every kind and nature and regardless of the merit of same, arising out of or related to the exercise or enjoyment of any refuse collection franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, regardless of any claimed or actual contributory negligence or conduct of any such indemnitee, and including, without affecting the scope of the foregoing, and not limited to claims, demands, actions, liabilities and judgments based upon unfair competition or alleged unfair competition or any infringement or violation, and grantee shall reimburse the city and any other such indemnitee for any costs and expenses incurred by them in defending against any such claim or demand or action, including any attorney fees, accountant fees, expert witness or consultant fees, court costs, per diem expenses, travel and living expenses; and grantee shall, upon demand of the city or any other such indemnitee, appear in and defend any and all suits, actions or other legal proceedings, whether judicial, quasi-judicial, administrative or otherwise, brought by third persons or duly constituted authorities against or affecting the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents or employees and arising out of or related to the exercise or enjoyment of such franchise, or the granting thereof by the city; the foregoing obligation shall exist and continue without reference to or limitation by the amount of any bond, policy of insurance, deposit, undertaking, or other security required hereunder; provided, that neither grantee nor city shall make or enter into any compromise or settlement of any claim, demand, action or suit without first giving the other ten days prior written notice of its intention to do so.

        B.     Upon acceptance of such franchise the grantee shall file with the city clerk and shall thereafter, during the entire term of such franchise, maintain in full force and effect, at its own expense, a general comprehensive liability insurance policy or policies which shall insure grantee and provide primary coverage for the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, against liability for loss or liability for personal injury, death, property damage (both automobile and nonautomobile caused), or other damages. Such policy or policies shall include insurance against damages from unfair competition, copyright, infringement (common law or statutory), and a failure of grantee to secure consents (etc.) occasioned by any activity or operation of grantee under such franchise and regardless of any claimed or actual activities of city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees. The city council, in any franchise granted, may waive the requirement for insurance from one or more perils mentioned in the last preceding sentence upon a finding that such insurance cannot be procured or cannot be procured at a reasonable cost, and in connection therewith may reduce the otherwise required limits on coverage hereafter set forth. Such policy shall contain the standard cross-liability endorsement. Such policy or policies shall be issued by a company approved by the director of public works and shall be in a form approved by the city attorney, with a public liability policy with five million dollars and ten million dollars limits and a property damage insurance policy of five hundred thousand dollars for the benefit of third persons who may be injured or damaged as a result of the operations of the grantee. The policies shall name the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, as additional insured and shall contain a provision that a written notice of any cancellation, modification or reduction in coverage of the policy shall be delivered to the city clerk thirty days in advance of the effective date thereof. No franchise granted under this chapter shall be effective unless and until each of the foregoing policies of insurance as required in this subsection has been delivered to the city clerk. Any substitute policy or policies shall be subject to the same approvals and shall comply with all the provisions of this subsection. (Ord. 1257, 1986; Ord. 787 § 1, 1970)

 

5.44.150 Inspection of property and records by city.
        A.    At all reasonable times, the grantee shall permit any duly authorized representative of the city to examine all property of the grantee, together with any appurtenant property of the grantee situated within or without the city, and to examine and transcribe any and all maps and other records kept or maintained by the grantee or under its control which deal with the operations, affairs, transactions or property of the grantee with respect to its franchise. If any such maps or records are not kept in the city, or upon reasonable request made available in the city, and if the council shall determine that an examination thereof is necessary or appropriate, then all travel and maintenance expense necessarily incurred in making such examination shall be paid by the grantee.

        B.     The grantee shall prepare and furnish to the director of public works, at the times and in the form prescribed by said officer, such reports with respect to its operations, affairs, transactions or property, as may be reasonably necessary or appropriate to the performance of any of the rights, functions or duties of the city or any of its officers in connection with the franchise.

        C.     The grantee shall keep up-to-date records at all times of establishments served, number of containers, number of weekly pickups, and other such information as may be required by the city. Such records shall be available to the city upon demand. (Ord. 787 § 1, 1970)

 

5.44.160 Equipment standards.
        A.    Any equipment used by the grantee shall be approved by the director of public works. Trucks shall not be used which are older than five years. Trucks shall be painted with the firm name in three-inch-high letters on the sides and shall be numbered.

        B.     No material shall be permitted to leak, fall or be spilled from trucks or bins. Any such leakage or spills shall be immediately corrected and the area involved cleaned of all refuse. Each truck shall be equipped with a shovel and broom for this purpose.

        C.     Bodies of all trucks shall be constructed of metal and shall be watertight so that no material can leak from the bodies. Truck bodies shall be closed when the vehicles are being used to transport their contents to the place of disposal.

        D.    Collections shall be made as quietly as possible and any unnecessarily noisy trucks or equipment shall not be used.

        E.     When economically feasible devices become available for reducing the noise normally associated with refuse collection, such as rubber fittings and bumpers, the city may require grantee to use them, and otherwise reasonably require grantee to operate within certain noise levels to be established in the future.

        F.     Trucks must conform to all vehicle code requirements. Substandard trucks shall not be allowed to operate in the city until repaired. The grantee’s trucks shall be inspected by the city at least every six months. More inspections may be required at the direction of the director of public works.

        G.    Bins shall be metal with lids and wheels. All bins shall be painted at least once a year and steam-cleaned upon need at the discretion of the director of public works. (Ord. 787 § 1, 1970)

 

5.44.170 Collection standards.
        A.    The grantee shall furnish all services, labor, materials and equipment necessary for the collection of commercial and industrial refuse within the present or future city limits of the city. The refuse shall be transported to the nearest available county dump to the city, or such other place as may be provided free of cost to the grantee. All duties shall be performed according to the highest standards of the trade.

        B.     Employees of the grantee who are unnecessarily noisy or who violate the provisions of the State Motor Vehicle Code of this code, in collection, shall be dismissed upon the demand of the director of public works.

        C.     Performance of each of the provisions herein shall be under the direction and supervision of the director of public works.

        D.    Collections shall be required on holidays, except when the county dump is closed. Collection shall not be allowed on Sunday, except upon written approval by the director of public works.

        E.     All trucks shall be cleaned thoroughly at least once each day and shall be disinfected by the use of live steam or a disinfectant approved by the city at least once a week.

        F.     Vehicles shall be operated in a safe manner. All vehicle code requirements shall be followed. (Ord. 787 § 1, 1970)

 

5.44.180 Service requests.
        The grantee shall receive all service requests and communications from subscribers. Records of all service requests and solution of same shall be kept by the grantee and presented to the city upon demand. (Ord. 787 § 1, 1970)

 

5.44.190 Fees and gratuities.
        The grantee shall not, nor shall he permit his agent or employee to, request, solicit, demand or accept, either directly or indirectly, any compensation or gratuity for the collection of refuse as defined in this chapter, except such compensation as herein provided. (Ord. 787 § 1, 1970)

 

5.44.200 Additional services by grantee.
        Additional services not included in this chapter may be provided by the grantee on an individual basis. These services and charges therefor shall be subject to the approval of the director of public works. (Ord. 787 § 1, 1970)

Chapter 5.46 PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND DEALERS, AND AUCTIONEERS
5.46.010 Definitions.
        As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:

        A.    “Auctioneer” means and includes any person, copartnership, firm or corporation who at public outcry offers for sale, as principal or agent, to the highest bidder on the spot any secondhand tangible personal property, except under trade by virtue of legal process.

        B.     “Pawnbroker” means and includes any person, copartnership, firm or corporation who engages in the business of receiving goods in pledge as security for a loan.

        C.     “Secondhand dealer” means and includes any person, copartnership, firm or corporation who engages in buying, selling, trading, taking in pawn, accepting for sale on consignment, accepting for auctioning, or auctioning secondhand tangible property.

        D.    “Tangible personal property” includes, but is not limited to, all secondhand tangible personal property which bears a serial number or personalized initials or inscription or which, at the time it is acquired by the secondhand dealer, bears evidence of having had a serial number or personalized initials or inscription. “Tangible personal property” also includes, but is not limited to, the following:

        1.     All tangible personal property, new or used, received in pledge as security for a loan by a pawnbroker or a secondhand dealer acting as a pawnbroker;

        2.     All tangible personal property that bears a serial number or personalized initials or inscription which is purchased by a secondhand dealer or a pawnbroker or which, at the time of such purchase, bears evidence of having had a serial number or personalized initials or inscription;

        3.     All personal property commonly sold by secondhand dealers which statistically is found through crime reports to the Attorney General to constitute a significant class of stolen property. A list of such personal property shall be supplied by the Attorney General to all local law enforcement agencies. Such lists shall be reviewed periodically by the Attorney General to insure that it addresses current problems with stolen goods.

        “Tangible personal property” does not include any new goods or merchandise purchased from a bona fide manufacturer or distributor or wholesaler of such new goods or merchandise by a secondhand dealer. For the purposes of this chapter, however, a secondhand dealer shall retain for one year from the date of purchase, and shall make available for inspection by any law enforcement officer, any receipt, invoice, bill of sale or other evidence of purchase of such new goods or merchandise.

        “Tangible personal property” does not include coins, monetized bullion, or commercial grade ingots of gold, silver, or other precious metals. “Commercial grade ingots” means .99 fine ingots of gold, silver, or platinum, or .925 fine sterling silver art bars and medallions; provided, that the ingots, art bars, and medallions are marked by the refiner or fabricator as to their assay fineness. (Ord. 1230 § 1, 1984)

 

5.46.020 Permit required.
        A.    No person, copartnership, firm or corporation shall conduct business as a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or auctioneer within the city without first obtaining a proper permit therefor, as provided in this chapter. The provisions of this chapter shall also apply to any business which is licensed pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 21640, et seq.

        B.     The permit shall be issued by the police department, but only after having been approved by the chief of police or his designee. (Ord. 1230 § 1, 1984)

 

5.46.030 Application for permit.
        Application for a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or auctioneer permit shall be made to the city clerk, who shall refer all such applications to the chief of police or his designee for an investigation. (Ord. 1230 § 1, 1984)

 

5.46.040 Application form.
        The form on which application shall be made for a permit hereto shall require the following information:

        A.    Name of the applicant and complete physical description, including date and place of birth;

        B.     Residence and business addresses of applicant;

        C.     Length of time for which a permit is desired;

        D.    A statement as to whether or not the applicant holds or has held a permit from any state, municipality, governing body, or licensing authority; a list of such permits and a statement of time, place and by whom issued; a statement as to whether any state, municipality, governing body or licensing authority has ever refused to issue or renew a permit to the applicant and if so, a full and accurate statement as to the reasons for any such refusal; a statement as to whether any state, municipality, governing body or licensing authority has ever revoked or suspended a permit held by the applicant and if so, a full and accurate statement as to the reasons for such revocation or suspension;

        E.     A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of any felony, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance, and if so, a full and accurate statement as to the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. (Ord. 1230 § 1, 1984)

 

5.46.050 Police investigation of applicant.
        The chief of police shall cause each applicant to be fingerprinted and photographed, a record of which shall be kept by the police department. The applicant shall pay the amount set by the state for processing of the fingerprints. The chief of police shall cause an investigation of each applicant to be made and if he determines that the applicant has knowingly made a material misstatement in the application for a permit or if he determines that the applicant, or any proposed employee of the applicant, has been convicted of a violation of any statute of this state or any ordinance of this city regulating pawnbrokers or secondhand dealers, or has been convicted of any crimes involving theft, receiving stolen property, embezzlement, fraud, false pretenses or immoral turpitude when such a conviction bears a reasonable connection to the business for which the permit is sought, he shall refuse to issue the permit. Any permit issued hereunder may be revoked for failure to maintain the standards required for issuance of same. (Ord. 1230 § 1, 1984)

 

5.46.060 Fee.
        The permit fee for each applicant shall be as established by resolution. (Ord. 1230 § 1, 1984)

 

5.46.070 Report of acquired property required.
        Every pawnbroker, secondhand dealer and auctioneer shall report all personal property which he has purchased, taken in trade, taken in pawn, accepted for sale consignment, or accepted for auctioning to the chief of police of the city, not later than twelve noon of the day following the acquisition of such property. (Ord. 1230 § 1, 1984)

 

5.46.080 Exceptions to required reporting.
        The following are secondhand goods excepted from the reporting requirements of Section 5.46.070:

        A.    Acquired in good faith in a transaction involving the stock in trade of another pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or auctioneer who has previously made the report or reports required by Sections 5.46.070 and 5.46.090 of such property included in the transaction and who states in writing that the report or reports so required have been made, and provided the acquiring pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or auctioneer submits a copy of such statement to the chief of police. Each of the pawnbrokers, secondhand dealers or auctioneers involved in the transactions shall retain a copy of the statement referred to in this section for a period of three years as a matter of record which shall be made available for inspection by any law enforcement officer;

        B.     Acquired in a nonjudicial sale, transfer, assignment, assignment for the benefit of creditors or consignment of the assets or stock in trade, in bulk, or a substantial part thereof, of an industrial or commercial enterprise for the purpose of voluntary dissolution or liquidation of the sellers’ business, or for the purpose of disposing of an excessive quantity of personal property; or which has been acquired in a nonjudicial sale or transfer from an owner of his entire household of personal property, or a substantial part thereof; provided, the pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or auctioneer retains in his place of business for a period of three years a copy of the bill of sale, receipt, inventory list or other transfer document as a matter of record which shall be made available for inspection by any law enforcement officer; and provided further, that the pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or auctioneer notifies the chief of police that the exemption from reporting is being claimed under this section. “Industrial or commercial enterprise” and “owner,” as used in this section, do not include a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, or auctioneer;

        C.     Acquired in a sale made by any public officer in his official capacity, trustee in bankruptcy, executor, administrator, receiver or public official acting under judicial process or authority, or which has been acquired in a sale made upon the execution of, or by virtue of, any process issued by a court or under the provisions of the Warehouse Receipts Act;

        D.    Acquired in good faith as part or complete payment for other personal property by a person whose principal business is primarily that of selling or trading personal property directly to the consumer; provided, however, that in such transaction no consideration other than stock in trade shall pass from the business enterprise to the person trading or exchanging the used item;

        E.     Acquired as surplus property of the United States Government or a state, city, county, city and county, municipal corporation or public district and which after requisition or acquisition by the United States Government or by a state, city, county, city and county, municipal corporation or public district has never thereafter been sold at retail;

        F.     Reported by a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or auctioneer as an acquisition or a purchase, or which has been reported as destroyed or otherwise disposed of, or:

        1.     To a state agency by the authority of any other law of this state, or

        2.     To a city, county, or city and county officer or agency by authority of any other law of this state, or a city, county, or city and county ordinance;

        G.    Acquired by gift and the person sells the property acquired by gift as a part of a charitable activity carried on by said person;

        H.    The provisions of this chapter have no application to a person whose sales of secondhand personal property are confined to the disposal of goods accepted in trade and as part payment of new merchandise; provided further, however, that such new merchandise is not then redeemable in cash to the person trading or exchanging the used item. (Ord. 1230 § 1, 1984)

 

5.46.090 Prescribed form of report.
        A permittee under this chapter shall utilize the forms prescribed by the police department or by the department of justice. (Ord. 1230 § 1, 1984)

 

5.46.100 Fingerprint to be recorded as part of record of transaction.
        Every pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or auctioneer shall cause the person selling, buying, trading, offering for consignment or auction, or offering as pledge for any loan tangible secondhand personal property to produce a clear and permanent record of said person’s fingerprint on the original form of the report as required in Section 5.46.090.

        A.    The fingerprint to be recorded shall be of the right thumb of said person.

        1.     If there is sufficient cause for said person’s right thumb not to be fingerprinted, a fingerprint shall be obtained from another finger, starting with the remaining fingers of the right hand and then the thumb or fingers of the left hand.

        B.     A fingerprint shall be recorded on each record of transaction.

        C.     No transaction shall be completed until such fingerprint has been recorded.

        D.    The fingerprint shall be recorded in the space provided on the original report form or on the reverse side of the original report form if no space is provided. (Ord. 1230 § 1, 1984)

 

5.46.110 Records to be kept.
        Every pawnbroker, secondhand dealer and auctioneer shall have a complete record of all personal property pledged to, purchased, received or sold by him, which record shall contain all the matters required to be shown in the reports referred to in Sections 5.46.070, 5.46.090 and 5.46.140. Every such record shall be open at all times during business hours to the inspection of any law enforcement officer. (Ord. 1230 § 1, 1984)

 

5.46.120 Reports and records to be in the English language.
        A.    Every report required by the terms of this chapter shall be entirely in the English language.

        B.     Every report and record required by the terms of this chapter shall be typed or printed in a clear and legible manner. (Ord. 1230 § 1, 1984)

 

5.46.130 Thirty-day hold of property.
        Every pawnbroker, secondhand dealer and auctioneer shall retain in his possession for a period of thirty days all personal property reported under the provisions of this chapter. The thirty-day holding period, with respect to such personal property, shall commence when the chief of police receives a report of its acquisition by the pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or auctioneer. A police officer of the city may require the pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or auctioneer, upon notice, written or verbal, to hold property which the police officer has reason to believe is stolen, for a period not to exceed ninety days from the date of placing such hold. Such property may be released only upon written authorization of a police officer of the city. The chief of police or his designee(s) may release any property covered by this chapter and waive any holding period therein, when determined in the public interest to do so. Any such release or waiver shall be in writing and signed by the chief of police or his designee(s) on an appropriate form designated by the police department for such purpose. (Ord. 1230 § 1, 1984)

 

5.46.140 Regulations when the customer is a minor.
        No person conducting business as a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or auctioneer shall buy, trade, accept for consignment or auction, or loan money for secondhand property from any person who is under eighteen years of age unless said person is accompanied by his parent, guardian, or other person in lawful custody of the person who is under eighteen years of age. The person conducting business as a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or auctioneer shall obtain the written permission, under penalty of perjury, from the parent, guardian or other person in lawful custody of the person who is under eighteen years of age before the person conducting a business shall buy, sell, trade, accept for consignment or auction, or loan money for secondhand property from any person who is under eighteen years of age. A copy of the written permission shall be included with the report which is required under Section 5.46.070. (Ord. 1230 § 1, 1984)

 

5.46.150 Signs.
        Every pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or auctioneer shall maintain on the premises where the business is located, a sign plainly printed in the English language, of sufficient size so that the same may be easily read from the sidewalk in front of the place of business, stating that he is a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or auctioneer. Where the business is conducted in a department of any building, the sign shall be placed at the entrance of the building. (Ord. 1230 § 1, 1984)

 

5.46.160 Engaging in more than one type of business.
        A.    If any person, copartnership, firm or corporation shall engage in, conduct, manage or carry on at the same time more than one of the businesses defined and referred to in this chapter, such person, copartnership, firm or corporation shall be deemed to be engaged in, conducting, managing and carrying on such businesses separate and apart from the other such business, and such person shall comply in all respects with the provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter relating to each such business.

        B.     No person, copartnership, firm or corporation doing business as a personal property broker or pawnbroker with or without a license from the Corporation Commission of the state, shall conduct such business, or any part thereof, in the same establishment or place of business used for the transacting of any other business or in any retail or wholesale store. No entrance to or exit from a place of business used by any personal property broker or pawnbroker shall open from that business into any other place of business, but any such entrance or exit shall open directly onto a public street or public place, except that on any floor above the street floor in an office building, an entrance to or exit from such place of business shall open directly onto the public hallway. (Ord. 1230 § 1, 1984)

 

5.46.170 Violation, misdemeanor—Penalties.
        A violation of the provisions of this code relating to pawnbrokers, secondhand dealers or auctioneers constitutes a misdemeanor.

        A.    In addition to the foregoing penalties, the city council may revoke or suspend the business license of any pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or auctioneer for failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter, or any local, state or federal enactment relating to business of a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or auctioneer.

        1.     No business license shall be revoked or suspended until a hearing shall have been had by the city council. Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing and served at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing, upon the holder of the license, his manager or agent.

        2.     The notice shall be served on the holder of the license by delivering same to the holder, his manager or agent, or to any person in charge of or so employed in the place of business of such holder or the residence of such holder.

        3.     If the holder of such license cannot be found and serving of such notice cannot be made upon him in the manner herein provided, then a copy of such notice shall be mailed, postage fully prepaid, addressed to such holder at such place of business or residence, at least ten days prior to the date of hearing.

        B.     When the license of any holder is revoked, the license shall remain revoked for a period of one year. Such holder shall not be eligible to obtain a license during the one-year period. (Ord. 1230 § 1, 1984)

Chapter 5.48 GAS, OIL, ELECTRIC, AND WATER PIPELINE FRANCHISES
5.48.010 Adoption of Franchise Act of 1937.
        The Franchise Act of 1937, located in Article 1 of Chapter 2 of Division 3 of the California Public Utilities Code, beginning with Section 6201, is adopted in its entirety as the governing code of the city, concerning the granting of oil, gas, electric and water pipeline franchises within the city. (Ord. 1599 § 1, 2001)

 

5.48.020 Pipeline franchise application process.
        A.    Every applicant for a new oil, gas, electric or water pipeline franchise, or for the transfer of an existing franchise, shall be required to fill out and submit an application in accordance with the requirements of the Franchise Act of 1937.

        B.     If, upon review of the application, the city council determines that it would like to grant the franchise, in accordance with Section 6232 of the California Public Utilities Code, the city council shall pass a resolution:

        1.     Stating its intention to grant the franchise;

        2.     Stating the character of the franchise to be granted;

        3.     Setting forth notice of a time and place where a public hearing will be held concerning the plan to grant the franchise; and

        4.     Directing the city clerk to publish the notice of the public hearing at least once within fifteen days after the passage of the resolution in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The public hearing must held not less than twenty days, nor more than sixty days after the date the resolution is passed. Content of the notice shall be in accordance with Section 6232 of the California Public Utilities Code.

        C.     Anyone who wishes to object to the granting of the proposed franchise, must deliver a written and signed protest to the city clerk, prior to the hour set for the public hearing. At the time of the hearing, the city council shall proceed to hear and pass on all objections properly received, and its decision shall be final and conclusive.

        D.    If at the time of the hearing no written protests are received, or if such protest have been heard and are determined by the city council to be insufficient, or have been otherwise denied, the city council may then grant the franchise. In accordance with Section 6234 of the California Public Utilities Code, the franchise must be granted by ordinance of the city council.

        E.     Between the time that the application is filed and the date set for the public hearing, the city manager shall be responsible for negotiating and finalizing a franchise agreement between the city and the proposed franchisee. At the point in time that the city council grants the franchise, the council shall also approve the franchise agreement, and incorporate its terms by reference into the granting ordinance. (Ord. 1599 § 1, 2001)

 

5.48.030 Pipeline franchise application—Transfer-fees.
        Each application for a new oil, gas, electric or water pipeline franchise, or for the transfer of an existing franchise, must be accompanied by a five thousand dollar application fee. The city council has determined that this application fee approximates the amount of expenses incurred by the city in processing and finalizing a franchise application. The fee is not intended, nor shall it be construed, as being in any way related to the annual franchise fee that must be paid pursuant to California Public Utilities Code Section 6231.5. (Ord. 1599 § 1, 2001)

 

5.48.040 Severability.
        If any section, subsection, clause or phrase or portion of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of all other provisions of this ordinance.

        The city council hereby declares that it would have passed the ordinance codified in this chapter, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more of the sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases or portions thereof be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 1599 § l, 2001)

Chapter 5.54 FILMING PERMITS
5.54.010 Definitions.
        “Charitable films” means commercials, motion pictures, television, videotapes, or still photography produced by a nonprofit organization, which qualifies under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code as a charitable organization. No person, directly or indirectly, shall receive a profit from the marketing and production of the film or from showing the films, tapes, or photos.

        “City” means the city of La Habra.

        “City council” means the city council of the city of La Habra.

        “City manager” means the city manager of the city of La Habra, or designee.

        “Commercial filming” means motion picture, television, still photography at the same location more than six days out of a period of ninety consecutive days for any purpose other than news purposes.

        “County” means the county of Orange, California.

        “Date of the notice” means the date indicated on the notice.

        “Director” means the city of La Habra’s director of community services or designee.

        “Limited filming” means motion picture, television, still photography at the same location for six or fewer days out of a period of ninety consecutive days.

        “Motion picture, television, still photography” means and includes all activity attendant to staging or shooting commercial motion pictures, television shows or programs, and commercials in any medium including film, tape or digital format.

        “News purposes” means the photographing, filming or videotaping for the purpose of spontaneous, unplanned television news broadcast or reporting for print media by reporters, photographers or cameramen, and which are intended for broadcast within twenty-four hours after the event.

        “Noise disturbance” means any sound which: (1) endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals; or (2) annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; or (3) endangers or injures personal or real property.

        “Obscene or lewd acts” means acts that to the average person applying contemporary statewide standards, when taken as a whole appeal to the prurient interest, and as a whole constitute patently offensive way sexual conduct, which lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.

        “Peak travel hours” means the hours of seven a.m. to eight-thirty a.m. and four-thirty p.m. to six p.m.

        “Person” means any individual, firm, corporation, association, group or combination acting as a unit, nonprofit entity, or government agency.

        “Student” means a person studying at a school or college and who can provide proof of enrollment.

        “Studio” means a fixed place of business where filming activities are regularly conducted upon the premises.

        “Traffic engineer” means the city of La Habra’s traffic engineer or designee. (Ord. 1704 § 1, 2009)

 

5.54.020 Filming—Permitted zones.
        A.    Limited filming shall be permitted in all zones.

 

        B.     Commercial filming shall be permitted in C and M zones, subject to a use permit.

        C.     Commercial filming shall be permitted in R zones, subject to written permission by seventy-five percent of the property owners or residents within a two hundred fifty foot radius of the proposed film location property lines, and subject to approval by the director. (Ord. 1704 § 1, 2009)

5.54.030—5.54.050

5.54.030 Commercial or limited filming—Permit required.
        A.    A permit shall be required for commercial or limited filming on private property within the city.

        B.     A permit shall be required for commercial or limited filming on any city street, alley, sidewalk, park, off-street parking facility, public right-of-way or other public property.

        C.     All filming on any public property within city boundaries and that is not owned or controlled by the city shall require written permission and any applicable permits from the public entity that has jurisdiction over that property. A public entity can include, but is not limited to, a school district, community college district, county or state agency, and the California Department of Transportation. (Ord. 1704 § 1, 2009)

 

5.54.040 Exceptions to permit requirement.
        The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to filming for the following purposes:

        A.    News purposes, provided that filming is for less than six days out of a period of ninety consecutive days;

        B.     Private family use;

        C.     Criminal investigations, civil proceedings or emergencies such as fires, flood or police actions;

        D.    Education, government and public access and local original programs for cable television systems franchised within the city;

        E.     Filming by the city itself (for example, video taping of sewer lines and promotional filming);

        F.     Filming that is being conducted on private property, completely inside an enclosed building or structure, and that is not viewable from adjoining public or private property, with a cast and crew of four or fewer people, who are using two or fewer motor vehicles in connection with the filming, and there are no pyrotechnics, use of hazardous materials, open flames, special effects smoke or use of vehicles inside buildings associated with the filming; however, an application form shall be submitted as provided for, and such filming shall nonetheless comply with these provisions;

        G.    Filming conducted entirely inside a studio;

        H.    Charitable films shall be subject to the permit requirements but are exempt from any and all fees pursuant to this chapter;

        I.      Students shall be subject to the permit requirements but are exempt from any and all fees pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1704 § 1, 2009)

 

5.54.050 Permit—Application.
        A.    Any person desiring to use any public property or facility or any private property for commercial or limited filming shall file an application for a permit with the director, on a form furnished by the city, not less than thirty days before the date on which such person desires to conduct such activity. The director may in his or her discretion waive the requirement that applications be filed no less than thirty days prior to the date on which the activity is to be conducted.

        B.     The application shall be verified and shall set forth the following information:

        1.     The name, address and telephone number of the person wishing to conduct commercial or limited filming;

        2.     The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be in charge of the commercial or limited filming and be responsible for its conduct;

        3.     The date or dates and hours when such filming, commercial or limited, is to be conducted;

        4.     The approximate time when such filming, commercial or limited, will begin and end;

        5.     The location or locations within the city where such filming, commercial or limited, will take place;

        6.     The approximate number of persons who will engage in the filming, including commercial and limited;

        7.     A list of major equipment to be used, including but not limited to trucks, buses, limousines and cameras;

        8.     A general statement of the character or nature of the proposed filming;

        9.     A description, if applicable, of what is to be built for pyrotechnics or stunts;

        10.   A traffic control plan approved by the traffic engineer must be prepared to ensure the orderly movement of traffic through or around any area in which filming is to occur. The traffic control plan shall also include street parking restriction requirements in the event production vehicles and/or equipment shall be parked on city streets;

        11.   Proof of liability insurance in an amount not less than one million dollars naming the city as a coinsured for protection against claims of third persons for personal injuries, wrongful deaths, and property damage. The city officers and employees shall be named as additional insured. The certificate shall not be subject to cancellation or modification until after thirty days written notice to the city. A copy of the certificate will remain on file. The director has the authority to increase or decrease the insurance amount requirement if he or she deems it appropriate, in light of the scope, duration, and location of the filming;

        12.   Worker’s Compensation Insurance. An applicant shall conform to all applicable federal and state requirements for worker’s compensation insurance for all persons operating under a permit;

        13.   The application shall be accompanied by an application fee as shall be established, and amended from time to time, by city council resolution;

        14.   The application shall be accompanied by any use fees required for use of any public property, including park or other city facility, as shall be established, and amended from time to time, by city council resolution. (Ord. 1704 § 1, 2009)

 

5.54.060 Permit—Conditions.
        All filming permits shall be subject to the following conditions:

        A.    Permittee shall agree to hold harmless, indemnify and defend the city, its officers, agents, and employees with respect to any claims or suits for damages caused by, asserted to be caused by, arising out of, or in any way connected with exercise by the applicant of the rights granted by the permit, except those arising out of the sole negligence of the city.

        B.     Permittee shall comply with all applicable provisions of the La Habra Municipal Code, as well as state and federal law.

        C.     Permittee shall submit to municipal safety inspections.

        D.    Permittee shall pay for, prior to commencement of filming, any estimated costs incurred by the city for any necessary service in conjunction with the issuance and use of the permit, including, but not limited to, police services and traffic control, as shall be established and amended from time to time by city council resolution.

        E.     Filming shall not obstruct ingress to or egress from any private property, unless the signatures of one hundred percent of the property owners and tenants whose properties would be affected have been obtained.

        F.     Filming shall reasonably allow access to or use of any public property, including streets and sidewalks abutting the property where the filming is to occur.

        G.    Traffic Control.

        1.     For filming that would impede traffic flow, an applicant must use La Habra police department personnel and comply with all traffic control requirements deemed necessary.

        2.     A permittee shall furnish and install advance warning signs and any other traffic control devices in conformance with the Manual of Traffic Controls, state of California Department of Transportation. All appropriate safety precautions must be taken.

        3.     Traffic may be restricted to one twelve-foot lane of traffic and/or stopped intermittently, except during peak traffic hours.

        4.     Traffic shall not be detoured across a double line without prior approval of the police department, traffic division.

        5.     Unless authorized by the city, the camera cars must be driven in the direction of traffic and must observe all traffic laws.

        H.    All aspects of production shall occur between six a.m. and ten p.m.

        I.      All activity associated with the filming shall not cause any noise disturbance.

        J.      Any lighting used during filming or for related purposes shall not intrude into yards or buildings of an adjoining property.

        K.    Permittee shall obtain any applicable permits from the Los Angeles County fire department authorizing filming and all associated pyrotechnics, hazardous materials, open flames, special effects smoke and vehicle usage inside buildings. Filming shall be conducted in accordance with all fire safety restrictions ordered by the Los Angeles County fire department.

        L.     Permittee shall not film, or cause or allow to be filmed, nudity or obscene or lewd acts within public view.

        M.    Permittee shall use La Habra police department personnel during hours of filming and related activities to ensure compliance with permit conditions and to mitigate any parking, noise, congestion or other problems that would affect the surrounding areas. A minimum of one police personnel shall be used at all times, with the actual number of personnel to be determined by the chief of police. The chief of police may waive the requirement based upon his or her sole determination of the necessity of police personnel. Permittee shall be responsible for all costs associated with the use of La Habra police personnel.

        N.    Clean Up.

        1.     The permittee shall conduct operations in an orderly fashion with continuous attention to the storage of equipment not in use and the cleanup of trash and debris. The area used shall be cleaned of trash and debris upon completion of shooting at the scene and restored to the original condition before leaving the site.

        2.     To ensure cleanup and restoration of the site, a permittee may be required to submit a refundable security deposit in an amount to be determined by the director based upon the scope, location and duration of the filming. Upon completion of filming and inspection of the site by the city, the security deposit may be returned to the applicant.

        O.    Flood Control. When filming in a flood control channel, an applicant must obtain permission from the Orange County flood control district and vacate the channel when permit indicates because of water releases. When filming in or on flood control properties, the flood control district must be named as an additional insured.

        P.     Public Works Department (Road and Streets).

        1.     If the applicant must park equipment, trucks, and/or cars on streets or highways, temporary “No Parking” signs must be posted no less than seventy-two hours prior to the date. The applicant must also obtain permission to string cable across sidewalks, or from generator to service point.

        2.     Any emergency roadwork or construction by city crews and/or private contractors, under permit or contract to the appropriate department, shall have priority over filming activities.

        Q.    Public Parking Lots. When parking in a public parking lot, a permittee may be billed according to the current rate schedule established by the city. In order to assure the safety of citizens in the surrounding community, fire lanes and any traffic lanes that serve as emergency service roads must never be blocked. No relocation, alteration, or moving of any existing structures will be permitted without prior approval.

        R.     Notification. All residents and merchants within a two hundred fifty feet radius of the film location must receive notice of filming at least twenty-four hours prior to the first day of filming. The notice must include the permittee’s name, city permit number, contact information, general description of activities, and hours of filming.

        S.     Residential Zone Approval. Commercial filming within any R zone in the city requires written permission by seventy-five percent or more of the property owners, businesses and residential tenants within a two hundred fifty foot radius of the proposed filming location. Written permission may be in the form of signatures on a standard form that includes no less than the following information: permittee’s name, contact information, general description of filming activities and hours and dates of filming. (Ord. 1704 § 1, 2009)

5.54.070—5.54.080

5.54.070 Permit—Decision to grant, conditionally grant or deny.
        A.    The director shall investigate and grant, conditionally grant, or deny an application for a permit within the time limits set forth in this section.

        B.     The director shall determine the completeness of an application within five working days of its submittal to the city. If the director determines that the application is not complete, he or she shall notify the applicant in writing that the application is not complete and the reasons therefor, including any additional information necessary to render the application complete. Such notification by the director may be sent by hand delivery, via facsimile, or deposited in the U.S. mail or postage prepaid.

        C.     Within five working days following receipt of an amended application or supplemental information, the director shall determine whether the application is complete in accordance with the procedures set forth above. If an amended application is not filed with the city within fifteen days of the date of the notice to the applicant, the application shall be deemed to have been withdrawn and the applicant will be required to submit a new application to the city.

        D.    Upon receiving a completed application, the director shall direct city staff to conduct an investigation to determine whether the permit shall be approved. The investigation shall include consultation with the building, police, parks, public works and fire departments and inspection of the premises on which filming is proposed.

        E.     The director or designee shall render a written decision within fifteen calendar days of the submission of a completed application. Once a decision is made the applicant shall be notified in writing forthwith.

        F.     Additional time, beyond what is provided for in this section, may be requested by the permit applicant to amend an incomplete application. Reasonable or justifiable extensions of time shall be granted, up to thirty days. Extensions of time sought by applicants shall not be considered a delay on the part of the city or constitute failure by the city to provide for prompt decisions on applications.

        G.    A permit may be denied for the following reasons:

        1.     A complete application is not submitted;

        2.     The applicant, or his or her predecessor, employer, or agent, has been convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter during the preceding twelve months;

        3.     The applicant has failed to submit the required fees;

        4.     The applicant has failed to obtain any necessary permits or written permissions;

        5.     The city has already issued a filming permit for a location, date, and/or time that conflicts with the applicant’s request.

        H.    If the permit is denied, the written decision shall state the reasons for the denial. (Ord. 1704 § 1, 2009)

 

5.54.080 Permit denial appeal.
        A.    Any person aggrieved by the director’s decision shall have the right to appeal the decision to the city manager. An appeal must be in writing and submitted within ten calendar days from the date of the denial of the filming permit, along with the appeal fee, in the amount set forth by resolution of the city council.

        B.     The city manager shall set a hearing within ten days from the date the written request is received by the city.

        C.     The formal rules of evidence shall not apply. All relevant evidence may be considered, and the hearing officer has the discretion to exclude evidence if he or she finds such evidence to be irrelevant or needlessly repetitive. The hearing officer has the authority to cut off presentation of evidence if he or she reasonably believes that the evidence being presented is irrelevant or needlessly repetitive.

        D.    After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the city manager shall issue a written decision to grant, or deny the permit and shall list in the decision the reasons for that decision. The decision of the city manager shall be final.

        E.     The city manager’s written decision shall be served on the appellant within five calendar days from the date of the hearing by mailing to the appellant by certified mail, return receipt requested, via the U.S. mail. Service of the city manager’s decision shall be deemed to have been completed on the date of mailing. (Ord. 1704 § 1, 2009)

5.54.090—5.54.100

5.54.090 Permit—Judicial review of decision to grant or deny.
        The time for a challenge to a decision of the city manager in a court of law is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6.

        Notice of the city manager’s decision and findings shall include citation to California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6. (Ord. 1704 § 1, 2009)

 

5.54.100 Permit—Revocation.
        A.    Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be revoked summarily on the basis of any one or more of the following:

        1.     Filming or related activity has been conducted in a manner which violates one or more of the conditions imposed upon the issuance of the permit, including failure to conform to the plans and procedures described in the application, or violation of the occupant load limits or other restrictions established by the Los Angeles County fire department;

        2.     The permittee has failed to obtain or maintain all required city, county and state licenses and permits;

        3.     The permit is being used to conduct an activity other than that for which it was issued;

        4.     The permittee has misrepresented a material fact in the application;

        5.     Private property owner(s) and/or tenant(s) on whose property the filming was permitted have withdrawn consent to the filming.

        B.     The city officer who summarily revokes the permit on any of the enumerated bases shall advise the permit holder of the basis or bases for the revocation.

        C.     The permit holder may appeal the revocation decision to the city manager, who shall hold an appeal hearing within forty-eight hours.

        D.    The city manager shall issue his or her decision to uphold the permit revocation or reinstate the permit within twenty-four hours of the public hearing. The city manager’s decision shall be in writing and shall be final. Such written decision shall include findings upon which the decision is based. (Ord. 1704 § 1, 2009)

Title 6 ANIMALS
Chapter 6.04 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 6.08 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 6.12 IMPOUNDMENT
Chapter 6.16 DOG AND ANIMAL LICENSING
Chapter 6.20 CARE AND KEEPING OF DOGS
Chapter 6.22 CARE AND KEEPING OF CATS, OTHER ANIMALS AND BEES
Chapter 6.24 DISEASED AND CRIPPLED ANIMALS
Chapter 6.30 PERMITS
Chapter 6.40 PET SHOPS
Chapter 6.50 STABLES

Chapter 6.04 DEFINITIONS
6.04.001 Definitions generally.
        For the purpose of this title, the following words and phrases are defined and shall be construed as set out in this chapter unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended. The present tense includes the past and future tense; each gender includes the other. The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.04.010 Animal.
        “Animal” means any animal, mammal, bird, reptile, fish, or any other dumb creature or any live vertebrate creature other than a human being. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.04.020 Animal shelter.
        “Animal shelter” means the facility designated by the council to receive care and cause a proper disposition of those animals that come under the care of the city by virtue of the duties imposed upon the animal control officer(s) by this title. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.04.030 Animal control officer.
        “Animal control officer” means those persons employed by the city and empowered by the chief of police whose duties relate to the enforcement of laws and ordinances concerning animals. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.04.040 Bird.
        “Bird” means any bird of any age of either sex, including any fowl, exotic or domestic bird. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.04.050 Cat.
        “Cat” means any cat of any age of either sex.

(Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.04.060 Dog.
        “Dog” means any dog of any age of either sex.

(Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.04.070 Exotic animal.
        “Exotic animal” means any non-native animal not normally considered being a domestic animal, fowl or livestock. Such animals might include but are not limited to an alligator, crocodile, caiman or other large reptile including snakes, a chimpanzee, monkey or other primate, a lion, tiger cheetah, ocelot or other large cat, an ostrich, pea fowl or other large bird. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.04.080 Fowl.
        “Fowl” means a bird usually raised for consumption. In this environment a fowl could include but is not limited to chicken, duck, goose, turkey, pigeon, quail, or pheasant. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.04.090 Grooming shop or parlor.
        “Grooming shop or parlor” means any person, firm, or corporation operating a business or establishment where customers take their animals to be washed, clipped, or groomed. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.04.100 Impounded.
        “Impounded” means having been taken or received into the custody of the animal control officer or any authorized agent or representative thereof, or any police officer of the city (31607 F&A). (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.04.110 Kennel.
        “Kennel” means any lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises whereon four or more dogs, or cats are being kept, boarded or maintained. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.04.120 Livestock.
        “Livestock” means any cattle, goat, sheep, swine, or other animals raised primarily for consumption and any horse, mule donkey, burro or other equine. It does not include those species that are usually kept as pets, such as dogs, cats, and pet birds. (18663 — Food & Agriculture Code). (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.04.130 Owner or responsible person.
        “Owner or responsible person” means any person having custody, care and control of any dog or cat or other common household pet for ten consecutive days shall be deemed the owner or responsible person of such animal, except any veterinarian, or kennel operator having in his possession or control any animal for the purpose of treatment or other care. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.04.140 Potentially dangerous dog.
        “Potentially dangerous dog” means any dog which: (a) when unprovoked, on two separate occasions within the prior thirty-six month period engaged in any behavior that required a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury when the person and the dog were off the property of the owner or keeper of the dog, (b) when unprovoked has bitten a person causing a minor injury, or (c) when unprovoked, on two separate occasions within the prior thirty-six month period, has killed, seriously bitten, inflicted injury or otherwise caused injury to another domestic animal while off the property of the owner or keeper of the dog (31602 F&A). (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.04.150 Quarantine.
        “Quarantine” means isolation of a dog or other animal in an enclosure or other environment so that the dog or animal cannot be subject to other animals or unauthorized persons. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.04.160 Pet shop.
        “Pet shop” means any person, firm, or corporation operating an establishment where live animals, including fish, are kept for sale, for hire, or sold. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.04.170 Unlicensed dog.
        “Unlicensed dog” means any dog over the age of four months upon which the current plate or tag provided for in this title is not attached. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.04.180 Vicious dog.
        “Vicious dog” means: (a) Any dog seized under section 599aa of the Penal Code (Dog Fighting) and upon conviction of the dog’s owner or keeper for violations of section 597.5(a) of the Penal Code, (b) Any dog which, when unprovoked, in an aggressive manner inflicts a severe injury (31604 F&A) on or kills a human being, or (c) Any dog previously determined to be and currently listed as a “potentially dangerous dog” (6.04.140) which, after its owner or keeper has been notified of this determination, continues or repeats the behavior described in Section 6.04.140, or is kept or maintained in accordance with the provisions established through the declaration hearing as described in Section 6.20.200. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.04.190 Wild animal.
        “Wild animal” means any amphibian, bird, fish, mammal, reptile or other animal which is not normally domesticated in this state; or any non-domestic, or untrained animal which because of its size, natural disposition, or other characteristic constitutes a hazard or menace to persons or other animals, or is likely to damage property. Such animals might include but are not limited to a bear, cougar, wolf or coyote, ferret, opossum, raccoon, skunk, squirrel or weasel, or an eagle, hawk, falcon or other bird of prey. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

Chapter 6.08 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
6.08.010 Animal shelter established.
        A.    An animal shelter shall be established or designated by resolution of the city council to receive, care and disposition animals in accordance with the laws of the state and the provisions of this title.

        B.     Information as to the name, location, telephone number and hours of operation of the designated animal shelter shall be made available to the public through the city and the police department. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.08.020 Badge of animal control officer—Interference with animal control officer.
        A.    Animal control officers appointed by the chief of police shall possess, while engaged in the discharge of their duties, badges plainly designating their office; except, that when any police officer acts as an animal control officer his or her badge as police officer shall be sufficient.

        B.     It is unlawful for any person to hinder, molest, resist or interfere with the animal control officer in the performance of his official duties or to physically attempt to release the animals in his custody. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.08.030 Enforcement authority.
        Upon the issuance of an animal control officer badge, the recipient thereof shall be duly sworn in as a public officer or employee of the city, as authorized by the Penal Code, and is charged with the duty of enforcing this code and all ordinances of the city and the penal laws of the state relating to the care, treatment or impounding of dumb animals or for the prevention of cruelty thereto. Such recipient shall be deemed to be a member of the police department of the city and shall function under the direction and supervision of the chief of police. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.08.040 Authority to enter premises.
        A.    Whenever it is necessary to cause an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of or perform any duty imposed by this title or other applicable law, or whenever the animal control officer or a police officer has reasonable cause to believe that there exists a violation of this title or other applicable law, the animal control officer or a police officer is authorized to enter such property or premises at any reasonable time to inspect the property or premises and perform any duty imposed by this title or other applicable law.

        1.     If such property or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials to an occupant, explain his purpose and request entry.

        2.     If such property or premises is unoccupied he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate and/or contact the owner or person responsible for the property or premises, explain his purpose, and request entry.

        3.     If such entry is refused or cannot be obtained, the animal control officer or police officer shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure lawful entry and inspect the property.

        B.     Not withstanding the provisions set forth in subsections (A) if the animal control officer or a police officer has reasonable cause to believe that the keeping or maintaining of any animal is so hazardous, unsafe or dangerous as to require immediate inspection or action to safeguard the animal or the public safety, he shall have the right to immediately enter and inspect such property or premises, and may use any reasonable means required to effect such entry and inspection.

        C.     For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by Section 6.08.030, animal control officer(s) and/or police officer(s) are authorized and directed to enter upon and inspect, in accordance with the procedures provided by law, any premises upon which any dog or dangerous animal is kept or harbored, and to demand the person owning or having charge or control of the dog or dangerous animal to exhibit such dog or animal and its license tag, rabies certificate, or permit if a permit is required by this title or state law. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.08.050 Mutual aid authority.
        Upon approval of the chief of police the animal control officer may seek the assistance of other duly authorized animal control officer(s), or peace officer(s) to assist in the administration and/or enforcement of the provisions of this title. Likewise, upon proper request and approval of the chief of police, the animal control officer(s) may provide assistance to another animal control agency. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.08.900 Penalty.
        Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful and constitutes a misdemeanor for any person to violate, or fail to comply with any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

Chapter 6.12 IMPOUNDMENT
6.12.010 Impoundment duties.
        It is the duty of the animal control officer or a police officer of the city when the animal control officer is not on duty, to capture those dogs, cats and other animals when they are found or kept in violation of the provisions of this title. Upon capture, the animal control officer or police officer should, when possible and prudent, deliver the dog, cat or other animal to the person who is determined to be the owner or person responsible for the dog, cat or other animal. When it is not possible or prudent to return the dog, cat or other animal to the owner or responsible person, the animal should normally be taken to and lodged at the designated animal shelter. Nothing in this section prohibits the animal control officer or a police officer from issuing the owner or responsible person a citation for any applicable violation or the recovery of any legally established fees. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.12.020 Sick or injured animals.
        It is the duty of the animal control officer or a police officer to deliver all sick and injured cats and dogs, found in a public place without their owners, to a veterinarian known by such officer or agency to be a veterinarian that ordinarily treats dogs and cats, for a determination of whether the animal shall be immediately and humanely destroyed or shall be hospitalized under proper care and given emergency treatment. The duty created pursuant to this section shall not be considered as a mandatory duty for purposes of the California Torts Claim Act. Nothing in this section prohibits the animal control officer or a police officer from issuing the owner or responsible person a citation for any applicable violation or the recovery of any legally established fees. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.12.030 Neglected animals.
        Whenever animals are kept within any building or on any premises without food, water, or proper care and attention, the animal control officer or a police officer may enter the building or premises to remove and impound the neglected animals in accordance with the procedures provided by law. Nothing in this section prohibits the animal control officer or a police officer from issuing the owner or responsible person a citation for any applicable violation or the recovery of any legally established fees. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.12.040 Quarantine.
        Whenever the animal control officer is informed that a dog or wild animal has bitten a human being, or suspects that the animal is infected with rabies, he shall act to locate and confine such animal. At the discretion of the animal control officer, any animal which bites or otherwise exposes a person shall be isolated in strict confinement in a place and manner approved by the animal control officer and observed for the proper term to assure that the animal has not been infected with the disease. All costs related to such confinement shall be the responsibility of the owner of the dog or animal. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.12.050 Records of impounded animals.
        The animal control shelter shall keep a record of each animal impounded, the date of receipt of such animal, the date and manner of its disposal, and, if redeemed, reclaimed or sold, the name of the person by whom redeemed, reclaimed or purchased, the address of such person, and the amounts of all fees received or collected for or because of the impounding, reclaiming, or purchasing thereof, together with the number of any tag, and the date of any license exhibited or issued upon the redemption or sale of any such animal. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.12.060 Impounding fees.
        For any dogs found running at large and impounded by the city, the city shall charge and receive from the owner or responsible person fees for impounding and providing necessary care for the impounded animal as established per resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.12.070 Reclaiming animals.
        Any animal may be reclaimed by the owner or person entitled to its control before the sale or other disposition thereof by paying all fees and charges that have been incurred or accrued up to the time of reclamation. Any and all fees may be waived by the animal control officer if the owner of a dog or a cat agrees to and does spay and/or neuter the animal in question; all surgery fees will be collected in lieu of redemption fees. Nothing in this section shall prevent the issuance of a citation or complaint for any violation of law. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

Chapter 6.16 DOG AND ANIMAL LICENSING
6.16.010 License and tag.
        No person shall keep or cause to be kept any dog that is over the age of four months within the city for more than thirty days unless the dog is licensed as provided in this title and has around its neck a collar to which is attached a plate or tag as provided by this title. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.16.012 Voluntary licensing of animals.
        Any owner of a domestic or permitted animal other than a dog may voluntarily license such animal for identification purposes upon payment of a fee as established per resolution of the city council. Such animals are not required to provide proof of rabies vaccination. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.16.020 Application, term, form, transferability.
        A.    Application for a dog or animal license shall be made to the city finance director or his designated representative on the form provided by such officer and shall be accompanied by a certificate of anti-rabies vaccination for any dog to be licensed. Each application for a dog license tag shall state the age, sex, color, and breed of the dog for which the license is desired and the address of the owner (30802 F&A).

        B.     The term of any dog license issued under this chapter commences on the date of the issuance of the license and shall terminate on or before the expiration date of the certificate of anti-rabies vaccination accompanying the application for the dog license.

        C.     The person to whom the license is to be issued pursuant to this subdivision may choose a license period as of up to one, two, or three years. However, when issuing a license pursuant to this subdivision, the license period shall not extend beyond the remaining period of validity for the current rabies vaccination.

        D.    All dog or animal licenses issued under this chapter shall be numbered and shall be in such form as provided by the finance director.

        E.     Upon approval of the application, payment of the applicable license fee, and payment of any applicable late fee, the finance director or his designated representative shall issue the dog or animal license in the name of the owner or possessor of the dog or animal to be licensed. Such license shall not be transferable to another owner or possessor and shall not be valid for another dog or animal. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.16.030 License fee, late fee, refunds.
        A.    The fee for a dog license issued under this chapter, except as provided in subsections (B), (C), (D) and (E) below, shall be as established per resolution of the city council. All such license taxes shall be paid to or collected by the finance director shall be credited to the general fund.

        B.     The license fee for spayed female dogs and neutered male dogs shall be one-half (fifty percent), or less of the fee listed in the municipal schedule for subsection (A) (38792 GC).

        C.     A citizen over the age of sixty-two years shall be charged one-half of any license fee noted herein.

        D.    No person having impaired hearing or eyesight shall be required to pay any license fee for any dog specially trained and principally used for the purpose of leading or guiding such person.

        E.     Licenses for active or retired police service dogs shall be issued without charge.

        F.     If a person fails to obtain a dog license within ten days after service of a written notice on him that such license is required, or thirty days after the expiration of a dog license or after acquiring a dog, or moving into the city limits with a dog, then a late fee as established per resolution of the city council shall be charged in addition to the applicable license fee.

        G.    Once remitted, licensing fees shall not be refunded except upon mistake or duplication by city staff. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.16.040 Tag specifications, records.
        A plate or tag with an identification number inscribed thereon shall be furnished to the owner or possessor of the dog/animal to be licensed with each initial license. Such identification number shall not be transferable to another dog. The finance director shall keep a record of identification numbers, licenses issued, a general description of each dog for which an identification number and license are issued, and the name, address and telephone number of the owner or possessor of each dog for which an identification number and license are issued. It shall be the responsibility of every dog owner to ensure that the finance director has on file the current address and telephone number for the owner of any licensed dog. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.16.060 Duplicate tags.
        Whenever any plate or tag as provided in this chapter is lost or stolen, the city finance director may issue a duplicate upon application therefore and upon the payment of a fee as established per resolution of the city council and the filing of an affidavit by the owner or possessor of said dog or animal to the effect that such tag or plate was lost or stolen. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.16.900 Penalty.
        Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful and constitutes an infraction for any person to violate, or fail to comply with any provision of this chapter. A second or subsequent violation of any section within this chapter may, at the discretion of the animal control officer, chief of police, city attorney or district attorney, constitute a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

Chapter 6.20 CARE AND KEEPING OF DOGS
6.20.010 Vaccination—Rabies.
        Every owner of a dog over four months of age shall cause such dog to be vaccinated with an anti-rabies vaccine approved by the state department of public health. Revaccination shall be made at such intervals of time as may be prescribed by the State Department of Public Health. Any animal may be exempted from the rabies vaccination requirement upon approval of the animal control officer, and upon presentation of an affidavit from a licensed veterinarian stating that, in the opinion of such veterinarian, the vaccination would be injurious to the health and well-being of such animal. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.20.020 Failure to comply—Impoundment.
        Every dog not wearing a collar to which is attached a valid license plate or tag provided under this title, found or being on a public place within the city, shall be taken by an animal control officer or a police officer and impounded in the animal shelter, or delivered to the owner (if known), whereupon it may be reclaimed by the owner or person entitled to its possession within the term prescribed by law after impounding. If not claimed, such dog shall be dispositioned in accordance with the shelter’s policies. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.20.030 Redemption.
        Whenever a dog is redeemed, the party redeeming the dog must pay for any fees and costs related to the care of the dog, any licensing fees due for the current year, late fees and all charges for feed and care, any inoculations and/or neutering costs (if needed). (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.20.040 Number of dogs and female dogs permitted.
        A.    No person shall keep or maintain more than four dogs that have attained the age of four months, at any street address within the city unless the person, family, or group of persons keeping or maintaining such dogs is operating a bona fide animal clinic or hospital or a duly licensed pet shop, dog kennel, circus, carnival, traveling show, menagerie, or dog exhibition at such street address.

        B.     No person shall keep or maintain more than one unspayed female dog at any street address within the city unless the person, family, or group of persons keeping or maintaining such dogs is operating a bona fide animal hospital or a duly licensed pet shop, dog kennel, circus, carnival, traveling show, menagerie, or dog exhibition at such street address or has obtained a breeding permit (Section 6.20.050). (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.20.050 Breeding permit required.
        Any person owning or having control, custody, charge or possession of more than one female dog for breeding purposes shall secure a breeding permit from the animal control officer as prescribed in Chapter 6.30 of this title. The fee for such permit shall be as established per resolution of the city council. A dog shall be deemed to be used for breeding purposes if the animal has more than one litter per year. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.20.060 Transfer of ownership or possession—Notice required.
        Each owner or operator of any dog kennel, animal hospital or pet shop, and any person engaged in the business of breeding dogs or as a veterinarian who sells, gives away or in any manner causes the ownership or permanent possession of any dog, whether over four months of age or not, to be transferred to any person, shall notify the animal control officer in writing of that fact within five days after the date of such sale or transfer. Such notice shall state the kind of dog, the name of the dog, if any, and the name and address of the person to whom the dog has been sold or transferred. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.20.100 Leash required.
        No person owning or harboring any dog shall allow or permit such dog, whether licensed or not, to be upon a public street, sidewalk, park, school ground, public place or upon any unenclosed lot or land except when held under leash by an able-bodied person. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.20.110 Dog at large while in heat—Prohibited.
        It is unlawful for the owner or person having possession, charge, custody or control of any female dog to cause or permit or allow the same to stray or run or in any other manner to be at large upon any public street, lane, alley, court or other public place in the city while such female dog is in heat. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.20.120 Private property.
        A.    Provided a dog has not attacked and bitten a person or another animal, the animal control officer shall not seize or impound a dog for violation of an ordinance requiring a dog to be leashed or issue citations for violation of such ordinance when the dog has not strayed from and is upon private property owned by the dog owner or the person who has a right to control the dog, or upon private property to which the dog owner or person who has a right to control the dog has a right of possession.

        B.     A dog that has strayed from but then returned to the private property of his owner or the person who has a right to control the dog shall not be seized or impounded, but in such a case, a citation may be issued; provided, however, that if in such a situation the owner or person who has a right to control the dog is not home, the dog may be impounded as specified by law. The animal control officer shall post a notice of such impounding on the front door of the living unit of the owner or person who has a right to control the dog. Such notice shall state the following: that the dog has been impounded, where the dog is being held, the name, address, and telephone number of the agency or person to be contacted regarding release of the dog, and an indication of the ultimate disposition of the dog if no action to regain it is taken within a specified period of time by its owner or by the person who has a right to control the dog. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.20.130 Dog defecation to be removed by the dog owner/handler.
        A.    It is unlawful for any person owning or having control or custody of any dog to permit the animal to defecate upon the public property of this city or upon the private property of another unless the person immediately removes the feces and properly disposes of it.

        B.     It is unlawful for any person to walk a dog on public property of this city or upon the private property of another without carrying, at all times, the means for the removal and disposal of dog feces.

        C.     Visually disabled persons who use seeing-eye guide dogs are exempt from this section. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.20.140 Dogs allowed in designated parks.
        It is unlawful for any person owning, having care or custody of or charged with the control of any dog, to allow or permit the dog to be in public park or playground unless:

        A.    The city council has by resolution designated the park or playground to permit access to dogs, and the public park or playground is posted with a sign permitting access to a dog while on leash.

        B.     There are no organized youth activities such as baseball, football, soccer, basketball or other organized community event in progress while the dog is in the park.

        C.     It is unlawful for any person to walk a dog in any public park of this city without carrying, at all times, the means for the removal and disposal of dog feces.

        D.    Visually disabled persons who use seeing-eye guide dogs are exempt from this section. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.20.150 Barking dogs.
        It is unlawful for any person to keep, maintain, or permit in or upon any premises within the city any barking dog that is under the control of that person. “Barking dog” means a dog that barks, bays, cries, howls or makes any other noise continuously and incessantly for a period of ten minutes within a fifteen-minute period to the disturbance of any other person. The issuance of a citation shall be within the discretion of the animal control officer or a police officer.

        Nothing in this section shall require or prevent the utilization of nuisance abatement procedures for abatement of the nuisance created by such barking dog. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.20.200 Declaration as a “potentially dangerous” or “vicious” dog.
        Whenever the animal control officer or a police officer has determined that there is probable cause to believe that a dog is a “potentially dangerous dog” as defined in Section 6.04.140, or a “vicious dog” as defined in Section 6.04.180, he shall petition the chief of police to conduct a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not the dog in question should be declared potentially dangerous or vicious. This hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures and provisions prescribed in Sections 31621 — 31626 of the Food and Agriculture Code. At his discretion, the chief of police may defer the hearing on the matter to the superior court. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.20.210 Potentially dangerous or vicious dog—Permit required.
        A.    It is unlawful for any person to own or have possession, custody, charge, or control of any potentially dangerous dog as defined in Section 6.04.140, or a previously declared vicious dog as described in Section 6.04.180, without obtaining a permit from the animal control officer as prescribed in Chapter 6.30 of this title. The fee for this permit shall be as established per resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.20.220 Keeping a “potentially dangerous dog” or “vicious dog”—Requirements.
        In addition to any standards and requirements established in Sections 31641 through 31645 of the Food and Agriculture Code, any owner or responsible person keeping or maintaining a dog that has been declared by competent authority to be either a “potentially dangerous dog” or a “vicious dog” must post at entrances to the property where such dog is kept, a sign not less than fifteen inches square, containing the warning, both in written and pictorial form, that a potentially dangerous dog or vicious dog is present. If in transit, any cages or containers used to hold such dog(s) must have a clearly visible notice attached to such cage or container warning of the presence of dangerous or vicious dog. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.20.230 Potentially dangerous dog or vicious dog at large.
        A.    It is unlawful for any person owning or having possession, custody, charge, or control of any potentially dangerous dog or any vicious dog to cause or permit the dog to run loose about the person’s premises in a manner endangering any person lawfully entering such premises, or cause or permit the dog to be unrestrained upon or about any public street, sidewalk, park, schoolyard, or property of other persons.

        B.     For purposes of this section, lawful entry to a premises includes but is not limited to entry made by a person in the performance of any duty imposed upon that person by the laws of this state or any city or county or by the laws or postal regulations of the United States, or when that person is on such property by reason of accident beyond control, or disaster, or by invitation either expressed or implied. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.20.900 Penalty.
        A.    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful and constitutes an infraction for any person to violate, or fail to comply with any provision of Sections 6.20.010 through 6.20.150 of this chapter. A second or subsequent violation of any section within this chapter may, at the discretion of the animal control officer, chief of police, city attorney or district attorney, constitute a misdemeanor.

        B.     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful and constitutes a misdemeanor for any person to violate, or fail to comply with any provision of Sections 6.20.200 through 6.20.230 of this chapter. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

Chapter 6.22 CARE AND KEEPING OF CATS, OTHER ANIMALS AND BEES
6.22.010 Cats.
        A.    No person shall keep or maintain more than four cats that have attained the age of four months, at any street address within the city unless the person, family or group of persons keeping or maintaining such cats is operating a bona fide animal clinic or hospital or a duly licensed pet shop, cat kennel, circus, carnival, traveling show, menagerie, or cat exhibition at such street address.

        B.     No person shall keep or maintain more than one unspayed female cat at any street address within the city unless the person, family, or group of persons keeping or maintaining such cats is operating a bona fide animal hospital or a duly licensed pet shop, cat kennel, circus, carnival, traveling show, menagerie or cat exhibition at such street address. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.22.020 Breeding permit required.
        Any person owning or having control, custody, charge or possession of any female cat for breeding purposes shall secure a breeding permit from the animal control officer as prescribed in Chapter 6.30 of this title. The fee for such permit shall be as established per resolution of the city council. A cat shall be deemed to be used for breeding purposes if more than one litter per year is raised. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.22.030 Cat at large while in heat—Prohibited.
        It is unlawful for the owner or person having possession, charge, custody or control of any female cat to cause or permit or allow the same to stray or run or in any other manner to be at large upon any public street, lane, alley, court or other public place in the city while such female cat is in heat. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.22.100 Livestock permit required.
        A.    No person shall keep any livestock, as defined in Section 6.04.140 of this title, within the city limits, except in the agricultural zone or open space declared area, without first securing a permit from the animal control officer as prescribed in Chapter 6.30 of this title. The fee for this permit shall be as established per resolution of the city council.

        B.     Section (A) shall not apply to those animals that are being kept upon the premises of a public school in association with an agriculture education program. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.22.110 Maintaining livestock.
        A.    No person or persons, firm or corporation shall keep or maintain or cause to be kept or maintained within the city any livestock, except under the following conditions:

        1.     Such animals shall under no circumstances be permitted to run at large off of the owner’s property and shall be confined within a suitable cage, corral, house or pen.

        2.     Such cage, corral, house, pen or any other area where such animals roam shall at all times be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, shall be cleaned once a week or more often if necessary and shall at all times be free from offensive odors rodents and insects.

        3.     Such cage, corral, house, or pen shall be well lime-washed or painted once a year, or more often if necessary.

        4.     No part of any such cage, corral, house, or pen shall be less than fifty feet from any adjacent dwelling or place of business occupied by human beings for dwelling or business purposes.

        5.     No person shall keep or maintain any house, coop or runway within ten feet of any property line of the lot or parcel of land upon which it is situated.

        6.     No person shall keep or maintain in the city, more than two mature cattle, goats, horses or other equine, pigs, sheep, or other livestock.

        7.     No person shall raise, keep or have in his possession in the city, except within a rural zone or open space declared area, animal that because of its size, natural disposition, or any other characteristic constitutes a hazard or menace to persons or disturbs the peace.

        B.     The provisions of this section shall not apply to those animals that are being kept upon the premises of a public school in association with an agriculture education program. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.22.200 Exotic or wild animals—Permit required.
        A.    In addition to any license or other permit required by law, it is unlawful for any person to own or have in his possession, custody, charge or control any exotic animal as defined in Section 6.04.070 or wild animal as defined in Section 6.04.190 without first obtaining a permit from the animal control officer as prescribed in Chapter 6.30 of this title. The fee for this permit shall be as established per resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.22.210 Exotic or wild animals—Posting required.
        Persons owning, caring for, or having control of any exotic or wild animal as defined in this chapter must post at entrances to the property where such animal is kept, a sign not less than fifteen inches square, containing the warning, both in written and pictorial form, that an exotic or wild animal is present. If in transit, any cages or containers used to hold such animals must have a clearly visible notice attached to such cage or container warning of the presence of an exotic or wild animal(s). (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.22.220 Exotic or wild animals at large.
        A.    It is unlawful for any person owning or having possession, custody, charge, or control of any dangerous, exotic or wild animal to cause or permit the animal to run loose about the person’s premises in a manner endangering any person lawfully entering such premises, or cause or permit the animal to be unrestrained upon or about any public street, sidewalk, park, schoolyard or property of other persons.

        B.     For purposes of this section, lawful entry to a premises includes but is not limited to entry made by a person in the performance of any duty imposed upon that person by the laws of this state or any city or county or by the laws or postal regulations of the United States, or when that person is on such property by reason of accident beyond control, or disaster, or by invitation either expressed or implied. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.22.300 Permit required to keep fowl.
        No person shall keep any fowl as defined in Section 6.02.100 of this title, within the city limits, except in the agricultural zone or open space declared area, without first securing a permit from the animal control officer as prescribed in Chapter 6.30 of this title. The fee for this permit shall be as established per resolution of the city council. This section shall not apply to those animals that are being kept upon the premises of a public school in association with an agriculture education program. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.22.310 Birds.
        A.    No person or persons, firm or corporation shall keep or maintain or cause to be kept or maintained within the city any canary, parrot, parakeet, macaw, or fowl as defined in Section 6.02.100 of this title, any bird of prey, or other bird, except under the following conditions:

        1.     No person shall raise, keep or have in his possession in the city, except within a rural zone or open space declared area, any live adult fowl or any other bird which because of its size, natural disposition, or any other characteristic constitutes a hazard or menace to persons or disturbs the peace.

        2.     Permitted birds shall be confined within a suitable house, cage, coop, or aviary after sundown.

        3.     Such bird house, cage, coop, aviary, or area where birds reside shall at all times be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, shall be cleaned once a week or more often if necessary, and shall be free from offensive odors and insects.

        4.     Such bird house, cage, or coop shall be well lime-washed or painted once a year, or more often if necessary.

        5.     No part of any such bird house, cage, coop or aviary shall be less than fifty feet from any adjacent dwelling or place of business occupied by human beings for dwelling or business purposes.

        6.     No person shall keep or maintain any bird house, cage, coop or runway within ten feet of any property line of the lot or parcel of land upon which it is situated.

        7.     No person shall keep or maintain in the city, more than twenty mature birds.

        B.     The provisions of subsection (A) of this section shall not apply to those persons who maintain no more than four adult canaries, parakeets, parrots, doves or other similar birds that are customarily housed within a residence. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.22.400 Bees.
        A.    “Bees” means honey-producing insects of the genus Apis. It includes all life stages of these insects. (29004 - Food & Agriculture Code).

        B.     Except in the agricultural zone or open space declared area, no person shall keep or maintain in the city any hive of bees.

        C.     Any person who keeps or maintains any hive of bees shall also comply with the following conditions:

        1.     Except in the agricultural zone or the open space declared area, no more than two hives can be maintained on any one lot or parcel of land.

        2.     No hive shall be kept or maintained within twenty-five feet of any property line of the lot or parcel of land upon which it is situated.

        3.     “Front property line,” for the purpose of subsection (A)(2) of this section, is defined as the sidewalk boundary farthest from the street. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.22.500 Animals at large.
        No person owning or having possession, charge, custody, or control of any animal, except domestic cats, shall cause, permit or allow the animal to stray, run, or in any other manner to be at large in or upon any public street, sidewalk, park or school ground, or upon any unenclosed lot or land. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.22.510 Animals on unenclosed premises.
        A.    No person shall stake out, herd or graze any animal upon any unenclosed lot or land in any manner so that the animal may be or go beyond the boundary of such lot or land.

        B.     No person shall stake or tie or leave staked or tied upon an open lot, within one hundred feet of an adjacent inhabited or uninhabited residence, any horse, cow, sheep, pig, mule, llama or goat. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.22.520 Animals kept in enclosures.
        Every person who by permit is allowed to keep livestock, dangerous or exotic animals within the city, when not in use shall keep them in secure enclosures at all times. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.22.530 Sanitary enclosures.
        All animals and all premises, enclosures or structures wherein animals are kept shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary and secure condition, free from all obnoxious odors and substances. All animals and all premises, enclosures or structures wherein animals are kept shall be thoroughly cleaned, and all debris, refuse, manure, urine, waste food, or other removable material shall be removed there from every day or more often as necessary. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.22.540 Tying animals to bicycle racks or trees.
        No person shall tie any animal to any city bicycle rack, or any shrub or tree growing upon or along any of the sidewalks or streets of the city. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.22.550 Nuisances by animals.
        It is unlawful for the owner or person having custody of any dog or other animal to permit, either willfully or through failure to exercise due care or control, any such dog or animal to commit any act constituting a public nuisance as defined under 3490 et seq. of the California Civil Code and as such part may hereafter be amended, upon the sidewalk of any public street; or upon any walkway, path, grass or play area of any park or school; or upon the floor of any common hall in any apartment house, condominium complex, or any other community housing project, hotel or other multiple dwelling, or upon any entranceway, stairway or wall immediately abutting on a public sidewalk, or upon the floor of any theater, shop, store, office building or other building used in common by the public; or upon the floor or stairway of any depot or station or public waiting room; or upon any floor, stairway, entranceway, office lobby, foyer, patio or any other area used in common by the public. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.22.560 Slaughter of animals.
        A.    It is unlawful for any person, by any means, to slaughter any dog, cat, sheep, goat, pig, cow, horse, deer, elk, raccoon, coyote, mountain lion, llama, mule, squirrel or opossum within the city.

        B.     This section shall not apply to the act of putting to death any such animal by an animal control officer or police officer when the animal is dangerous or is so badly injured that humanity requires its removal from further suffering and no other disposition is practical.

        C.     This section shall not apply to the act of putting to death any such animal by a licensed veterinarian, an animal health technician or an unregistered assistant at the direction and under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian, or the administering of medication or drug for euthanasia of sick, injured, homeless, or unwanted domestic pets or animals by an employee of an animal shelter or humane society who has received proper training in the administration of such medication or drug for such purposes.

        D.    This section shall not apply to those animals that are being slaughtered upon the premises of a public school in association with an agriculture education program. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.22.600 Live animal event.
        No person, business, firm, corporation or other entity shall operate a circus rodeo, petting zoo or other live animal event, whether permanent or temporary, without the approval of the city council. Upon gaining such approval, the person, business, firm, corporation or other entity shall apply and obtain a permit from the animal control officer as prescribed in Chapter 6.30 of this title. The fee for this permit shall be as established per resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.22.610 Permit inspection and conditions.
        Prior to the issuance of a permit and the establishment or commencement of a temporary or permanent live animal event the animal control officer shall inspect the facility or premises to assure that live animal event or exhibit is being conducted in accordance with the laws of this state and the provisions of this code. The animal control officer may impose any conditions he deems necessary to assure the safety of those persons attending the live animal event and the proper health and care of the animals involved in the live animal event. Any conditions imposed by the animal control officer shall be in writing and shall be included as part of the live animal event permit. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.22.620 Follow-up inspections.
        The animal control officer shall cause periodic inspections of the live animal event, with or without notice, to assure compliance with state law, this code and any conditions imposed upon the issuance of the live animal event permit. Refusal to submit to an inspection shall be grounds for revocation of the permit. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.22.900 Penalty.
        Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful and constitutes an infraction for any person to violate, or fail to comply with any provision of this chapter. A second or subsequent violation of any section within this chapter may, at the discretion of the animal control officer, chief of police, city attorney or district attorney, constitute a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

Chapter 6.24 DISEASED AND CRIPPLED ANIMALS
6.24.010 Keeping diseased or crippled animals.
        No person shall have, keep, or harbor any animal which is known or believed by him to be infected with any dangerous or communicable disease, or which is in an incurable, crippled condition or which is afflicted with any painful disease which is believed by such person to be incurable, except as in this title otherwise provided. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.24.020 Animals suspected of having rabies.
        A.    Whenever the owner or person in control of any animal is informed that such animal has bitten a human being, or suspects that the animal is infected with rabies, he shall immediately report the same to the local health department and to the animal control officer or the police department, and shall immediately confine such animal.

        B.     At the discretion of the local health officer or animal control officer, any animal which bites or otherwise exposes a person shall be isolated in strict confinement in a place and manner approved by the local health officer or animal control officer and observed for at least thirty days (dogs, cats and ferrets, ten days) after the day of infliction of the bite, with the exception that the following alternative to the ten-day isolation of dogs and cats is permitted.

        C.     If it appears at any time during such period that the animal has rabies, the health officer or animal control officer shall cause the animal to be destroyed.

        D.    If at the end of the quarantine period as may be prescribed by law it appears that the animal does not have rabies, it shall be released upon payment of a quarantine fee as established per resolution of the city council, to the city for its care and/or supervision of the animal during the quarantine period; provided, however, that no impound fee shall be charged to an owner or custodian of an animal who immediately transports such animal to the animal shelter.

        E.     The health officer or animal control officer or his duly authorized representative is empowered to enter upon any public or private premises, in accordance with the procedures provided by law, within the city for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this section and he is empowered to call upon the police officers of the city for assistance in enforcing such provisions. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.24.030 Physicians to report animal bite cases.
        All cases of animal bites treated by any physician shall be reported by the physician to the health department within seventy-two hours. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.24.040 Dead animals in public places.
        No person shall place the body of any dead animal in any street, park or public place or in any refuse receptacle. In case the owner of such dead animal is known and removal is accomplished by the city, the owner shall pay a fee as established per resolution of the city council for the removal of such animal. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.24.900 Penalty.
        Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful and constitutes an infraction for any person to violate, or fail to comply with any provision of this chapter. A second or subsequent violation of any section within this chapter may, at the discretion of the animal control officer, chief of police, city attorney or district attorney, constitute a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

Chapter 6.30 PERMITS
6.30.010 Permit fee and application.
        Wherever a permit is required by this title, the owner or person(s) seeking such permit shall proceed in the following manner:

        A.    Applicants for such permit shall pay an annual permit fee as set forth in the municipal fee schedule to the finance director.

        B.     Upon payment of the required fee, the applicant shall obtain, complete and submit a permit application to the animal control officer. The posting of the permit fee does not guarantee approval of the permit and is not refundable. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.30.020 Permit inspection.
        Upon receipt of an application for a permit, the animal control officer shall, within twenty working days, conduct an appropriate investigation and inspection of the premises requiring the permit, to properly evaluate that issues related the particular permit. It is his duty to assure that he is satisfied that keeping such animal is legal and conforming, and that such animal will be kept in a safe, secure and humane fashion and without menacing the safety of any person or animal or causing damage to property. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.30.030 Permit condition(s).
        As a condition of granting a permit, the city may impose special conditions that may include but are not limited to:

        A.    Keeping the animal confined on the premises in an enclosure approved by the animal control officer;

        B.     Keeping the animal securely muzzled, leashed, and under the control of a person eighteen years of age or older, and who is physically capable of restraining the animal when the animal is either on or off the property of the person having control, custody, care, or ownership of the animal;

        C.     Providing financial responsibility for the animal by posting a bond or certificate of insurance to an amount deemed necessary by the city which shall not be less than the amount of fifty thousand dollars;

        D.    Providing for the surgical spaying or neutering of the animal to prevent reproduction. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.30.040 Approval of conditions.
        Any conditions for granting of a permit must be approved by the chief of police or his designee, and must be noted on the permit at the time of issuance or at a later date that the chief of police or the animal control officer deems necessary. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.30.050 Permit revocation.
        Any permit issued under this section may be revoked when any provision of this title, or any condition issued by the chief of police or his designee, or the animal control officer under this chapter, is violated, or when, in the opinion of the chief of police, the safety of any person or animal is menaced or property is likely to be damaged by the possession or maintenance of such animal. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.30.060 Permit term, renewal and late fee.
        A.    All permits provided for in this section shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance, unless revoked as provided in Section 6.30.050.

        B.     If the permit is to be renewed, and the premises has been inspected within the past two years, and the applicant indicates in writing that there are no changes since the most recent inspection, then the animal control officer may forego an inspection and the permit fee shall be one half or fifty percent of the normal permit as established per resolution of the city council.

        C.     If a person fails to renew a permit within ten days after service of a written notice on him that such permit is required, or thirty days after the expiration of an existing permit, then a late fee as established per resolution of the city council shall be charged in addition to the applicable permit fee. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.30.070 Permit exemption.
        This section shall not apply to any dangerous or wild animal caged in a safe and humane manner when being transported through the city or when such animal is within the city under the control of a city approved live animal event such as a circus, carnival, traveling show, or collection of animals. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.30.080 Permit denial—Appeal.
        A.    Upon completion of an appropriate inquiry, the animal control officer may deny a permit for failure to meet the standards as expressed in Section 6.30.020 or other warranted cause.

        B.     Upon deciding to deny the permit, the animal control officer shall provide the applicant a document informing him of the facts causing the denial of the permit, and informing the applicant of all requisite information concerning an appeal of the animal control officer’s denial.

        C.     The animal control officer shall report in writing to the chief of police detailing the circumstance that prompted his decision/denial.

        D.    Upon receipt of a written request from the applicant, the chief of police or his designee shall set a date and time for a public hearing to review the decision/denial by the animal control officer, within ten calendar days of receipt of the appeal. If the owner of the animal does not respond to or oppose the decision/denial of the animal control officer, then the decision of the animal control officer shall prevail.

        E.     The chief of police or his designee shall preside at the hearing and shall summon witnesses, administer oaths, hear testimony, and determine whether the denial of the permit shall stand.

        F.     The chief of police or his designee shall issue written findings and a decision, concerning the permit within ten working days after the hearing is concluded. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.30.900 Penalty.
        If not otherwise indicated, a violation of any section of this chapter is unlawful and constitutes a misdemeanor for any person to operate a business or maintain restricted animals without the required permit(s) as required within this title. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

Chapter 6.40 PET SHOPS
6.40.010 Establishment of pet shop, boarding kennel or grooming parlor.
        Every person who owns conducts or operates a pet shop, kennel or grooming parlor or other similar business shall only conduct said business in or upon a facility established in accordance with the zoning regulations as established in Title 18 of this municipal code. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.40.020 Pet shop, kennel, grooming parlor—Permit required.
        Every person who owns conducts or operates a pet shop, boarding kennel or grooming parlor or other similar business shall secure a permit from the animal control officer as prescribed in Chapter 6.30 of this title. The fee for such permit shall be as established per resolution of the city council. The animal control officer may impose conditions to secure the purposes of this chapter upon a permit at the time of issuance or such later date that the superintendent of animal control deems necessary. Announced or unannounced routine inspections of the pet shop, boarding kennel or grooming parlor shall be conducted by the animal control officer to insure compliance with this chapter. Such inspections shall be an automatic condition of permit approval. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.40.030 Housing facilities.
        A.    Every person who owns conducts or operates a pet shop shall keep each animal in a housing facility that is structurally sound and in good repair to protect the animal from injury and to restrict entrance of other animals. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit the keeping of more than one animal in a single housing facility, so long as such multiple housing does not create a threat to the safety of any of the animals so housed.

        B.     Said facilities shall be constructed so as to prevent escape of the animals kept therein.

        C.     Said facilities shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate and proper housing for the animals kept therein.

        D.    Said facilities shall provide temperature and ventilation control of a nature compatible with the needs of the animals kept therein. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.40.040 Sanitation.
        A.    Every person who owns conducts or operates a pet shop, boarding kennel or grooming parlor shall comply with the following:

        1.     All animals and all premises, enclosures or structures wherein animals are kept shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, free from all obnoxious odors, substances and flies.

        2.     All animals and all premises, enclosures or structures wherein animals are kept shall be thoroughly cleaned, and all debris, refuse, manure, urine, waste food, or other removable material shall be removed there from every day or more often as necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of subsection (A)(1) of this section. Daily cleaning of animals, premises, enclosures or structures shall be completed prior to the time that the pet shop is open to the public for business. Nothing in this section shall prevent continuous cleaning of the animals, premises, structures or enclosures when the pet shop is open to the public, and after compliance with all of the above. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.40.050 Food.
        Every person who owns conducts or operates a pet shop shall supply each animal therein with sufficient good and wholesome food and fresh water as often as the feeding habits of the animal require. Food so supplied each animal shall be of a nature compatible with the dietary habits and needs of the animal. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.40.060 Name and telephone number notification.
        Every person who owns, conducts, or operates a pet shop, boarding kennel or grooming parlor shall provide the police department with the names, current address and phone numbers of persons to be notified during any hour of the day or night who will proceed at once to the location so as to permit entry to the premises by the animal control officers or the police officers of the city in the event of an emergency situation. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.40.070 Sale of dangerous, exotic or wild animals.
        No person who owns conducts or operates a pet shop shall sell a dangerous, exotic or wild animal, as defined in this title without first ascertaining the place of residence of the prospective purchaser of such animals. If the prospective purchaser resides in the city, the prospective purchaser shall be advised that he must obtain a permit pursuant to Section 6.28.010 of this code before he may purchase such dangerous, exotic or wild animal. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.40.080 Diseased and injured animals.
        Every person who owns conducts or operates a pet shop shall take reasonable care to display or release for sale, trade or adoption only those animals which are free of disease or injuries. The animal control officer may order any animal which is sick, diseased, or injured to be removed from display. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.40.090 Dead animals.
        Every person who owns conducts or operates a pet shop shall remove any dead animals from display on a daily basis, or more often as necessary. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.40.100 Sale of kittens and puppies.
        No person who owns, operates, conducts, or is employed by a pet shop shall display, sell, offer for sale, barter, or give away any kitten or puppy under eight weeks of age. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.40.110 Sale of raccoons and/or opossums.
        No person who owns, operates, conducts, or is employed by a pet shop shall display, sell, or offer for sale any raccoon or opossum. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.40.120 Restrictions.
        A.    No person shall sell, offer for sale, barter, or give away any rabbits, baby chicks, ducklings, or other fowl under four weeks of age in any quantity less than six.

        B.     No person shall sell, offer for sale, barter, or display any rabbits, baby chicks, ducklings or other fowl which have been dyed, colored or otherwise treated so as to impart to them an artificial color.

        C.     No person shall sell, offer for sale, barter or give away any rabbits, baby chicks, ducklings or other fowl unless such person provides proper brooder facilities for the care of such rabbits, chicks, ducklings or other fowl during the time they are in the possession of such person.

        D.    This section shall not be construed to prohibit the display or sale of rabbits, natural chicks, ducklings or other fowl, in proper facilities by dealers, hatcheries or stores engaged in the business of selling the same, to be raised for food purposes.

        E.     No person shall display, sell, offer for sale, barter, or give away, upon any city owned street or sidewalk as pets or novelties:

        1.     Any fish, turtle, snake, lizard, chameleon or other reptile;

        2.     Any rabbit, bird, cat, dog, fowl, guinea pig, rodent or other animal. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.40.900 Penalty.
        If not otherwise indicated, a violation of any section of this chapter is unlawful and constitutes a misdemeanor for any person to operate a business or maintain restricted animals without the required permit(s) as required within this title. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

Chapter 6.50 STABLES
Note
*       This chapter would be adopted by those cities permitting stables.

 

6.50.010 Definitions.
        The word “stable” as used in this chapter shall be taken to mean any building, structure or part of any building or structure used or intended to be used for housing one or more horses, mules, donkeys, cows or cattle. The word “premises” as used in this chapter shall be taken to mean the land and appurtenances thereof used in connection with any stable. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.50.020 Permit required to construct.
        It shall be unlawful to construct, reconstruct, alter or repair any stable, or to use as a stable any building, structure or part of any building or structure, without having a valid permit therefore from the chief building official. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.50.030 Application for permit.
        A.    No permit shall be granted to construct, reconstruct, alter or repair any stable within the corporate limits of the city, except upon written application therefore to the building official, signed by the owner or lessee of the land upon which said stable is, or will be, located. The application shall contain the following information:

        1.     Exact location of premises on which the stable is to be constructed, reconstructed, altered or repaired;

        2.     The size, location on the premises, and character of construction of said stable;

        3.     The number of stalls, and the number of animals maintained or to be maintained on said premises;

        4.     The materials of which the floors are constructed or are to be constructed;

        5.     The location, size and character of construction of all gutters, drains and sewer connections;

        6.     The location, dimensions and character of construction of all manure bins;

        7.     Any other information in regard to said stable or premises which the building official may require.

        B.     The application shall be accompanied by plans or sketches setting forth the above information. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.50.040 Materials and construction requirements.
        A.    All stables hereafter constructed, reconstructed, altered or repaired within the corporate limits of the city shall, in addition to any zoning regulations and other regulations of the city governing construction, fully comply with the regulations of this section and the regulations applicable to accessory buildings.

        B.     All floors shall have adequate drainage.

        C.     Adequate ventilation shall be provided in all stables. There shall be not less than five hundred cubic feet of space for each stall or animal housed in any stable.

        D.    There shall be provided upon all premises upon which any stable is situated one or more manure bins, sufficient in number and dimensions to contain all manure accumulating between removals. The bins shall be flyproof when closed, and shall be kept closed at all times except when manure is being introduced therein or being removed there from.

        E.     All bins, storerooms or receptacles in which any grain or feed other than hay is stored or kept shall be thoroughly ratproofed.

        F.     All stables capable of accommodating more than six or less than twenty-five animals shall have at least two exits five feet or more in width and at least thirty feet apart, and shall be at opposite ends of the stable if practicable. All stables capable of accommodating twenty-five or more animals shall have exits as herein provided, except that the width thereof shall be not less than five and one-half feet, and said width shall be increased six inches for each additional ten animals accommodated above twenty-five animals. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.50.050 Maintenance of stables.
        All stables and stable premises shall be kept at all times in a clean condition and good repair. All manure accumulating at any stable shall be removed not less often than twice each week, or more often if necessary. Manure shall not be permitted to accumulate in excess of the capacity of the manure bin or bins required by this chapter, and all manure shall be promptly placed in such bin or bins, and shall not be placed or piled at any place upon said stable premises other than in such bin or bins. The generation and escape of odors from stables shall be prevented as far as possible. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

 

6.50.060 Suspension of permit.
        Whenever any regulation or requirement of this chapter, or of any permit to construct, reconstruct, alter or repair any stable within the corporate limits of the city, shall have been violated, the permit of the stable upon which said violation has occurred shall be suspended by the building official until such time as all requirements or regulations of this chapter and of the permit shall have been fully complied with, and during the suspension of the permit, no animals shall be kept in the stable. (Ord. 1627 § 1, 2003)

Title 7 RESERVED

Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 8.04 GARBAGE AND RUBBISH COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
Chapter 8.10 SHOPPING CARTS
Chapter 8.12 UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS
Chapter 8.16 (RESERVED)
Chapter 8.18 (RESERVED)
Chapter 8.20 ABATEMENT OF WEEDS, RUBBLE, REFUSE, DIRT AND OTHER EARTH AND MATERIAL
Chapter 8.24 FOOD HANDLING BUSINESSES
Chapter 8.26 REGULATION OF SIDEWALK VENDORS
Chapter 8.28 CONTROL OF FLIES
Chapter 8.32 MOBILE X-RAY UNITS
Chapter 8.36 HAZARDOUS MATERIAL DISCLOSURE

Chapter 8.04 GARBAGE AND RUBBISH COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
8.04.010 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

        “Bin” also known as a “dumpster,” means a solid waste container typically measuring three cubic yards and is of the type commonly utilized by tenants of commercial businesses and apartment complexes. Other sizes may include, but are not limited to, one and one-half-yard, two-yard, four-yard, or six-yard.

        “Cart” means a solid waste container typically measuring ninety-six gallons that is of the type commonly serviced from a side-loading refuse vehicle. The cart is usually picked up by a mechanical device on the side-loader, the cart contents are then emptied into the refuse vehicle, and the empty cart is then placed back at the curbside. Other sizes may include, but are not limited to, sixty-four gallons, and thirty-two gallons.

        “Collection” means the operation of gathering together and transporting to the point of disposal of rubbish, garbage and waste material.

        “Contractor” means the person entering into a contract with the city for the collection and disposal of waste material.

        “Director of public works” means the director of public works of the city or duly authorized representatives.

        “Disposal” means the operation and treating and disposal of the accumulations of waste material and the product or residue arising from such treatment.

        “Dumpster” see the definition for “Bin” herein.

        “Garbage” means all ordinary accumulations of waste or refuse from food or food products, arising from the use of food or food products.

        “Recyclable materials” means collected used products or materials including, but not limited to, newspaper, plastics, glass, office paper, aluminum, scrap metal, corrugated cardboard, clothing, tires, motor oil, batteries, yard waste and white goods, which can be turned into new products or materials by reprocessing, reconstructing, remanufacturing or reusing them.

        “Roll-off” means a solid waste container typically measuring forty cubic yards that is of the type commonly transported on a flat-bed truck and that is detachable from the truck and/or the main cab for the temporary parking at construction or demolition site. Other sizes may include, but are not limited to, thirty-yard, twenty-yard, and ten-yard bins. This definition can also include compactor roll-offs.

        “Rubbish” means tree and shrubbery trimmings, lawn renovations, grass, weeds, leaves, chips, paper, pasteboard, magazines, books, rags, rubber, carpets, clothing, boots, shoes, hats, straw, packing boxes and cartons, crates, packing material, broken crockery, broken glass, ashes (when cold and double wrapped), cinders, shells, bottles, tin cans, metals and other kinds of rubbish, trash or waste material which ordinarily accumulates in the operation of a household or business. Such term shall not include discarded automobile or truck bodies or other bulky or heavy objects, manure or animal waste, material resulting from building or construction operations, nor material resulting from manufacturing operations, and complete or partial removal of trees or large shrubs.

        “Rubbish container” means a receptacle constructed of metal, wood, plastic trash bags specifically manufactured for rubbish or other durable material and shall not exceed forty-five gallons. Oil or gasoline drums shall not be used for rubbish containers. Each container must have a tight fitting lid and convenient hand holds.

        “Service request” means citizen request in writing or telephoning for correction of any undesirable condition stemming directly from garbage and rubbish collection. Subject involved may include, but not be limited to, failure to collect garbage, damaged container, spilled refuse, and discourtesy of contractor’s employees.

        “Solid waste” means all putrescible and non-putrescible solid, semisolid, and liquid wastes, including garbage, trash, Refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, construction and demolition debris, abandoned vehicles and parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances, dewatered, treated, or chemically fixed sewage sludge which is not hazardous waste, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semisolid wastes, and other discarded solid and semisolid wastes. Solid waste includes recyclable materials, green waste, construction and demolition debris, and bulky items. solid waste does not include hazardous waste, low-level radioactive waste, and medical waste.

        “Solid waste container” means any type of container used or designed for the deposit or storage of solid waste before transport to a landfill. Examples include, but are not limited to, a garbage can, bin, cart, dumpster, or roll-off.

        “Waste” or “waste material” means either rubbish or garbage or both as defined in this section. (Ord. 1799 § 2, 2018)

 

8.04.020 Restricted to authorized persons.
        The city and its duly authorized agents, servants and employees, or any contractors with whom the city may at any time enter into a contract therefor and the agents, servants and employees of such contractors while any such contract shall be in force, shall have the exclusive right to gather, collect and remove rubbish, garbage and waste material from all residential and commercial premises in the city; and it is unlawful for any person other than those specified in this section to gather, collect or remove any rubbish or waste material or to convey or to transport any rubbish or waste material in, along or over any public street, alley or highway in the city or to take any rubbish, garbage or waste material from any receptacle in which the same may be placed for collection or removal or to interfere with or disturb any such receptacle or to remove any such receptacle from any location where the same is placed by the owner thereof, provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the occupant of any dwelling, house or commercial establishment from him or herself removing any rubbish accumulated on the premises and disposing of the same in a lawful manner or to prohibit any person from removing from the premises occupied by him or her any waste material or other objects of debris as provided in Section 8.04.050. (Ord. 788 § 2, 1970)

 

8.04.030 City to provide for collection—Placement of receptacles for collection—Unacceptable containers.
        A.    The city shall provide for the collection and disposal of rubbish, garbage and waste material as defined in Section 8.04.010 in such time and manner as may be from time to time deemed for the best interest of the city, and may give such notice of established routes and times of collection as the city or its agents may deem necessary.

        B.     When the collection and removal of such rubbish, garbage or waste material is desired such receptacles shall be placed along the street curb in front of the premises from which such rubbish, garbage or waste material is to be removed, or along the property line of the alley in the rear of or at the side thereof, according to the route so prescribed by the director of public works in or along such street or such alley on the days prescribed by the director of public works for the collection of rubbish, garbage or waste material on such route.

        C.     Any receptacle placed more than three and one-half feet from the curb or property line shall not be collected or removed.

        D.    Plastic trash bags or other containers that collapse or fall apart shall not be collected. (Ord. 1124 § 3, 1980; Ord. 788 § 2, 1970)

 

8.04.035 Collection of garbage and recyclables.
        A.    All refuse, garbage, cuttings or recyclables which are placed in the vicinity of any curb or alley for collection purposes shall become the property of the city.

        B.     No person, except an individual acting within the course and scope of their agency or employment with the city, or private collector licensed by the city, shall remove from any place or premises in the city, or transport over public streets, any garbage, refuse, cuttings or recyclables.

        C.     No person shall enter onto private property for the purpose of collecting or inspecting refuse, garbage, cuttings or recyclables, except the owner, occupant, manager, person in control of the premises, or a person employed to do so by the city, or private collector licensed by the city who is then acting within the course and scope of their agency or employment.

        D.    The provisions of this section shall not prohibit:

        1.     Any person from gathering and removing refuse or cuttings generated by construction, landscaping or gardening on the property when the refuse and cuttings have not been set out for collection by the city or a private collector licensed by the city;

        2.     Any person from removing garbage, refuse or cuttings generated on property owned or controlled by that person;

        3.     The immediate removal by any person of garbage, refuse or cuttings which the health officer, city manager, general manager of public services, fire chief, chief building inspector or their agents have determined to constitute a nuisance or an immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare;

        4.     Any nonprofit organization from collecting recyclables in any manner which does not conflict with this section or any other provisions of this code. (Ord. 1415 § 2, 1991)

 

8.04.040 Receptacles required—Placement of rubbish for collection.
        A.    Every person occupying or having charge of or control of any premises in the city shall provide suitable containers or receptacles for the accumulation and collection of rubbish, garbage and waste material each of which containers or receptacles shall have a capacity no greater than forty-five gallons and shall weigh not more than sixty-five pounds when filled and set out for collection. All containers must be set out for collection by six a.m. on the collection day or placed out the evening before scheduled collection.

        B.     All garbage shall be double-wrapped and placed in with other rubbish.

        C.     Branches of trees, hedges, etc., shall be cut in lengths of not over four feet and tied in bun-

dles of not more than eighteen inches in diameter or fifty pounds in weight.

        D.    All vacuum cleaner dust, sweepings or ashes shall be double-wrapped or placed in sealed disposable containers.

        E.     All ashes shall be cold.

        F.     All newspaper bundles shall weigh no more than fifty pounds.

        G.    All rubbish not set out in time shall not be collected until next pickup day.

        H.    Cardboard boxes shall be broken down and bundled as indicated for newspapers and shrubbery. (Ord. 1124 § 4, 1980; Ord. 788 § 2, 1970)

 

8.04.050 Property owner’s duty to collect and dispose of waste materials.
        Every person occupying or having charge or control of any premises in the city shall at least once in each calendar month collect and dispose of all waste material and debris such as discarded automobile bodies and similar heavy or bulky objects and all other waste not included in the meaning of rubbish which may have accumulated on his or her premises; provided, that building or construction waste and debris need be removed only upon completion of construction operations. All such waste and debris defined in this section shall be removed to dump grounds as may be provided or designated by the city. (Ord. 788 § 2, 1970)

 

8.04.060 Collection of heavy and bulky objects.
        Heavy articles such as trees, logs, auto bodies, building materials of any kind, grass from renovating, sod, dirt or similar material will not be picked up on regular collection. Arrangements may be made with the director of public works for collecting this material and a charge will be assessed depending on the quantity, weight and character of such materials. (Ord. 788 § 2, 1970)

 

8.04.070 Prohibited disposition of rubbish, garbage and waste materials.
        No person shall throw, place, scatter or deposit any rubbish, garbage or waste material in or upon any public alley, street, highway or flood-control channel in the city, except as expressly authorized in this chapter, nor throw, place, scatter or deposit any rubbish, garbage or waste material upon or below the surface of any premises in such manner that the same is or may become a nuisance or endanger the public health. (Ord. 788 § 2, 1970)

 

8.04.080 Rubbish burning restrictions.
        A.    No person shall permit to be ignited or burned any grass, weeds, dead trees, bushes or portions thereof, or ignite, set fire to or burn paper, shavings, boxes or any other combustible material within the city, except in a multiple-chamber incinerator or in other equipment just as effective for air pollution control approved for such use by the air pollution control district of the county, or except under a valid permit issued in compliance with the provisions of the fire prevention code of the city.

        B.     It shall be the duty of the owner, manager, occupant and any person in charge of any premises improved with a structure to extinguish any smoldering or burning fire on such premises in violation of the provisions of this section.

        C.     The fire chief and members of the fire department under his or her direction shall be the principal enforcement officers for the provisions of this section. They are authorized and directed to seal and tag each incinerator in violation of the provisions of this section and it is deemed to be a misdemeanor to break the seal or remove the tag from any incinerator without authority, in writing, from the fire chief. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent members of the police department or of the building and safety department from enforcing any provision of this section. (Ord. 1211, 1983; Ord. 788 § 2, 1970)

 

 

8.04.090 Commercial and industrial collectors required to obtain a franchise.
        Commercial and industrial rubbish, garbage and waste material collectors shall obtain a franchise pursuant to Chapter 5.44. (Ord. 788 § 2, 1970)

 

8.04.095 Enforcement authority and impoundment of unauthorized solid waste containers.
        A.    Violations.

        The conducting of a solid waste collection operation without a franchise or contract with the city in violation of Chapter 8.04 of this code shall result in the impoundment of any and all solid waste containers used in such unlawful operation as provided in this section.

        B.     Enforcement Authority, Impounding of Solid Waste Containers—Civil Remedies.

        1.     Authority. The public works director, or designee, shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter. This authority shall be in addition to the authority granted to police officers pursuant to this code.

        2.     Impounding of Containers. If a solid waste container is not properly identified as belonging to a city contracted or franchised solid waste collector (hereinafter “city-approved franchisee”), or if the terms of the permit, the franchise agreement, contract or terms of this chapter are not complied with, then the solid waste container shall be subject to removal and impound by order of the public works director pursuant to subsection C of this section.

        3.     Civil Remedies. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to limit the right of a city-approved franchisee or the city to bring a civil action against any person who violates this chapter, nor shall a conviction for such violation exempt any person from a civil action brought by a city-approved franchisee or the city.

        C.     Unauthorized Solid Waste Container—Impoundment.

        1.     The public works director may cause the posting of a notice to remove, in a conspicuous place, on any solid waste container placed on any public or private property within the city in violation of this chapter.

        2.     Notices to remove posted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall specify the nature of the violation and shall state that the solid waste container must be removed within twenty-four hours or it may be impounded at the owner’s sole expense, which shall include all impound towing, dump (emptying), storage and administrative processing fees. The notice to remove shall also advise the owner of its right to contest the violation pursuant to subsection D of this section. The posting of a notice to remove shall constitute constructive notice to the owner and user of the container of the requirement to remove the solid waste container.

        3.     If the solid waste container is not removed within twenty-four hours after the notice to remove is posted, the public works director may authorize impoundment and direct the removal and storage of the solid waste container and the disposal of its contents. The actual removal may be carried out by city staff or city-approved franchisee as designated by the public works director.

        4.     If the identity of the owner of a solid waste container that has been removed by the city is known to the public works director, the public works director shall promptly cause a notice of impoundment to be mailed to the owner to claim the stored property. The notice of impoundment shall advise the owner of the nature of the violation and of its right to contest the violation pursuant to subsection D of this section. If the solid waste container is not claimed within thirty days after removal and notice to the owner, or thirty days after removal if the identity of the owner is unknown, and whose impoundment has not been contested pursuant to subsection D, the solid waste container and its contents shall be deemed abandoned property and may be disposed of accordingly.

        5.     After a solid waste container has once been removed by the city pursuant to a notice to remove, the owner thereof shall be deemed to have actual notice of the provisions of this chapter, including the prohibition of placement of solid waste containers by any person other than a city-approved franchisee. In the event of a subsequent placement of a solid waste container determined to be used by the same owner, irrespective of the name under which the unlawful business is operated, the public works director may immediately, without the posting of a notice to remove, direct the removal and storage of the unlawfully placed solid waste container and shall, in such case, give a notice of impoundment to the owner to claim the solid waste container. The notice of impoundment shall advise the owner of the nature of the violation and of its right to contest the violation pursuant to subsection D. In such event, the owner shall be responsible to reimburse the city for the actual cost of removal, storage and disposal of its contents, which cost shall be paid by the owner before the solid waste container is returned to the owner. If the solid waste container is unclaimed after notice of impoundment is mailed to the owner and the expiration of the period set forth in subsection (C)(4), the solid waste container and its contents shall be deemed abandoned property and may be disposed of accordingly.

        6.     The owner of the solid waste container shall be responsible to reimburse the city for the actual cost of the removal, storage and disposal. All amounts due to the city for the cost of the removal, storage and disposal shall be paid before the solid waste container is returned to the owner. The costs incurred by the city for removal, storage and disposal shall constitute a debt owed to the city by the owner, who shall be liable therefor in an action by the city for the recovery of such amounts.

        7.     The fees related to the impoundment, emptying, storage and administrative processing of impounded solid waste containers shall be set by city council resolution.

        D.    Administrative Hearing.

        1.     Request for Hearing. Any responsible party to whom a notice to remove or notice of impoundment has been issued may contest that there was a violation of this section or that he or she is the responsible party by filing a written request with the city manager for a hearing within ten business days from the date of notice.

        2.     Administrative Hearing and Judicial Review. The procedure for the conduct of the hearing and the options for judicial review shall be according to the procedures for administrative citations set forth in Chapter 1.20 of this code. Specifically Sections 1.20.070 through 1.20.100. (Ord. 1799 § 3, 2018)

 

8.04.100 Applicability of abatement procedures to trash and rubbish.
        Trash, rubbish and objectionable material of every kind and nature being or remaining upon real property which constitutes a nuisance may be abated in the same manner and subject to the same terms and at the same time as is provided for the abatement of weeds or growth in Chapter 8.20. (Ord. 789, 1970)

 

8.04.110 Hours of collection.
        There shall be no collection of garbage or rubbish before the hour of six a.m. in any area of the city; nor shall any commercial refuse collection vehicles operate on the streets prior to six a.m. Violation of this section constitutes an infraction. (Ord. 982 § 1, 1977; Ord. 971 § 1, 1977)

 

8.04.120 Charges.
        There shall be a monthly charge for all curbside residential or commercial refuse collection services rendered by the city. The amount of the charges shall be as established by resolution of the city council. Any such resolution establishing charges may be amended from time to time. Such charges shall be applicable to and required of owners and/or occupants of all residential dwellings receiving services in the city. Commercial entities may elect to receive curbside refuse collection services; and in the event of such collection, shall be billed in the same manner as residential users. (Ord. 954 § 1, 1976)

 

 

8.04.125 Sanitation fee.
        A.    The purpose and intent of this section is to provide for a sanitation fee to be assessed upon each and every refuse account within the city (“user”). The funds shall be used principally to defray the operational and capital outlay costs of the services specified in subsection B of this section.

        B.     The costs of services that have a direct nexus to solid waste collection are street sweeping, median and parkway tree trimming, La Habra disposal station #11 landfill gas system maintenance, and recycling programs.

        C.     Every person in possession or control of property, referred to in this section as users, shall pay a sanitation fee as set by resolution by the city council. (Ord. 1800 § 4, 2018)

 

8.04.130 Billing procedure.
        The charges imposed pursuant to any resolution authorized by this chapter shall be billed and collected with the regular water bills or statements rendered by the city water department. In any area not served by the city water department, a separate bill shall be rendered bimonthly by the water department for refuse collection services. (Ord. 954 § 1, 1976)

 

8.04.140 Liability for services rendered.
        The regular collection of refuse and disposal thereof from all places in the city shall be deemed a service to the premises from which it is collected. The person in whose name the water meter, whether the meter is a city water meter or a water meter of a private company, is the person who shall be liable for and billed for the refuse collection services rendered unless other arrangements are made by such person and approved by the city manager or designated representative. (Ord. 954 § 1, 1976)

Chapter 8.10 SHOPPING CARTS
8.10.010 Purpose—Declaration of nuisance.
        Many retail establishments provide shopping carts for the convenience of customers while shopping on the premises of such businesses. However, shopping carts removed from the premises of such businesses and left abandoned on public or private property throughout the city constitute a public nuisance and a potential hazard to the health and safety of the public. The proliferation of lost, stolen or abandoned shopping carts on public and private property causes blighting conditions in the community, clogs storm drains, results in the obstruction of free access to public and private sidewalks, streets, parking lots and other ways, interferes with pedestrian and vehicular traffic on public and private streets, and impedes emergency services. For the aforesaid reasons, such lost, stolen or abandoned shopping carts are hereby declared to be a public nuisance which shall be subject to abatement in the manner set forth in this chapter or in any other manner provided by law. The purpose of this chapter is to set forth regulations to ensure that reasonable measures are taken by the owners and operators of businesses which provide shopping carts for the convenience of customers to either prevent the removal of shopping carts from business premises and parking lots, or provide for the prompt retrieval of lost, stolen or abandoned shopping carts, to complement and supplement provisions of state law, and to adopt local regulations to the extent not otherwise preempted by state statute. (Ord. 1731 § 1, 2012)

 

8.10.020 Definitions.
        Except as otherwise expressly set forth herein, the following words and terms as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

        “Agent” means the person or persons designated in the shopping cart control plan that the owner of the shopping cart authorizes as the person(s) to perform or provide retrieval services on behalf of the owner. The agent may be the owner if so designated in the city approved shopping cart control plan.

        “Approved plan” means the approved mandatory shopping cart containment plan required by this chapter.

        “Cart containment plan” means a document submitted by the owner of the shopping cart pursuant to Section 8.12.100 of this chapter.

        “City” means the city of La Habra, California or its designated representatives.

        “City council” means the city council of the city of La Habra.

        “City manager” means the city manager of the city of La Habra, or designee.

        “Contractor” means an authorized independent contractor approved by the city council for the purpose of effecting the removal of abandoned shopping carts.

        “Director” means the director of public works, or designee.

 

        “Enforcement personnel” means any police officer or code enforcement officer employed by the city of La Habra.

        “Identified cart” means a shopping cart that has a permanently affixed sign that identifies, in accordance with Business and Professions Code Section 22435.1, the owner of the cart or the retailer, or both; notifies the public of the procedure to be utilized for authorized removal of the cart from the owner’s premises; notifies the public that the unauthorized removal of the cart from the cart owner’s premises or cart owner’s parking area or the unauthorized possession of the cart, is a violation of state law; lists a valid telephone number or address for returning the cart to the owner or retailer.

        “Laundry cart” means a basket which is mounted on wheels and used in a coin-operated laundry or dry-cleaning retail establishment by a customer or an attendant for the purpose of transporting fabrics and the supplies necessary to process them.

        “Lost, stolen or abandoned shopping cart” means a shopping cart which is either: (1) removed from the premises of a retail establishment by any person without the written permission or consent of the owner of the shopping cart or the retailer otherwise entitled to possession of such cart; or (2) left unattended, discarded or abandoned upon any public or private property other than the premises of the retail establishment from which the shopping cart was removed, regardless of whether such shopping cart was removed from the premises with the permission of the owner. For purposes of this chapter, any shopping cart located on any public or private property other than the premises of the retail establishment from which such shopping cart was removed shall be presumed lost, stolen or abandoned, even if in the possession of any person, unless such person in possession thereof either: (1) is the owner, or an employee or authorized agent of the owner, entitled to possession of said shopping cart; (2) is an officer, employee or agent of a cart retrieval service hired by the owner to retrieve such carts; (3) is an enforcement officer retrieving, storing or disposing of said cart pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; or (4) has written permission or consent to be in possession of said shopping cart from the owner entitled to possession of said shopping cart.

        “Owner” or “cart owner” means any person or entity, who in connection with the conduct of a business, including, but not limited to, a retail establishment, owns, leases, rightfully possesses, or makes a shopping cart available to customers, patrons and/or the public. This means and includes the owner’s agent or authorized representative.

        “Parking area” means a parking lot or other property provided by a retail establishment for the use of customers of said retail establishment for parking of customer vehicles. The parking area of a retail establishment located in a multistore complex or shopping center shall include the entire parking area used by the multistore complex or shopping center.

        “Person” means a natural person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business, trust, corporation, limited liability company or other entity.

        “Premises” means any building, property or other area owned, occupied, and/or utilized upon which any retail establishment business is conducted or operated in the city of La Habra, which provides shopping carts for use by customers or other persons, including the parking area provided for customers of such retail establishment.

        “Public property” means all real property in the city in which a public agency has a fee simple, easement or leasehold interest. This includes, but is not limited to, streets, sidewalks, the civic center, parks and flood control facilities.

        “Retail establishment” means any business located in the city of La Habra which offers or provides shopping carts for the use of the customers of such business regardless of whether such business is advertised or operated as a retail or wholesale business, and regardless of whether such business is open to the general public, or is a private club or business, or is a membership store.

 

        “Shopping cart” or “cart” means a basket which is mounted on wheels or a similar device generally used in a retail establishment by a customer for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind. The term “shopping cart” or “cart” includes a laundry cart.

        “Unidentified cart” means a shopping cart that is not an owner identified cart, or an identified cart of a retail establishment located outside the city. (Ord. 1731 § 1, 2012)

 

8.10.030 Unauthorized removal prohibited.
        It is unlawful for any person:

        A.    To remove a shopping cart from a premises, either temporarily or permanently, which is properly marked in conformity with this chapter, without the written consent of the owner; or

        B.     To be in possession of a shopping cart that has been removed from a premises, which is properly marked in conformity with this chapter, without the written consent of the owner; or

        C.     To detach the sign or deface the name or address marked on a sign, which is properly marked on a shopping cart in conformity with this chapter.

        This section shall not apply to shopping carts removed as authorized by the owner for the purposes of repair, maintenance or disposal. (Ord. 1731 § 1, 2012)

 

8.10.040 Removal of unidentified carts.
        Once an unidentified cart is discovered on public or private property, the city or its authorized contractor may remove and impound said cart. If the removal is from private property, the city or its authorized contractor must first obtain the property owner’s consent. The unidentified cart shall be marked with a tag indicating the date and location of its discovery and shall be stored for thirty calendar days at a location selected by the city. Any claims for an unidentified cart shall be presented to the director, and shall be accompanied by proof of ownership of the cart. A person demonstrating proof of ownership of an unidentified cart stored by the city shall pay the city’s nuisance abatement fee prior to the cart being released by the city. (Ord. 1731 § 1, 2012)

 

8.10.050 Removal of identified carts.
        A.    The city, or its authorized contractor, may remove and impound any abandoned identified shopping cart from any public property, or from private property with the property owner’s consent, provided that the identified cart is located outside the premises or parking area of the retail establishment which owns the cart.

        B.     In the event the city, or its authorized contractor, removes and impounds an identified cart, the city, or its authorized contractor, shall provide actual notice to the owner of the identified cart or his or her representative within twenty-four hours following the impound of the cart, indicating the location where the cart may be claimed.

        C.     Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, the city or its authorized contractor may remove and impound any identified cart from any public or private property in instances where the location of the cart may impede emergency services. (Ord. 1731 § 1, 2012)

 

8.10.060 Disposal.
        A.    Any identified or unidentified cart not reclaimed from the city within thirty days of receipt of a notice of impoundment by the owner of the cart, may be sold or otherwise disposed of by the city.

        B.     In the event a cart remains unclaimed, is disposed of or destroyed, the city reserves the right to collect any applicable redemption fees and/or fines from the cart owner. (Ord. 1731 § 1, 2012)

 

8.10.070 Nuisance abatement cost recovery and/or fine.
        A.    Cost Recovery. The city may recover from the owner of a shopping cart, actual costs incurred in impounding the shopping cart pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Section 22435.7(d).

        B.     Fine. In addition to the payment of the city’s costs as set forth in subsection A, the owner of a shopping cart may also be subject to a fine in the maximum amount established by Business and Professions Code Section 22435.7(f), as may be amended from time to time, for each occurrence in excess of three during any six-month period for failure to retrieve identified carts in accordance with this chapter. An occurrence includes all identified carts impounded by the city or its authorized contractor in a one-day period. (Ord. 1731 § 1, 2012)

 

8.10.080 Redemption by owner.
        A.    A cart owner or authorized representatives may, upon prior appointment, inspect impounded carts to determine if any of the owner’s carts are present and may redeem such carts upon proof of ownership and payment of all applicable cost recovery or administrative fines.

        B.     An impounded cart may be redeemed by the owner at any time during normal business hours prior to disposal or destruction. The owner shall be entitled to receive the cart upon payment of all applicable cost recovery or administrative fines.

        C.     Any impounded cart redeemed by the owner or authorized representative within three business days following the date of actual notice of impoundment shall be released and surrendered to the owner or authorized agent at no charge.

        D.    Any impounded cart redeemed by the owner or authorized representative within three business days following the date of actual notice of impoundment shall not be deemed an occurrence for purposes of Section 8.10.070(B) of this chapter.

        E.     Any impounded cart that is not redeemed by the owner or authorized representative within three business days following the date of actual notice of impoundment shall be subject to any applicable cost recovery or administrative fines imposed pursuant to Section 8.10.070 of this chapter, commencing on the fourth business day following the date of the notice of impoundment.

        F.     No cart shall be released to a person seeking to redeem an impounded cart, unless such person submits, to the sole satisfaction of the city, proof of ownership or right to possession of the impounded cart.

        G.    Any release of a cart to a person deemed by the city to be entitled thereto, shall be an absolute defense of the city against any other person claiming to be entitled thereto. (Ord. 1731 § 1, 2012)

 

8.10.090 Appeals of cart impound.
        A person who can demonstrate that they are the owner of an impounded cart may appeal the imposition of the nuisance abatement cost recovery or administrative fine by presenting evidence that the cart removal and storage was not performed substantially in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Appeals shall be made in writing to the director within ten calendar days of paying the cost recovery or fine. An office hearing will be held within thirty calendar days of the receipt of a request for an appeal. The cart owner or authorized representative shall appear and be heard on the matter. If the director determines that the shopping cart was not removed and stored in substantial accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the nuisance abatement cost recovery or administrative fine shall be refunded. The decision of the public services director or designee shall be final. (Ord. 1731 § 1, 2012)

 

8.10.100 Cart containment plan.
        Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every owner subject to this chapter who provides shopping carts to customers for use on the premises of any retail establishment shall prepare, submit, implement and comply with the terms and conditions of a shopping cart control plan to prevent the unauthorized removal of any shopping cart from the owner’s premises and, if removed, retrieval of the shopping cart within time periods set forth in subsection E. The focus of the plan shall be on means to confine shopping carts to the owner’s premises. The cart containment plan shall be designed to effectively prevent the removal of all shopping carts from the premises. The owner shall have the obligation to provide demonstrable evi-

dence that the elements proposed will be effective. The cart containment plan, at a minimum, shall include the following elements:

        A.    Signs Affixed to Carts. No owner shall provide any shopping cart for customer use that does not contain the signage required by this section. Any shopping cart found abandoned that does not have the identification and information required by this section may be removed and disposed of by the city in accordance with state law. Every shopping cart made available for use by customers shall have a sign permanently affixed to it that: (1) identifies the owner of the cart or the retail establishment or both; (2) the address of the owner of the business establishment for shopping cart return and a phone number at which a person may contact the owner to return the cart removed from the premises to the owner or retailer; (3) notifies the public that the unauthorized removal of the cart from the premises of the business, or the unauthorized possession of the cart, is a violation of state law.

        B.     Notice to Customers. Written notice shall be provided to customers, in both English and Spanish, that removal of shopping carts from the premises is prohibited by state law. Such notice may be provided in the form of flyers distributed on the premises, warnings printed on shopping bags, direct mail, website notices or any other means demonstrated to be effective. The cart containment plan shall identify the specific measures to be implemented to comply with this notice requirement. In addition, conspicuous signs shall be placed and maintained on the premises near all customer entrances and exits and throughout the premises, including the parking area, warning customers that removal of shopping carts from the premises is prohibited by state law.

        C.     Physical Measures. Specific physical measures shall be implemented and maintained by the owner to prevent, deter or impede the removal of shopping carts from the premises. Such physical measures shall be specifically identified in the cart containment plan and may include, but are not limited to, the following: (1) electronic or other disabling devices installed and maintained on carts so they can not be removed from the premises; or (2) bollards and chains or other physical barrier in locations between the business exits and the parking area which effectively prevent transporting shopping carts into the parking area or off the premises; and/or (3) effective management practices including use of: (a) courtesy clerks to accompany customers and return the shopping carts to the store, (b) security personnel assigned the responsibility to prevent removal, or (c) other measures acceptable to the director that the owner can demonstrate will effectively prevent shopping cart to be removed from the premises; or (4) requiring security deposits by customers for cart use, or rental or sale of carts to customers. Where physical improvements such as subsections (1) and (2) above are not proposed, the plan shall include justification for such omission.

        D.    Retrieval Personnel. The owner shall provide personnel for purposes of the retrieval of lost, stolen or abandoned shopping carts. Such personnel may be either employees of the business or one or more independent contractors hired by the owner to provide shopping cart retrieval services, or a combination of both. The cart retrieval plan shall either: (1) identify the number of employees who will be assigned such cart retrieval duties, the number of total hours per week that each assigned employee will perform such services (in addition to any on-premises retrieval duties to which such employee may be assigned), and the training each of such personnel has received or will receive concerning the retrieval of lost, stolen or abandoned shopping carts; or (2) include a copy of each contract with a cart retrieval service (other than confidential financial information which may be redacted from the contract). For purposes of this section, those persons identified in the cart retrieval plan as providing cart retrieval services, whether employees of the business or independent contract services, shall be referred to in this section as “retrieval personnel.” The owner shall provide written authorization to all retrieval personnel, which authorization shall be carried by each such person while performing cart retrieval services on behalf of the owner and shall be provided to any enforcement personnel upon request. Each vehicle used by retrieval personnel shall bear conspicuous signs on the vehicle identifying either the name of the retail establishment for which such retrieval service is being performed or, if applicable, the name of the cart retrieval service with which the retail establishment has contracted for such services.

        E.     Mandatory Shopping Cart Retrieval Element. The plan shall include provisions for retrieval of abandoned shopping carts. The owner shall provide retrieval personnel in sufficient number to assure that all public streets within a minimum two-mile radius of the premises of the retail establishment are patrolled not less often than every twenty-four hours, and all bus stops within a minimum one-mile radius of the retail establishment are patrolled not less often than every twelve hours, and each lost, stolen or abandoned shopping cart owned or provided by the retail establishment which is found as a result of such patrols is immediately retrieved and removed from any public or private property upon which the cart is found. The cart retrieval plan shall identify the streets and bus stops which will be patrolled as required by this subsection; the manner, frequency and times of such patrols; and the procedures to be employed by the retail establishment to identify and retrieve any lost, stolen or abandoned shopping carts. The cart retrieval plan shall identify the number of trucks, hours of operation of the retrieval personnel, and such other information as reasonably required by the city to assure that the owner is devoting sufficient resources to cart retrieval operations to comply with the provisions of this section and the approved cart retrieval plan. In addition, the retrieval element shall detail a telephone notification program, whereby persons may notify the owner of an abandoned shopping cart and request retrieval of any shopping cart properly identified as belonging to the owner; and provide that each vehicle used to retrieve shopping carts shall bear conspicuous signs identifying the name of the owner or the retail business name and, if applicable, the name of the contract shopping cart retrieval service.

        F.     Daily Cart Confinement. All shopping carts located on the premises of the retail establishment (other than an establishment open for business twenty-four hours per day) shall be collected at the end of each business day by employees of the retail establishment and shall be collectively confined in a secure manner at the cart confinement area on the premises as designated in the cart containment plan until the commencement of the next business day. All shopping carts located on the premises of any retail establishment open for business twenty-four hours per day, other than carts then currently in use by a customer or patron, shall be collected by employees of the retail establishment and returned to the cart confinement area on the premises as designated in the cart containment plan at least once per calendar day between the hours of nine p.m. and twelve midnight on each day the retail establishment is open for business. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any shopping carts located within an enclosed building.

        G.    Employee Training. The owner of the retail establishment shall implement and maintain an annual training program for its new and existing employees designed to educate such employees concerning the requirements of the cart containment plan and the provisions of state law prohibiting the unauthorized removal of shopping carts from the premises of the retail establishment. The cart containment plan shall expressly describe the employee training program.

        H.    Collaboration with Other Businesses. Two or more retail establishments located within the same shopping or retail center or sharing a common parking area may collaborate and submit a single cart containment plan.

        I.      Fees. Every owner subject to this chapter shall submit with its initial proposed plan and thereafter annually with its annual report a fee in the amount set forth by resolution of the city council, and as may be amended from time to time. The fee shall not exceed the city’s reasonable cost to administer and manage the activities mandated by this chapter, and shall not include the city’s cost of retrieving shopping carts, except as provided for in Business and Professions Code Section 22435.7.

        J.      Annual Report. Each year, on or before the anniversary of the director’s approval of the plan, each owner (or multiple businesses that have collaborated on a single approved plan) shall submit an annual report to the director:

        1.     Certifying compliance with the approved plan and each item specified in this section; and

        2.     Detailing compliance with each provision of its approved plan over the prior year; and

        3.     Summarizing cart retrieval statistics for the prior year.

        The director may, based upon review of the annual report, initiate modification or revocation proceedings.

        K.    Shopping Cart Inventory. The plan shall include a complete list of all shopping carts maintained on or in the premises.

        L.     Exemptions. The requirements of this section shall not apply to any retail establishment which provides a total of ten or less shopping carts for use by customers of such business. (Ord. 1731 § 1, 2012)

 

8.10.110 Incentives for containment plan compliance.
        A.    Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, any retail establishment operating in compliance with an approved plan shall be exempt from the payment of any fees otherwise due pursuant to Chapter 8.10 of this code for the retrieval of any shopping carts impounded by the city.

        B.     For purposes of subsection A, a retail establishment shall be deemed to be operating in compliance with the provisions of an approved plan if and only if:

        1.     A cart containment plan for such establishment has been approved by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; and

        2.     Such cart containment plan has not previously been revoked by the city; and

        3.     Such establishment is not then currently the subject of any proceeding involving a written order to show cause as to why the approved plan should not be revoked.

        C.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, any existing retail establishment which: (1) provides a total of more than ten shopping carts for use by customers of such business; and (2) submits and obtains the approval of a cart containment plan within the time specified in Section 8.10.120 of this chapter, shall be exempt from the payment of any permit or inspection fees otherwise required to implement such cart containment plan. (Ord. 1731 § 1, 2012)

 

8.10.120 Plan submission and approval.
        A.    New or Relocated Retail Establishments. Unless otherwise expressly exempt hereunder, each new retail establishment, and any existing retail establishment relocating to a different location within the city, shall submit a proposed plan complying with the requirements of Sections 8.10.100 and 8.10.120 of this chapter to the director, and obtain approval thereof by the city, prior to providing any shopping carts to customers of the retail establishment. Each proposed plan shall be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council. No proposed plan shall be accepted for filing and processing by the director unless accompanied by the processing fee established by the city council.

        B.     Existing Retail Establishments. Unless otherwise expressly exempt hereunder, each existing retail establishment shall submit a proposed cart containment plan complying with the requirements of Sections 8.10.100 and 8.10.120 of this chapter to the director within one hundred twenty calendar days following the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. No retail establishment existing on the date the ordinance codified in this chapter is effective shall provide or continue to provide shopping carts for the use of its customers after the one hundred fiftieth calendar day following the date of adoption of this chapter without an approved plan; provided, however, such date shall be extended for the period, if any, during which an appeal of the denial of a submitted cart containment plan is pending pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Each proposed cart containment plan shall be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council. No proposed cart containment plan shall be accepted for filing and processing by the director unless accompanied by the processing fee.

        C.     Plan Review and Approval. Upon the filing of any proposed cart containment plan (referred to herein as the proposed plan), and receipt of the required processing fee, the director shall review the proposed plan and either approve or deny the proposed plan within thirty calendar days following the receipt thereof. If the proposed plan complies with all of the applicable requirements of this chapter, the director shall approve the proposed plan, otherwise the proposed plan shall be denied. The decision of the director shall be made in writing and notice thereof shall be transmitted to the owner of the retail establishment by the United States Postal Service, first-class mail, postage prepaid, or by personal delivery or fax transmission. The notice of the director’s decision shall be deemed given to the owner on the date of personal delivery or on the date of fax transmission of the notice to the owner; notices given by the United States Postal Service, first-class mail, postage prepaid, shall be deemed given to the owner on the third business day following the date of deposit with the United States Postal Service. If the proposed plan is denied, the notice of decision given to the owner shall state the grounds upon which the proposed plan was denied. The director’s decision may be appealed by the owner in the time and manner provided for in Section 8.10.140.

        D.    Amendments by Owner. The owner of any retail establishment which has an approved plan may, at any time, submit a proposed amendment to the approved plan which amendment shall be processed in accordance with the procedure provided for a proposed plan as set forth in subsection C. Each proposed amendment shall be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council. No proposed amendment shall be accepted for filing and processing by the director unless accompanied by the processing fee. (Ord. 1731 § 1, 2012)

 

8.10.130 Revocation or amendment by city.
        A.    Grounds. An approved plan may be revoked by the city upon any of the following grounds:

        1.     The owner of any retail establishment is operating, or is permitting operation of, the retail establishment in violation of one or more of the provisions of its approved plan and has failed to correct the violation(s) for a period of at least fifteen calendar days following the date of receipt of written notice of such violation(s) from the city; or

        2.     The owner of any retail establishment with an approved plan is operating, or is permitting the operation of the retail establishment in violation of one or more of the requirements of this chapter and has failed to correct the violation(s) for a period of at least fifteen calendar days following the date of receipt of written notice of such violation(s) from the city; or

        3.     The approved plan is inadequate to reasonably prevent the removal of shopping carts from the premises of the retail establishment.

        B.     Order to Show Cause. If at any time following the approval of a cart containment plan, the director obtains information or evidence that any of the grounds set forth in subsection A may exist, the director shall issue a written order to show cause as to why the approved plan should not be revoked, and the director shall schedule a hearing thereon, which hearing shall not be less than fifteen calendar days nor more than thirty calendar days following the date the order to show cause is given to the owner of the retail establishment. The order shall state the grounds upon which it is proposed to revoke the approved plan and shall include the information and evidence, or a summary thereof, upon which such order was issued.

        C.     Notice of Hearing. Notice of the hearing on any order to show cause issued pursuant to this section shall be given in the time and manner provided in Section 8.10.120(C).

        D.    Conduct of Hearing. The hearing shall be conducted informally and the legal rules of evidence shall not apply. The owner and the city shall each have the opportunity to present evidence and witnesses. The parties may each be represented by legal counsel or other representatives of their choice. The city shall bear the burden of proof to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence that grounds exist to revoke the approved plan. The director, at his or her discretion, and as an alternative to revocation, may consider amendment of the approved plan if the grounds for the order to show cause are solely the inadequacy of the approved plan.

        E.     Decision of Director of Public Works. Within fifteen calendar days following conclusion of the hearing, the director shall render his or her decision in writing either dismissing the proceedings or revoking or ordering amendment of the approved plan. If the plan is revoked or ordered amended, the decision shall specify the findings of fact and the reasons for such action. If the approved plan is ordered amended, the decision shall also specify the inadequacies that must be addressed by the proposed amendment.

        F.     Notice of Decision. Notice of the decision of the director of public works shall be given in the time and manner specified in Section 8.10.120(C).

        G.    Appeal of Decision. The director’s decision shall be subject to appeal by the owner within the time and manner specified in Section 8.10.140. In the absence of a timely appeal, the director’s decision shall be final and conclusive.

        H.    Use of Shopping Carts Following Revocation Prohibited. No owner of any retail establishment which is subject to the requirements of this chapter shall provide or make available shopping carts for the use of customers following the date any decision revoking an approved plan becomes final unless and until a new cart containment plan is approved by the city. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an owner of a retail establishment shall not be eligible to submit a new cart containment plan to the city for processing for a minimum of thirty days following the date any decision revoking the prior approved plan for such retail establishment becomes final. Any proposed cart containment plan submitted to the city for such retail establishment during the thirty-day period shall be returned to the owner of the retail establishment as untimely. (Ord. 1731 § 1, 2012)

 

8.10.140 Appeals.
        A.    Filing of Appeal. Any owner aggrieved by any adverse decision of the director may appeal such decision to the city manager within fifteen calendar days following the date of giving of notice of such decision by filing with the city manager a written notice of appeal briefly stating the grounds for the appeal. The notice of decision shall be deemed given on the date as provided in Section 8.10.120(C) of this chapter. The appeal shall be deemed filed on the date the appeal is actually received in the office of the city manager accompanied by an appeal processing fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council. No appeal shall be accepted for filing and processing by the city manager unless accompanied by the appeal processing fee.

        B.     Decision by City Manager. The city manager shall render a decision on the appeal and adopt findings of fact in support of such decision within thirty calendar days following the filing of the appeal.

        C.     Notice of Decision. The notice of decision of the city manager shall be deemed given on the date of personal delivery or on the date of the fax transmission to the appellant; notices given by the United States Postal Service, first-class mail, postage prepaid, shall be deemed given to the appellant on the third business day following the date of deposit with the United States Postal Service.

        D.    Decision is Final. The decision of the city manager shall be final and conclusive on the date the decision is deemed given to the appellant as provided in Section 8.10.120(C). (Ord. 1731 § 1, 2012)

 

8.10.150 Unlawful acts.
        A.    It is unlawful for the owner of any retail establishment to provide or offer, or permit to be provided or offered, any shopping carts to customers of the retail establishment without an approved plan as required by Sections 8.10.100 and 8.10.120 of this chapter; provided, however, this prohibition shall not apply to any retail establishment, or the owner thereof, which provides a total of ten or less shopping carts for the use of customers of said retail establishment.

        B.     It is unlawful for the owner of any retail establishment to provide or offer, or permit to be provided or offered, to customers of the retail establishment any shopping cart which does not have a sign permanently affixed thereto containing all of the information specified in Section 22435.1 of the Business and Professions Code of the state of California.

        C.     It is unlawful for an owner and/or owner’s agent to cause or permit any shopping cart to be abandoned upon any sidewalk, street or other public place in the city or upon any private property other than the premises owned by the owner of such shopping cart. This subsection shall apply to all owners of business establishments or other commercial services within the city that provide more than ten shopping carts for customer use.

        D.    Penalty for Violation. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction, and punishable as such, notwithstanding the fact that at the discretion of the city, the violation of any section of this chapter may be filed as a misdemeanor. The complaint charging such violation shall specify whether the violation is a misdemeanor or an infraction. Each day a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a new and separate violation and shall constitute a public nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil proceedings by means of a restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction, or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances.

        E.     The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by the city manager or designee.

        F.     Every owner shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and every provision of the owner’s approved plan. Any owner who violates any provision of this chapter or any provision of the owner’s approved plan shall be subject to enforcement procedures for each violation through any lawful means available to the city, including without Chapters 1.08 and 1.20 of the La Habra Municipal Code.

        G.    Failure to Submit or Implement Plan by Owner. An owner who fails to submit a complete cart containment plan to the satisfaction of the director, or fails to implement approved plan measures or fails to comply with the approved plan measures will be subject to enforcement of these requirements through any lawful means available to the city, pursuant to La Habra Municipal Code Chapters 1.08 and 1.20. (Ord. 1731 § 1, 2012)

 

8.10.160 Retrieval notification.
        The city shall notify the owner of an abandoned shopping cart as identified on the signage information permanently affixed to the shopping cart. The city notification shall be documented and provided either by telephone or by written notice. The notification shall require that the identified shopping cart(s) be retrieved pursuant to the conditions for retrieval as set forth in the owner’s abandoned shopping cart retrieval plan. (Ord. 1731 § 1, 2012)

Chapter 8.12 UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS
8.12.010 Purpose and intent.
        This chapter is intended to promote public health, safety and welfare of the public and public safety personnel through appropriate regulation pursuant to the city’s police powers and its authority to issue regulations related to zoning, land use, privacy, trespass, and law enforcement operations. All regulation herein is intended to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public and specific areas of local municipal concern where a drone incident would cause greater harm and risk of injury. It is not intended to restrict persons operating unmanned aircraft systems in compliance with all applicable FAA rules and any applicable laws, and outside of prohibited areas. This chapter is not intended to preempt FAA rules, but to operate in conjunction with those rules to promote public safety and privacy while recognizing the limitations in the FAA’s enforcement capabilities. (Ord. 1772 § 2, 2016)

 

8.12.020 Definitions.
        A.    “Drone” or “drones” shall mean all unmanned aircraft or unmanned aircraft systems that can fly under the control of a remote pilot or by a global positioning system (GPS) guided autopilot mechanism. This includes drone, as stated in Section 336 of Public Law 112-95, known as the FAA Modernization and Reform Act of 2012. This includes the controller mechanism and every other system required for operation of the drone.

        B.     “Emergency response” shall mean any effort by first responders to save lives, reduce property damage, and/or reduce human suffering. Examples include, but are not limited to, fire-fighting activities, search and rescue activities, police and law enforcement activities, restoration of public utilities, and similar efforts.

        C.     “Special event” or “special events” shall mean any event, assembly, or gathering held in a public park or open-air facility, private property, or commercial/industrial facility that is open to the public and intended to attract people. This includes, but is not limited to, sporting events, concerts, festivals, farmer’s markets, and other similar events.

        D.    “Person” means any individual and includes a corporation, partnership, company, association, organization or league and any other entity which owns, leases, or controls property. The term “person” includes “person responsible for the event, assembly or gathering.”

        E.     “Person responsible for the special event” means the person who owns or who is in charge of the premises of the private property where the special event takes place, or if the special event occurs on public property, the person who organized the event, assembly or gathering. If the person responsible for the event, assembly or gathering is a minor, then the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) of that minor will be considered the person responsible for purposes of this chapter.

        F.     “FAA” shall mean the United States Federal Aviation Administration. (Ord. 1772 § 2, 2016)

 

8.12.030 Prohibition on deploying, launching, or flying drones.
        A.    No person shall deploy, launch, fly, or otherwise operate a drone:

        1.     Within four hundred feet of any emergency response or within such greater distance from the emergency response as is necessary to ensure health, safety, and welfare of the public and as is verbally directed by the public safety responders at the scene of the emergency response;

        2.     Within four hundred feet of any special event unless express permission is acquired from the person responsible for the special event;

        3.     In a manner that is prohibited by any applicable federal statute or regulation governing aeronautics;

        4.     While under the influence of any alcohol or drug;

        5.     Over any open air assembly unit, school, school yard, hospital, place of worship, police station, fire station, public building, or public facility, without the property owner’s consent, and subject to any restrictions that the property owner may place on such operation;

        6.     Within five hundred feet of any water intake facility or any electric generating facility, substation or control center, or within one hundred feet of any electric transmission facility, or within twenty-five feet of any electric distribution facility or of any overhead wire, cable, conveyor or similar equipment for the transmission of sounds or signal, or of heat, light or power, or data, upon or along any public way within the city, without the facility or equipment owner’s consent, and subject to any restrictions that the facility or equipment owner may place on such operation;

        7.     Within any airspace or near any event temporarily designated by the city manager, or designee, as a no fly zone for the protection of health, safety, and welfare.

        B.     The city manager, or designee, is herein authorized to temporarily designate any area within the city as a no-fly zone which, within his or her sole discretion, requires such designation for the health, safety, and welfare of the public and consistent with the city’s authority over land use and zoning. (Ord. 1772 § 2, 2016)

 

8.12.040 Exemptions.
        This chapter shall not prohibit the use of drones by the city or public safety agency for lawful purposes and in a manner consistent with FAA regulations, lawful public safety uses, and this chapter. (Ord. 1772 § 2, 2016)

 

8.12.050 Enforcement.
        In addition to enforcement pursuant to Chapters 1.08 and 1.20 of the municipal code, drones flown in violation of this chapter shall be subject to immediate confiscation, but subject to a post-seizure hearing conducted in accordance with Section 1.20.080. (Ord. 1772 § 2, 2016)

Chapter 8.16 (RESERVED)

Chapter 8.18 (RESERVED)

Chapter 8.20 ABATEMENT OF WEEDS, RUBBLE, REFUSE, DIRT AND OTHER EARTH AND MATERIAL
8.20.010 Authority.
        “Director” means director of public works or fire chief, his assistants and deputies, or other public officer designated by the city council to perform the duties imposed by this article upon the director. (Ord. 1574 § 2, 2000; Ord. 1573 § 2, 2000)

 

8.20.020 Purpose.
        The purpose of the provisions of this chapter is to provide an alternative method for the removal of noxious weeds, rubble, refuse, dirt and other earth and materials from private properties located within the city. (Ord. 1574 § 2, 2000; Ord. 1573 § 2, 2000)

 

8.20.030 Duty of property owner.
        The owner of each lot in the city shall be responsible for the maintenance of all public rights-of-way which abut such lot, other than portions of public streets or alleys which are utilized for vehicular parking or traffic. The lot owner’s obligation shall be to maintain such rights-of-way so that the same do not become a public nuisance; such maintenance duty shall include, but not be limited to, the obligation to remove therefrom weeds, rubble, refuse, dirt and other earth and materials which may constitute a fire hazard, or a refuge for rats or other vermin, or which may produce pollen which is or may be injurious to the health, safety or welfare of person, or which is otherwise dangerous or injurious to adjacent real properties. Reference California Government Code 39560(b)(c)(d), 39561 and 39561.5. (Ord. 1574 § 2, 2000; Ord. 1573 § 2, 2000)

 

8.20.040 Unsafe conditions.
        No person, whether the same be the owner, agent or person in control of any inhabited or uninhabited lot, piece or parcel of land within the city, shall maintain such premises or allow the same to be maintained in a condition in which weeds, rubble, refuse, dirt and other earth and materials exist on such premises, which constitute a fire hazard or which may provide a refuge for rats or other vermin, or may produce pollen which is injurious to neighboring property or the health or welfare of residents of the vicinity. The existence of any condition prohibited by this section is declared to be a public nuisance. Reference California Government Code 39561.5. (Ord. 1574 § 2, 2000; Ord. 1573 § 2, 2000)

 

8.20.050 Notice to remove.
        Whenever the director shall find that a condition prohibited by Section 8.20.040 exists upon any lot, piece or parcel of land, or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or right-of-way abutting such lot, piece or parcel of land, he shall give or cause to be given, in the manner provided in Section 8.20.060, a notice to remove such weeds, rubble, refuse, dirt or other earth and materials. (Ord. 1574 § 2, 2000; Ord. 1573 § 2, 2000)

 

8.20.060 Form and manner of notice.
        Notice shall be given by posting a sign in a conspicuous place upon or in front of the lot, piece or parcel of land on which, or upon the street, alley, sidewalk, or right-of-way adjacent to which, such weeds, rubble, refuse, dirt or other earth and material may be. The notice shall be headed “Notice to Clean Premises” in letters not less than one inch in height and, in legible characters, shall direct the removal of weeds, rubble, refuse, dirt or other earth and materials as the case may be, and refer to this chapter for further particulars. The notice shall be in substantially the following form:

 

Notice to Clean Premises

 

        Notice hereby is given that under the provisions of Chapter 8.20 of the La Habra Municipal Code, noxious and dangerous weeds and/or rubble, refuse, dirt and other earth and materials are existing upon or in front of the following described property: (give the address or, if posting a whole street, the name of the street) and that they constitute a public nuisance which must be abated. If removal of the weeds, rubble, refuse, dirt and other earth and materials is not made within ten (10) days from the date of this notice, the same shall be removed by the City, and the cost of the removal assessed upon the land from which, or in front of which, the weeds, rubble, refuse, dirt and other earth and materials are removed and the assessed cost will constitute a lien upon such land until paid. All persons having any objection to the proposed required removal may appeal to the City Council, in writing, within ten (10) days from the date of this notice.

 

  Dated this _____ day of __________

  Director of Public Works

  City of La Habra

 

        As an alternative to the posting of notice, the notice required herein may be given by personal service to the owner, agent or person in control of such lot, piece or parcel of land, or by mailing the notice by depositing it in the United States Mail at La Habra, California, addressed to the owner of such lot, piece or parcel of land, at the address shown on the last equalized assessment roll. The notice shall bear the date of posting, personal service, or mailing. Reference California Government Code 39562.1 and 39562.2. (Ord. 1574 § 2, 2000; Ord. 1573 § 2, 2000)

 

8.20.070 Appeal.
        Within ten days from the date of the notice, the owner or any other person interested in the property, land or lots affected by such notice may appeal to the city council from the determination of the director. The appeal shall be filed in writing with the city clerk and shall be presented by the city clerk to the city council at the next regular meeting of the city council following the date of the filing. The city council, at such meeting or at such meeting to which the matter may be continued by the council, shall hear and pass upon the appeal, and the decision of the council thereon shall be final and conclusive. Written notice of the council’s determination shall be mailed to the person appealing at the address shown on the appeal. (Ord. 1574 § 2, 2000; Ord. 1573 § 2, 2000)

 

8.20.080 Abatement by city.
        If within ten days from the date of notice, or if an appeal has been made to the city council, within ten days from the date of the determination of the appeal, unless the appeal is sustained and the council determines that no such removal shall be required, the weeds, rubble, refuse, dirt or other earth and material have not been removed from the premises in question or from the street, alley, sidewalk or right-of-way abutting such premises as directed by the notice or by the city council on appeal, the director shall cause the same to be removed and may enter upon private property for the purpose of so doing.

        If, upon appeal, the requirements of the original notice have been modified by the city council, the director, in causing such weeds, rubble, refuse, dirt or other earth and material to be removed, shall be governed by the determination of the city council. (Ord. 1574 § 2, 2000; Ord. 1573 § 2, 2000)

 

8.20.090 Assessment—Lien.
        The director shall keep or cause to be kept at his office a record showing the legal description, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the County of Orange, of each piece of property or lot, or the street, alley, sidewalk or right-of-way abutting such property, from which weeds, rubble, refuse, dirt or other earth and material have been removed at city expense under the provisions of this chapter. The record shall show any and all expenses incurred by the city in the removal of the weeds, rubble, refuse, dirt or other earth and material as such expense relates to each separate property ownership. Each entry in the record shall be made upon the completion of work done on each piece of property or lot or upon the street, alley, parkway or sidewalk abutting thereon. After such entry has been made in the record, the same shall constitute an assessment against the parcel of land, and thereafter the assessment shall be confirmed by motion of the city council. The assessment, after being made and confirmed, shall become a lien upon the parcel. (Ord. 1574 § 2, 2000; Ord. 1573 § 2, 2000)

 

8.20.100 Appeal from assessment.
        The director shall send notice, at least fourteen days prior to hearing, to all owners of property subject to an assessment under the provisions of this chapter that they may appeal such assessment to the city council. The notice shall include the amount and nature of the assessment, the date, time and location of the appellate hearing, and that such assessment, upon affirmation, shall be recorded as a lien in the county recorder’s office. An aggrieved party who wishes to appeal must file an appeal in writing with the city clerk no less than five working days before the date of the appellate hearing. At the appellate hearing the city council shall hear and pass upon each appeal, and take action to approve the assessment report, and the determination by the council shall be final. If the determination of the director is modified by the city council or any assessment changed or corrected, the director shall cause the correction to be made upon the record showing the assessment. (Ord. 1574 § 2, 2000; Ord. 1573 § 2, 2000)

 

8.20.110 Cost assessment—Entry on the tax roll.
        At the expiration of the time for appeal, or upon the determination by the city council of all appeals so filed, and in compliance with the requirements of any determination so made, the director of public works shall deliver to the city clerk the assessment report approved by the city council on record in which the director has shown each assessment for the preceding fiscal year. The report shall show the property affected and the amount charged against such property. The city clerk shall deliver to the county assessor the amount of each such charge to be placed upon the assessment roll against the respective lots, and thereafter the charges shall be of the same character and effect, subject to the same penalties, and shall be collected in the same manner and at the same time as city taxes. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any piece of property or land or lot if the charge against it has been paid prior to the delivery to the city clerk of the report. In that event, an entry shall be made in the record book by the director showing that the charge had been paid. (Ord. 1574 § 2, 2000; Ord. 1573 § 2, 2000)

 

8.20.120 Proof of notice.
        Proof of the posting, serving in person or mailing of any notice, order or determination provided for in this chapter shall be affidavit of the person performing the duty, and affidavit shall specify the time and when the duty was performed. It shall be the duty of the director to keep such affidavits among the official records at his office. (Ord. 1574 § 2, 2000; Ord. 1573 § 2, 2000)

 

8.20.130 Refund.
        Any assessment or any portion of an assessment levied pursuant to the provisions of this chapter which, either before or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, has been paid more than once, erroneously or illegally collected, paid in excess of the amount chargeable, or was not chargeable to the person or the property paying the same under the provisions of this chapter, by reason of a clerical error of the employees or officials of the city, may be refunded by order of the city council in the same manner, to the same extent and under the same conditions as, at or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, are provided by the city for refund of payments of general taxes, at any time after the abstract of charges taken from the record book of the director of public works has been delivered to the county assessor and entered upon the assessment books. The owner of any property assessed who may claim that the assessment is void in whole or in part may pay the same under protest. The protest shall be in writing, shall be received by the city clerk on or before March 1st after the tax becomes due and payable, and shall specify whether the whole or any part of the assessment is void and the grounds upon which such claim is founded. An owner, after making payment under protest, may recover the same in the manner and under the conditions provided in Section 39585 of the Government Code of the State of California. (Ord. 1574 § 2, 2000; Ord. 1573 § 2, 2000)

Chapter 8.24 FOOD HANDLING BUSINESSES
8.24.010 Definitions.
        The following terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings indicated below; provided, however, said definitions shall also include any amendments or changes made to referenced sections of the California Health and Safety Code after January 1, 1991:

        “Certified farmers market” shall be as defined in Section 113745 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        “Commissary” shall be as defined in Section 113750 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        “Food establishment” shall be as defined in Section 113780 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        “Food facility” shall be as defined in Section 113785 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        “Food processing establishment” shall be as defined in Section 111955 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        “Health department” or “department” means the Orange County health care agency.

        “Health officer” means the county health officer or his or her deputy.

        “Inspector” means an environmental health specialist, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 106615, employed by the health department, or the health officer or any deputy health officer authorized to inspect premises or equipment for the enforcement of this chapter.

        “Mobile food preparation unit” shall be as defined in Section 113815 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        “Open-air barbecue facility” shall be as defined in Section 113830 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        “Person” shall be as defined in Section 113840 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        “Premises” means and includes land, buildings, vehicles and ships and other vessels wherein food is handled, stored, distributed, prepared, processed, served or sold, and also equipment installed or used in food establishments or food facilities or on such premises.

        “Produce stand” shall be as defined in Section 113855 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        “Restricted food service transient occupancy establishment” shall be as defined in Section 113870 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        “Satellite food distribution facility” shall be as defined in Section 113880 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        “Temporary food facility” shall be as defined in Section 113895 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        “Vehicle” shall be as defined in Section 113900 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        “Vending machine” shall be as defined in Section 113903 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        “Vending machine business” means the business of selling food or beverages by means of vending machines, regardless of the number of locations at which the vending machines are located. (Ord. 1498 § 1, 1996)

 

8.24.020 Permit required—Conditions and terms.
        A.    It is unlawful for any person to operate any food facility, vending machine business, food processing establishment, or any other food handling business governed by this chapter without first applying for and receiving a food vending permit issued by the health department under the provisions of this chapter.

        B.     Every applicant for a food vending permit shall file with the health department a written application which shall state the name and address of the applicant, the character and location of the activity for which a permit is required under this chapter and such other information as the health department may require. Applicants for a permit to operate a mobile food preparation unit shall, in addition, provide a list of three service stops which shall include the address of exact location and time of each stop.

        C.     A permit may be issued when investigation has determined that the proposed facility and its method of operation will conform to all applicable laws and regulations. A permit, once issued, is nontransferable. A permit shall be valid only for the person, location, type of food sales or distribution activity approved and, unless suspended or revoked, for the time period indicated.

        D.    Any permit may be suspended or revoked for a violation of any applicable provisions of law or regulation. Any food facility, vending machine business, food processing establishment, or any other food handling business governed by this chapter, for which the permit has been suspended or revoked shall close and remain closed until the permit has been reinstated or until a new permit has been issued.

        E.     Permits may be granted at any time during the year. A permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises or vehicle for which it is issued. (Ord. 1498 § 1, 1996)

 

8.24.030 Construction, conversion and alteration.
        A person proposing to build or remodel a food facility, vending machine business, food processing establishment, or any other food handling business governed by this chapter, shall submit three copies of the complete plans and specifications to the department for review and approval pursuant to the applicable requirements of the California Health and Safety Code. The health officer may thereafter issue a certificate stating what modifications, if any, are required for compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. (Ord. 1498 § 1, 1996)

 

8.24.040 Suspension of permits.
        A permit issued under this chapter or its predecessor may be suspended or revoked under the procedure set forth in this chapter for any of the following reasons:

        A.    Violation of state law;

        B.     Violation of this chapter;

        C.     Violation of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter; or

        D.    Upon recommendation by the health officer. (Ord. 1498 § 1, 1996)

 

8.24.050 Notice of violation.
        When any laws, this chapter, or rules and regulations have been violated, an inspector may serve written notice thereof entitled “Notice of Violation,” specifying:

        A.    The acts or omissions with which the permittee is charged;

        B.     The provision or provisions violated thereby;

        C.     The corrective steps required;

        D.    The date by which all such corrections must be completed, allowing a reasonable period therefor;

        E.     That the permittee has a right to a hearing upon written request or that a mandatory hearing has been scheduled;

        F.     That if no hearing is requested or the permittee fails to appear at the scheduled hearing and if the health department does not receive notice that all such corrections have been made before nine a.m. of the date specified under subsection D of this section, the permit will be subject to suspension or revocation from that time until all violations have been corrected. (Ord. 1498 § 1, 1996)

 

8.24.060 Hearing.
        A.    The hearing shall be held by the health officer or his or her duly authorized representative who is a qualified environmental health specialist as defined in Section 106615 of the Health and Safety Code and registered as provided in Section 106710 thereof, but shall not be the inspector who reported the violations or who inspected any corrective measure taken.

        1.     The permit holder shall have the right to a hearing, if requested, on all violations listed in the notice. A written request for a hearing shall be made by the permittee within fifteen calendar days after receipt of the notice. A failure to request a hearing within fifteen calendar days after receipt of the notice shall be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing. When circumstances warrant, the hearing officer may order a hearing at any reasonable time within this fifteen-day period to expedite the permit suspension or revocation process.

        2.     The hearing shall be held within fifteen calendar days of the receipt of a request for a hearing. Upon written request of the permittee, the hearing officer may postpone any hearing date, if circumstances warrant such action.

        3.     At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written notice of decision to the permittee within five working days following the hearing. In the event of a suspension or revocation, the notice shall specify the acts or omissions with which the permittee is charged, and shall state the terms of the suspension, or that the permit has been revoked.

        B.     The health officer may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, modify, suspend or revoke a permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of the applicable laws, rules and regulations. (Ord. 1498 § 1, 1996)

 

8.24.070 Mobile food preparation units generally.
        In addition to all other applicable provisions of the Health and Safety Code and of this chapter, mobile food preparation units shall comply with the following safety requirements:

        A.    Compressors, auxiliary engines, generators, batteries, battery chargers, gas-fueled water heaters, and similar equipment shall be installed so as to be accessible only from the outside of the unit.

        B.     All equipment installed in any part of the unit shall be secured so as to prevent movement during transit and to prevent detachment in the event of a collision or overturn.

        C.     All equipment installed within the interior of the unit, including the interiors of cabinets or compartments, shall be constructed so as to be free of sharp or jagged edges.

        D.    All utensils shall be stored so as to prevent their being hurled about in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn. A safety knife holder shall be provided to avoid loose storage of knives in cabinets, boxes or slots along counter aisles. Knife holders shall be designed to be easily cleaned and be manufactured of materials approved by the health officer.

        E.     Ceiling light fixtures shall be recessed or flush-mounted and sealed and shall be equipped with safety covers approved by the health officer. The minimum clearance from the floor to the light fixture shall be at least one hundred eighty-eight centimeters (seventy-six inches) or the fixture shall be installed out of the traffic aisle or work area.

        F.     High voltage (110-120 v) electrical wiring shall be properly installed in electrical conduit with all splices or connections being made within junction, outlet or switch as to prevent the use of extension cords exceeding one hundred eight-three centimeters (six feet). Outside electrical connection receptacles shall be of weatherproof design with cover.

        G.    Attached, firmly anchored seats with backrests, equipped with seat belts, shall be provided for all occupants. If a jump seat in the aisle way is utilized, it shall fold in a manner that will clear the aisle way when not in use and be held with a self-latching mechanism. Seats and backrests shall be at least thirty-five and five-tenths centimeters by thirty-five and five-tenths centimeters (fourteen inches by fourteen inches) in size. All occupants shall be seated, shall wear seat belts and shall not cook or prepare food while the unit is in motion. Signs setting forth the latter three requirements shall be posted in both English and Spanish.

        H.    A first-aid kit approved by the health officer shall be provided and located in a convenient area in an enclosed case.

        I.      All pressure cylinders shall be securely fastened to a rigid structure of the unit. All liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) equipment shall be installed as follows:

        1.     The LP gas tanks and relief valves shall be ASME-approved for intended use.

        2.     Tanks shall be securely fastened and located where they will normally not be subject to damage. They must be in a body compartment or underneath the body. The tank or fittings must not protrude beyond the body.

        3.     Tanks and regulators shall be separated from any open flame by a vapor tight partition.

        4.     When tanks are installed in a body compartment, the partitions shall be sealed off from the rest of the body with no openings to the interior except for the tubing. The following additional requirements shall be met:

        a.     All tank valves and fittings shall be readily accessible from outside the unit.

        b.     The tank safety relief valve shall be vented to the outside and directed downward.

        c.     The filling shall be done through an outside door to the compartment.

        d.     The compartment shall be vented to the exterior of the unit so as to prevent accumulation of gas.

        5.     Tubing that passes through partitions shall be protected by grommets made of rubber or other approved materials.

        6.     Tubing exposed to friction shall be protected against chafing.

        7.     Expansion and contraction bends shall be made in the tubing between the tank and the appliance.

        8.     ASME-approved LP gas tubing or standard weight pipe shall be used throughout.

        9.     Protective “thread” caps shall be installed on fill-line check valves.

        10.   Every appliance fueled by LP gas shall be equipped with a pilot light attachment and provided with an ASME-approved device which will automatically shut off all gas to the appliance if the pilot light should be extinguished.

        J.      A minimum 5 B.C.-rated portable fire extinguisher (UL or State Fire Marshal approved design) shall be installed in plain sight and within easy reach, immediately inside the front driver’s door. The extinguisher shall be replaced or recharged after each use. (Ord. 1498 § 1, 1996)

 

8.24.080 Additional requirements for mobile food preparation units operating in multiple locations in any day.
        In addition to the requirements specified in Section 8.24.070, Mobile food preparation units generally, mobile food preparation units which operate at more than one location in any calendar day, shall comply with the following additional requirements:

        A.    Coffee urns shall be installed in a compartment that will prevent excessive spillage of coffee in the interior of the unit in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn, or, as an alternative to this requirement, coffee urns shall be equipped with positive closing lids as well as perforated metal protective sleeves on the glass liquid level sight gauges.

        B.     Deep fat fryers are prohibited, unless equipped with positive closing lids to contain the fat and to prevent splashing or excessive spillage in transit or in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn of the unit. Such lids shall be designed and constructed so as to prevent pressure buildup which could result in an explosion. All lids shall be kept positively closed while the unit is in motion. Signs setting forth the latter requirements shall be posted in both English and Spanish.

        C.     Water bath or steam food insert tables shall be provided with baffles to prevent surging in transit. All such tables, as well as dry heat units, their insert food containers and similar equipment that contains hot liquids or hot foods shall have positive closing lids to contain all such liquids or foods and to prevent splashing or spillage in transit or in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn of the unit. Such lids shall be designed and constructed so as to prevent pressure buildup which could result in an explosion. All lids shall be positively closed while the unit is in motion. Signs setting forth the latter requirement shall be posted in both English and Spanish.

        D.    An alternate means of exit in the side opposite the main exit door, or the roof, or the rear of the unit, with unobstructed passage of sixty-one centimeters by ninety-two centimeters (twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches) minimum to the outside, shall be provided. The interior latching mechanism shall be operable by hand without special tools or key. The exit shall be labeled “Safety Exit” in contrasting colors with at least two and fifty-four one-hundredths centimeters (one inch) high letters. (Ord. 1498 § 1, 1996)

 

8.24.090 Suspension for refusal of entry.
        It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to deny or hinder entry by any inspector for the purpose of inspecting any of the premises described in Section 8.24.020, Permit required—Conditions and terms, or any portion thereof; and in such event the inspector may forthwith suspend the food vending permit issued for the premises. (Ord. 1498 § 1, 1996)

 

8.24.100 Summary suspension.
        A.    If any immediate danger to the public health or safety is found, unless the danger is immediately corrected, an inspector may temporarily suspend the permit and order the premises immediately closed. “Immediate danger to the public health and safety” means any condition, based upon inspection findings or other evidence, that can cause food infection, food intoxication, disease transmission or hazardous condition, including but not limited to unsafe food temperature, sewage contamination, nonpotable water supply, or an employee who is a carrier of a communicable disease.

        B.     Whenever a permit is suspended as the result of an immediate danger to the public health or safety, the inspector shall issue to the permittee a notice setting forth the acts or omissions with which the permittee is charged, specifying the pertinent code section, and informing the permittee of the right to a hearing.

        C.     At any time within fifteen calendar days after service of a notice pursuant to subsection B of this section, the permittee may request in writing a hearing before a hearing officer to show cause why the permit suspension is not warranted. The hearing shall be held within fifteen calendar days of the receipt of a request for a hearing. A failure to request a hearing within fifteen calendar days shall be deemed a waiver of the right to such hearing. (Ord. 1498 § 1, 1996)

 

8.24.110 Supervision of closing down premises.
        When any permit is first suspended hereunder, or when any premises governed hereby shall have been closed for business and left in an unsanitary condition, the health department shall have the power to enter to ensure that the premises are closed down in a manner which will not endanger the public health. If the permittee or his employee in charge cannot be found, or is unwilling or unable to remedy the condition of the premises, the owner of the premises shall be notified of the unsanitary conditions and shall be required to take such remedial action as may be necessary to obviate such condition. (Ord. 1498 § 1, 1996)

 

8.24.120 Rules and regulations.
        The health officer may adopt and enforce rules and regulations necessary to administer this chapter including, but not limited to, regulations pertaining to:

        A.    Forms for applications, permits and notices;

        B.     Forms and procedures for hearings upon the granting, denying, suspending, revoking or reinstating of permits;

        C.     Inspection of premises and reporting thereon.

(Ord. 1498 § 1, 1996)

 

8.24.130 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1498 § 1, 1996)

 

8.24.140 Preemption.
        This chapter shall not apply to any matter to which it concerns to the extent that the regulation of such matter is preempted by state law. (Ord. 1498 § 1, 1996)

 

8.24.150 Health services fee.
        The following terms used in this section shall have the meanings indicated below; provided, however, said definitions shall also include any amendments or changes made to referenced sections of the

 

 

California Health and Safety Code after January 1, 1991.

        A.    Definitions. The following terms used in this section shall have the meaning indicated below:

        “Health department” or “department” means the Orange County health care agency.

        “Health officer” means the county health officer or his or her duly authorized representative.

        “Person” means an individual, partnership, corporation or other legal entity.

        “Receipt” means a county public health services fee receipt.

        B.     Purpose and Authority. The purpose of this section is to establish fees sufficient to meet the reasonable expenses of the health officer in enforcing state statutes, orders, quarantines and rules and regulations of state offices and departments relating to public health, which expenses are found not to be met by the fees prescribed by the state. The authority for this section is contained in Section 101325 of the Health and Safety Code.

        C.     Area of Application. This section shall be enforceable within the territory in which the health officer enforces any state statute, order, quarantine or rule or regulation of any state office or department relating to public health, within the city.

        D.    Violation. It is unlawful for any person to conduct any activity enumerated in this chapter without a valid receipt.

        E.     Separate Activities. If a person shall conduct more than one of the activities for which a receipt is required, he must obtain a separate receipt for each activity, except as otherwise provided herein.

        F.     Applications. Applications for a receipt shall be filed with the health department on a form to be provided by that department. The applications shall be accompanied by payment of the required fee. An applicant for or recipient of a receipt shall provide the health officer with any information requested by him or her.

        G.    Rules and Regulations. The health officer shall administer this chapter and may issue regulations and prepare applications and identification forms pertaining thereto.

        H.    Fees. The county of Orange may, by annual board resolution, adopt health service fees to be paid by the proprietor or operator of the food facility. Such fees are to be paid directly to the county health officer and retained by the county as reimbursement for said services related to this chapter. (Ord. 1498 § 1, 1996)

Chapter 8.26 REGULATION OF SIDEWALK VENDORS
8.26.010 Purpose.
        A.    The purpose of this chapter is to establish a permitting and regulatory program for sidewalk vendors that complies with Senate Bill 946 (Chapter 459, Statutes 2018).

        B.     The city council hereby finds that:

        1.     Prohibiting sidewalk vending in streets and medians is necessary to protect the health and safety of vendors, because they are at risk of being struck by vehicles and/or causing vehicular accidents if they vend in streets or medians.

        2.     Limiting sidewalk vendors’ hours of operation within residential neighborhoods to daylight hours consistent with a residential atmosphere is necessary to protect the safety of sidewalk vendors and residents who would be more vulnerable to criminal activities during evening hours, and also to promote the welfare of the residents by prohibiting commercial activities and associated noise and traffic during hours when residents should be able to enjoy peace and quiet. Further, preventing stationary sidewalk vendors in residential neighborhoods and limiting the amount of time a roaming sidewalk vendor may stay in one location within a residential neighbor is necessary for the welfare of the residents of the city, because allowing sidewalk vendors to operate at a fixed location in residential neighborhoods may subject residents to increased noise and traffic, which may be appropriate for commercial areas, but will interfere with the peace and quiet that residential occupants should enjoy while in their homes.

        3.     Limiting sidewalk vendors’ hours of operation in commercial areas to daylight hours or to the same hours as other open businesses in the vicinity where the sidewalk vendor operates in the evening hours is necessary to protect the vendors’ health and safety, as they are more vulnerable to crime during nighttime hours, especially if operating where no other businesses are open.

        4.     Prohibiting soliciting on streets adjacent to schools during hours when school children are present is necessary to protect the health and safety of the school children, because vendors operating at close proximity to schools may attract unsupervised children to run into traffic in order to reach the vendor and be injured or killed in the process. Such activity would also pose a hazard to motorists who may stop suddenly or swerve to avoid hitting children, resulting in injury to those motorists.

        5.     Preventing sidewalk vendors from physical contact without permission from persistently soliciting a person after the person rejects the offer, and from threating injury or damage to a person while vending or soliciting are necessary to protect the safety and health of persons who may feel threatened or in physical danger if these activities occur.

        6.     Preventing sidewalk vendors from intentionally obstructing the free movement of people on any street, sidewalk, or other place open to the public is necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of those who may be seeking emergency services or who are otherwise uninterested in the goods or services offered and desire to pass through the public area unimpeded.

        7.     Preventing sidewalk vendors from using sound amplifying devices is necessary to protect the welfare of residents and visitors to the city by preventing excessive noise from disturbing the peace and quiet of residential areas or from an accumulation of excessive noise in commercial and other areas. Further, sound amplifying devices may cause traffic hazards by distracting drivers resulting in automobile accidents and harm to pedestrians, so prohibiting their use is necessary for the health and safety of motorists and pedestrians.

        8.     Preventing sidewalk vendors from operating within fifty feet of a marked or unmarked crosswalk, bus stop or bus shelter or within a sidewalk less than eight feet in width, is necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of a disabled person in maintaining Americans with Disabilities Act, as well as the city’s senior residents and visitors, with paths of access in areas commonly utilized by pedestrians.

        9.     Preventing sidewalk vendors from operating within eighteen inches from the edge of the curb face or within ten feet of a driveway, is necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the vendor, customer, and/or motorists, as it reduces exposure to pedestrian vs. vehicle contact.

        10.   Preventing sidewalk vendors from operating where placement impedes pedestrian access to or the use of an abutting property, including, but not limited to, residences and places of business, is necessary to protect the welfare of residents of the city by maintaining property values and use of said buildings.

        11.   Requiring sidewalk vendors to obtain insurance is necessary to protect the health and safety of the public and employees of sidewalk vendors, because insurance would cover medical expenses and other liabilities from injuries or damages resulting from sidewalk vendors’ activities that may not otherwise be covered. Further, compelling sidewalk vendors to provide commercial general liability is necessary to protect the welfare of the city’s elected or appointed officials, officers and employees as additionally insureds with respect to liability arising out of the use of the city premises.

        12.   Requiring sidewalk vendors to indemnify the city against claims arising from their activities helps reduce exposure to the city for personal injury or property damage claims and litigation that may be caused in whole or in part by the activities of sidewalk vending in the public right-of-way. (Ord. 1811 § 3, 2019)

 

8.26.020 Definitions.
        As used in this chapter, the following terms and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this part, unless the context in which they are used clearly requires otherwise. If a term or phrase is not defined in this part, or elsewhere in this code, the most common dictionary definition is presumed to be correct.

        “Alcohol” and “alcoholic beverage” has the same meaning as set forth in California Business and Professions Code Section 23004 or any successor section.

        “Americans with Disabilities Act” or “ADA” means the federal legislation passed in 1990 that prohibits discrimination against people with disabilities. In the context of this chapter, ADA refers to required clearance distances that must be maintained for safe and unhindered passage of all persons on public sidewalks or other public spaces.

        “Appellant” means someone who appeals for a legal or official decision to be changed.

        “Cannabis” has the same meaning as set forth in California Business and Professions Code Section 26001 or any successor section.

        “Certified famers’ market” means a location operated in accordance with Chapter 10.5 of Division 17 of the Food and Agricultural Code and any regulations adopted pursuant to that chapter.

        “Curb face” means the vertical or sloping surface on the roadway side of the curb.

        “Director” means the director of community and economic development for the city of La Habra.

        “Emergency vehicle access” means the roadway path or other surface that provides police, fire or public safety vehicular access from the dispatched point of origin to a facility, building, parcel, park or portion thereof. Emergency vehicle access includes, but is not limited to, fire lanes, public and private streets, parking lot aisles, access roadways, and walkways.

        “Food” has the same meaning as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 113781, or any successor section.

        “Hearing officer” means an impartial individual designated by the city manager to determine appeals pursuant to and in accordance with La Habra Municipal Code Chapter 1.20.

        “Heating element” means any device used to create heat for food preparation.

        “Merchandise” means any item(s) that can be sold and immediately obtained from a sidewalk vendor which is not considered food. Items for rent shall not be considered merchandise.

        “Open burning” has the same meaning as set forth in the California Fire Code (California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 9) or any successor section.

        “Open flame” is used in conjunction with “heating element” and means an open or exposed flame that would allow the ignition of combustible material or injury to a person.

        “Park” means any area dedicated or established as a public park, including, without limitation, active and passive parks.

        “Pathway” means a paved path or an unpaved walkway for pedestrian travel, other than a sidewalk.

        “Person” means and includes all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, business or common law trusts, societies, and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the city.

 

        “Public property” means all property owned or controlled by the city, including, but not limited to, alleys, parks, parkways, pathways, streets, parking lots, sidewalks, and walking trails.

        “Residential” means any area zoned exclusively as residential in Title 18 of this code, including, without limitation, R-1a, R-1b, R-1c, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, R-7 and MHP zoning districts and residential specific plan areas.

        “Roaming sidewalk vendor” means a sidewalk vendor who moves from place to place and stops only to complete a transaction.

        “Sidewalk” means that portion of a highway, other than the roadway, set apart by curbs, barriers, markings or other delineation for pedestrian travel.

        “Sidewalk vending receptacle” or “receptacle” means a pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or non-motorized conveyance used for sidewalk vending activities.

        “Sidewalk vendor” or “vendor” means a person who sells food or merchandise from a pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other non-motorized conveyance, or from one’s person, upon a public sidewalk or other pedestrian path.

        “Sidewalk vendor activities” or “sidewalk vending activity” means actions that qualify a person as a sidewalk vendor or actions done in anticipation of becoming a sidewalk vendor, such as, but not limited to, installation, placement, or maintenance of any sidewalk vendor receptacles.

        “Special event” means any temporary permitted event approved by the city. A special event permit may be obtained from the community development department for events that fall into the city’s policies and guidelines.

        “State highway” means a network of highways that are owned and maintained by the Highway Division of the California Department of Transportation (Caltrans). In the city of La Habra, this includes State Route (SR) 72 (portion of Whittier Boulevard west of Beach Boulevard), SR 39 (portion of Whittier Boulevard east of Beach Boulevard and all of Beach Boulevard) and SR 90 (portion of Imperial Highway, east of Beach Boulevard). The state highway shall include all roadways, sidewalks, curb and gutter, parkways, and related improvements.

        “Stationary sidewalk vendor” means a sidewalk vendor who vends from a fixed location.

        “Street” means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular and pedestrian travel. (Ord. 1811 § 3, 2019)

 

8.26.030 Permit required.
        A.    Permit Required. No person, either for him or herself or any other person, shall engage in any sidewalk vendor activities within the city without first applying for and receiving a permit from the director of community and economic development, or designee, in accordance with this chapter.

        B.     Application. A written application for a sidewalk vendor permit shall be filed with the director of community and economic development, or designee, on a form provided by the city and shall contain the following information:

        1.     The name, address, and telephone number of the person applying to become a sidewalk vendor;

        2.     The California driver’s license or identification number, individual taxpayer identification number, or municipal identification number (which shall not be available to the public for inspection, is confidential, and shall not be disclosed except as required to administer the permit or comply with a state law or state or federal court order);

        3.     The name, address, and telephone number of the person who will be in charge of any roaming sidewalk vendors, sidewalk vending activity and/or be responsible for the person(s) working at the sidewalk vending receptacle;

        4.     The name, address, and telephone number of all persons that will be employed as roaming sidewalk vendors or at a sidewalk vending receptacle;

        5.     Whether the vendor intends to operate as a stationary sidewalk vendor or a roaming sidewalk vendor;

        6.     The location(s) in the city where the stationary sidewalk vendor intends to operate;

        7.     The day(s) and hours of operation the stationary sidewalk vendor intends to operate at that location;

        8.     The dimensions of the sidewalk vendor’s vending receptacle, including a picture of the sidewalk vending receptacle that will operate under the permit;

        9.     Whether the sidewalk vendor will be selling food, merchandise, or both;

        10.   If the sidewalk vendor is selling food, a description of the type of food to be sold, whether such foods are prepared on site, and whether the vendor requires a heating element to prepare the food;

        11.   If the vendor is selling merchandise, a description of the merchandise to be sold;

        12.   A copy of the health permit required for any sidewalk vendors selling food, as required by the Orange County Health Care Agency, or any successor regulation;

        13.   Proof of his or her possession of a valid California Department of Tax and Fee Administration seller’s permit, which shall be maintained during the term of the sidewalk vendor’s permit;

        14.   An acknowledgment that the sidewalk vendor will comply with all applicable local, state, and federal laws;

        15.   A certification that, to his or her knowledge and belief, the information contained within the application is true and correct;

        16.   An agreement by the sidewalk vendor to defend, indemnify, release and hold harmless the city, its city council, boards, commissions, officers and employees from and against any and all claims, demands, obligations, damages, actions, causes of action, suits, losses, judgments, fines, penalties, liabilities, costs and expenses (including without limitation, attorney’s fees, disbursements and court costs) of every kind and nature whatsoever which may arise from or in any manner relate (directly or indirectly) to the permit or the vendor’s sidewalk vending activities. This indemnification shall include, but not be limited to, damages awarded against the city, if any, costs of suit, attorneys’ fees, and other expenses incurred in connection with such claim, action, or proceeding whether incurred by the permittee, city, and/or the parties initiating or bringing such proceeding;

        17.   An acknowledgement that the sidewalk vendor’s use of public property is at their own risk, the city does not take any steps to ensure public property is safe or conducive to the sidewalk vending activities, and the sidewalk vendor uses public property at his or her own risk;

        18.   Proof that the sidewalk vendor has obtained and is required to carry at all times proof of insurance of such types and in such amounts as required by the city’s risk manager; and

        19.   Any other relevant information required by the city manager.

        C.     Application and Permit Fees. Each application for a sidewalk vendor permit shall be accompanied by an application fee as established by the city council. The application and permit is only applicable to the individual(s) named on the application and is only applicable to one sidewalk vending receptacle. If said permit is approved, it shall not be necessary for the permittee to obtain a city business license to carry on the activities authorized by said permit, unless such permittee maintains a permanent place of business within the city. (Ord. 1811 § 3, 2019)

 

8.26.040 Issuance of permit, term of permit, denial, renewal, revocation and suspension of permit.
        A.    Within thirty calendar days of receiving a complete application, the director of community and economic development or designee may issue a sidewalk vendor permit, with appropriate conditions, as provided for herein, if he or she finds based on all of the relevant information that:

        1.     The conduct of the sidewalk vendor will not unduly interfere with traffic or pedestrian movement, or tend to interfere with or endanger the public peace or rights of nearby residents to the quiet and peaceable enjoyment of their property, or otherwise be detrimental to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare;

        2.     The conduct of the sidewalk vendor will not unduly interfere with normal governmental or city operations, threaten to result in damage or detriment to public property, or result in the city incurring costs or expenditures in either money or personnel not reimbursed in advance by the vendor;

        3.     The conduct of such sidewalk vending activity will not constitute a fire hazard, and all proper safety precautions will be taken;

        4.     The conduct of such sidewalk vending activity will not require the diversion of police officers to properly police the area of such activity as to interfere with normal police protection for other areas of the city;

        5.     The sidewalk vendor has paid all previous administrative fines, completed all community service requirements, and completed any other alternative disposition associated in any way with a previous violation of this chapter;

        6.     The sidewalk vendor has not had a permit revoked within the same calendar year;

        7.     The sidewalk vendor’s application contains all required information;

        8.     The sidewalk vendor has not made a materially false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of fact to the city in the application process;

        9.     The sidewalk vendor has satisfied all the requirements of this chapter;

        10.   The sidewalk vendor has paid all applicable fees as set by city council resolution;

        11.   The sidewalk vendor’s sidewalk vending receptacle and proposed activities conform to the requirements of this chapter;

        12.   The sidewalk vendor has adequate insurance to protect the city from liability associated with the sidewalk vendor’s activities, including the naming of the city as an additional insured, as determined by the city’s risk manager; and

        13.   The vendor has satisfactorily provided all information requested by the city manager to consider the vendor’s application.

        B.     A sidewalk vendor permit is non-transferable. Any change in ownership or operation of a sidewalk vendor or sidewalk vending receptacle requires a new permit under this chapter.

        C.     All permits issued under this chapter, regardless of when issued, expire on December 31 of the year in which they were issued.

        D.    Sidewalk Vendor License Term and Renewal. The term for a sidewalk vendor license, unless sooner suspended or revoked, shall be for a period of one year. Upon the expiration of such term, the person may renew the sidewalk vendor license by submitting a new application together with such renewal fee as may be established by resolution of the city council. No sidewalk vendor license shall be sold, leased, transferred conveyed or granted to any other person.

        E.     Denial, Suspension or Revocation of Sidewalk Vendor License.

        1.     If the director does not find that all of the requirements set forth in this subsection have been met, he or she shall deny the application for sidewalk vendor license. In the event the application for the sidewalk vendor license is denied by the director, written notice of such denial shall be given to the applicant specifying the ground or grounds of such denial. Notice of denial of the application for the sidewalk vendor license shall be deemed to have been served if it, in fact is personally served on the applicant or when deposited in the United States mail with postage prepaid and addressed to the applicant at his or her residence address as set forth in the application for the sidewalk vendor license.

        2.     Any sidewalk vendor license issued under this section may be suspended or revoked by the director for any of the following reasons:

        a.     Falsehood of any information supplied by the applicant upon which issuance of the sidewalk vendor license was based.

        b.     Failure of the applicant to promptly notify the director within thirty days of any change occurring subsequent to the issuance of the license in the information supplied by the applicant upon which the issuance of the license was based.

        c.     Revocation, suspension or non-renewal of the certificate of eligibility issued to the applicant by the Orange County Health Care Agency.

        d.     Conviction of, or plea of guilty or nolo contendere by the applicant of any offense which would have constituted ground for denial of a sidewalk vendor license.

        3.     A holder of a sidewalk vendor license shall be notified in writing by the director when a permit has been denied, suspended or revoked. Such notice shall contain the grounds upon which the denial, suspension or revocation is based and the right to seek an appeal in accordance with Section 8.26.080 “Appeals.”

        4.     Any person whose license is revoked shall not be eligible to apply for a new certificate for a period of one year following such revocation.

        F.     Fee Waivers. Veterans, as defined by Sections 16001 and 16001.5 of the California Business and Professions Code, shall not be required to pay any license or license fee to hawk, peddle or sell goods, wares or merchandise owned by them, except alcoholic beverages. (Ord. 1811 § 3, 2019)

 

8.26.050 Operating conditions.
        All sidewalk vendors are subject to the following operating conditions when conducting sidewalk vending activities:

        A.    All food and merchandise shall be stored either inside or affixed to the sidewalk vendor receptacle or carried by the sidewalk vendor. Food and merchandise shall not be stored, placed, or kept on any public property. If affixed to the sidewalk vendor receptacle, the overall space taken up by the sidewalk vendor receptacle shall not exceed the size requirements provided in this section.

        B.     The sidewalk vendor permit shall be affixed to the sidewalk vending receptacle and shall be displayed conspicuously at all times on the sidewalk vending receptacle. If other permits are required, such as those issued from the Orange County Health Care Agency, these permit(s) shall also be displayed conspicuously at all times on the sidewalk vending receptacle.

        C.     Sidewalk vendors shall not leave their sidewalk vending receptacle unattended to solicit business for their sidewalk vending activities. Sidewalk vending receptacles shall not be stored on public property and shall be removed when not in active use by a vendor.

        D.    All sidewalk vendors shall allow a city police officer, firefighter, community services officer, or code enforcement officer, at any time, to inspect their sidewalk vending receptacle for compliance with the size requirements of this chapter, to ensure that non-permitted items are not being sold (see Section 8.26.060(A)(3), and to ensure the safe operation of any heating elements used to prepare food.

        E.     Sidewalk vending receptacles shall not exceed a total height of three feet, a total width of three feet, and a total length of three feet. Any signage shall be placed on the exterior of the sidewalk vending receptacle within the confines of the previously described dimensions. An umbrella is permitted to shade the vendor so long as the umbrella does not create a traffic hazard to vehicles in the street or civilians passing on the sidewalk or create a violation of required ADA clearances. No advertising is permitted on the umbrella.

        F.     No sidewalk vending receptacle shall be motorized or utilize a generator.

        G.    If a sidewalk vending receptacle requires more than one person to conduct the sidewalk vending activity, all sidewalk vendors associated with the sidewalk vending receptacle shall be within five feet of the sidewalk vending receptacle when conducting sidewalk vending activities.

        H.    Sidewalk vendors that sell food shall maintain a trash container in or on their sidewalk vending receptacle and shall not empty their trash into public trashcans. The size of the vendor’s trash container shall be taken into account when assessing the total size limit of a sidewalk vending receptacle. Sidewalk vendors shall not leave any location without first picking up and removing all trash or refuse from their operation.

        I.      Sidewalk vendors shall at all times maintain a minimum four foot clear accessible path of travel within the sidewalk area around vending receptacle and customer queuing areas.

        J.      Sidewalk vendors shall comply with the noise standards provided in Chapter 9.32 of the La Habra Municipal Code, and any successor chapters.

        K.    Sidewalk vendors shall not approach persons to sell food or merchandise and shall not interfere in any way with anyone engaged in an activity to sell food or merchandise.

        L.     Sidewalk vendors shall not vend to, or otherwise conduct transactions with, persons in moving vehicles or vehicles parked or stopped.

        M.    Sidewalk vendors shall immediately clean up any food, grease or other fluid or item related to sidewalk vending activities that falls on public property. (Ord. 1811 § 3, 2019)

 

8.26.060 Prohibited activities and locations.
        A.    Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in any of the following activities:

        1.     Renting merchandise to customers;

        2.     Displaying merchandise or food that is not available for immediate sale;

        3.     Display merchandise that constitutes a hazard to pedestrians or vehicular traffic, or in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision, at any location where, by reason of the position, shape, color or movement, may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device. The vendor shall not make use of any word, phrase, symbol or character in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic;

        4.     Selling of adult-oriented material, cannabis, or alcohol;

        5.     Using an open flame heating element or any open burning on or within any sidewalk vending receptacle;

        6.     All sidewalk vendors, regardless of whether a roaming sidewalk vendor or stationary sidewalk vendor, are prohibited from conducting sidewalk vending activities between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. daily, except that sidewalk vending in commercial areas can occur at times commensurate with businesses legally operating on the same street. In residential areas, all stationary sidewalk vending is prohibited. In residential areas, roaming sidewalk vending activity is prohibited between the hours of six p.m. or sunset, whichever is earlier, and nine a.m. of the following day, Monday through Saturday, inclusive, and all day on Sundays and federal holidays;

        7.     Continuing to offer food or merchandise for sale, following, or accompanying any person who has been offered food or merchandise after the person has declined the offer to purchase food or merchandise;

        8.     Knowingly making false statements or misrepresentations during the course of offering food or merchandise for sale;

        9.     Blocking or impeding the path of the person(s) being offered food or merchandise to purchase. Additionally, seats, chairs, tables, or free-standing signs may not be placed on public or private property;

        10.   Making any statements, gesture, or other communication which a reasonable person would perceive to be a threat and which has a reasonable likelihood to produce in the person(s) a fear that the threat will be carried out; and

        11.   Touching the person(s) being offered to purchase food or merchandise without that person(s)’ consent.

        B.     Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in sidewalk vending activities at the following locations:

        1.     Within twelve inches of any curb face on all roads where street parking is prohibited.

        2.     Within fifteen feet of any entrance or exit to a building, structure or facility.

        3.     On any designated emergency vehicle accessway.

        4.     Any public property that does not meet the definition of a sidewalk or pathway including, without limitation, any alley, parkway, street, roadway or parking lot.

        5.     Within one thousand feet of an area designated for a special event permit approved by the city, during the limited duration of the special event permit (examples of events include, but are not limited to, Corn Festival, Citrus Fair, Tamale Festival, parades, concerts, certified farmers’ markets, etc.).

        6.     On any private property.

        7.     Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in sidewalk vending activities within fifty feet of another sidewalk vendor.

        8.     Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in sidewalk vending activities within five hundred feet of a property line for a grade school (kindergarten through eighth grade), a place of worship, or a child day-care facility.

        9.     Stationary sidewalk vending activities shall only occur on sidewalks or pathways with a minimum width of eight feet or wider.

        10.   Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in sidewalk vending activities within twenty-five feet of a:

        a.     Fire hydrant;

        b.     Curb which has been designated as white, yellow, or red zone;

        c.     Automated teller machine;

        d.     Driveway, alley, or street corner;

        e.     Trash or recycling receptacles, bike racks, benches, bus stops or similar public use items; and

        f.      Public art objects, items, and displays.

        11.   Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in sidewalk vending activities that would violate provisions of this code relating to visibility requirements for streets, alleys, driveways, and intersections.

        12.   Stationary sidewalk vendors shall not sell food or merchandise or engage in any sidewalk vending activities at any park where the city has signed an agreement for concessions that exclusively permits the sale of food or merchandise by a concessionaire during the times that said concessionaire is permitted to operate.

        13.   On any sidewalk with a gradient in excess of ten percent.

        14.   Within two hundred feet of any government building and public safety facility, including, without limitation, police stations and fire stations.

        15.   Within twenty-four inches of a parallel parking space.

        16.   On any sidewalk where vending equipment and queuing patrons would reduce clearance to less than four feet.

        17.   On any sidewalk where sidewalk vending receptacles and queuing patrons would restrict access requirements under the Americans with Disabilities Act.

        18.   On any sidewalk where sidewalk vending receptacles and queuing patrons would jeopardize the fire or life safety of any person.

        C.     Sidewalk vending receptacles shall not touch, lean against or be affixed at any time to, any building or structure including, but not limited to, mailboxes, traffic signal poles, traffic cabinets, fire hydrants, benches, bus shelters, street lights, newsstands, trashcans, utility poles, traffic signal controllers, street trees, landscaping, sign posts, transformers, utility vents, decorative devices, fences, block walls, irrigation cabinets, above ground utility vaults/ cabinets, back flow devices or traffic barriers. Additionally, no sidewalk vending receptacles shall be attached to or affixed to sidewalks or curbs. (Ord. 1811 § 3, 2019)

 

8.26.070 Penalties.
        A.    Violations of this chapter shall not be prosecuted as infractions or misdemeanors and shall only be punishable by the following administrative fine and rescission provisions:

        B.     Any violation of this chapter may be punished by:

        1.     An administrative fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation; and,

        2.     An administrative fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation within one year of the first violation; and,

        3.     An administrative fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for the third or more violations within one year of the first violation.

        C.     If a sidewalk vendor violates any portion of this chapter and cannot present the citing officer with a proof of a valid permit, the sidewalk vendor may be punished by:

        1.     An administrative fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars for a first violation; and,

        2.     An administrative fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for a second violation within one year of the first violation; and,

        3.     An administrative fine not exceeding one thousand dollars for a third or more additional violation within one year of the first violation.

        4.     Upon proof of a valid permit issued by the city, the administrative fines set forth in this subsection C shall be reduced to the administrative fines set forth in previous subsection B, or any successor sections.

        D.    Payment of fine(s) shall occur not later than thirty calendar days after service of the citation, as per the requirements of Section 1.20.050 of the La Habra Municipal Code.

        E.     The director of community and economic development, or designee, may rescind a permit issued to a sidewalk vendor for the term of that permit upon the fourth violation or subsequent violations. (Ord. 1811 § 3, 2019)

 

8.26.080 Appeals.
        A.    Decisions to deny an application for a permit or to impose administrative fines may be appealed by any interested person. Appeals shall be heard and determined by the hearing officer as per Sections 1.20.060 through 1.20.100 of the La Habra Municipal Code.

        B.     Appeals shall be initiated within twenty-one calendar days of the decision or imposition of administrative fine. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a person appealing an administrative fine is not required to pay the administrative fine as a prerequisite to filing an appeal.

        C.     Appeals of decisions or administrative fines shall be made in writing to the hearing officer on forms provided by the city. The appeal shall state the facts and basis for the appeal.

        D.    Appeals of a decision to deny an application for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee as established by resolution of the city council.

        E.     Decisions regarding administrative fines that are appealed shall not become effective until the appeal is resolved.

        F.     An appeal shall be scheduled for a hearing before the hearing officer within thirty calendar days of the filing of the appeal unless both the appellant and the hearing officer consent to a later date.

        G.    The hearing officer shall give notice in writing to the appellant of the time and location of the appeal hearing. At the hearing, the hearing officer shall review the record of the decision or administrative fine and hear testimony of the appellant, if any, the applicant and any other interested party. The appeal shall be reviewed and determined on a de novo basis.

        1.     If an administrative fine is the subject of an appeal, the hearing officer shall take into consideration the person’s ability to pay the fine. The hearing officer shall provide the person with notice of his or her right to request an ability-to-pay determination and shall make available instructions or other materials for requesting an ability-to-pay determination. The person may request an ability-to-pay determination at or before the hearing or while the administrative fine remains unpaid.

        2.     If the person meets the criteria described in subdivision (a) or (b) of Government Code Section 68632, or any successor section, the hearing officer shall accept, in full satisfaction, twenty percent of the administrative fine imposed pursuant to this chapter.

        3.     The hearing officer may allow the person to complete community service in lieu of paying the total administrative fine, may waive the administrative fine, or may offer an alternative disposition.

        H.    After the hearing, the hearing officer shall affirm, modify or reverse the original decision or administrative fine. When a decision or administrative fine is modified or reversed, the hearing officer shall state the specific reasons for modification or reversal. Decisions on appeals shall be rendered within thirty calendar days of the close of the hearing. The hearing officer shall mail notice of a decision to the appellant. Such notice shall be mailed within five working days after the date of the decision to the appellant. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. (Ord. 1811 § 3, 2019)

Chapter 8.28 CONTROL OF FLIES
8.28.010 Breeding place of flies—Defined.
        The term “breeding place of flies” as used in the ordinance codified in this chapter means any place found to breed flies in an amount or such as to endanger public health or safety or to create unreasonable interference with the comfortable enjoyment of and use of life and property by others. (Ord. 439 § 1, 1960)

 

8.28.020 Breeding place of flies—Declared a public nuisance.
        The city council declares that any breeding place of flies in the incorporated territory which exists by reason of any condition or use made of land, organic plant, waste, animal material, or of any other substance whatsoever, or the deposit or the storage thereof, is a public nuisance. (Ord. 439 § 2, 1960)

 

8.28.030 Inspection of premises by health officer—Action upon denial of entrance.
        A.    Every health officer, upon routine inspection, or whenever he or she is informed or has reasonable cause to believe that any land, building or collection of plant or animal waste, or any substance or existing condition on any lot, farm or other land, is a breeding place for flies shall enter, after requesting entry, and inspect to determine whether or not there is an existing breeding place for flies.

        B.     In the event that a health inspector is denied access to the premises, he or she shall promptly prepare an affidavit specifying on what grounds he or she believes the condition exists which constitutes a breeding place, and will request the city attorney to procure the issuance of a search warrant. The health officer shall furnish each of his or her deputies and inspectors with identification in such form as he or she shall prescribe. (Ord. 1211, 1983)

 

8.28.040 Notification to abate nuisance.
        A.    Whenever there exists in any place within the city a breeding place of flies, the health officer may notify in writing the record owner or persons having control or possession of such place or premises to abate such nuisance.

        B.     The notice shall direct the owner or person in control or possession of the place or premises, within the time specified in the notice, to abate the nuisance and to perform any and all work necessary to prevent the recurrence thereof in the places or premises specified in the notice.

        C.     The notice shall be served upon the owner of record or person having control or possession of the place or premises upon which the nuisance exists, or upon the agent of either.

        D.    Notices may be served by any person authorized by the health officer for such purpose in the same manner as a summons in a civil action. (Ord. 439 § 6, 1960)

 

 

8.28.050 Abatement of nuisance by city.
        A.    Upon the neglect or refusal of the owner, or the person having control or possession of any place or premises to comply with the notice to abate, the health officer may abate such nuisance and the owner of such place or premises, or the person having control or possession thereof, shall be liable for the costs of such abatement which may be recovered in a civil action.

        B.     In the event the health officer elects to abate any such nuisance, he or she shall serve or cause to be served upon the record owner or the person in control or possession of the premises a “Notice of Intention to Abate,” and if a hearing is not requested before the council as provided in subsection C of this section within ten days after service of the notice of intention to abate, the health officer may proceed to abate any such nuisance as provided in subsection A of this section.

        C.     The request for hearing shall be in writing and be filed with the city clerk. Notice of the time and place the council will consider the matter shall be mailed by the clerk to the applicant and to the health officer. At the time fixed for the hearing, the council shall hear and consider all relevant testimony and evidence relating to the matter as offered by the applicant and by the health officer. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the council shall determine whether or not a condition contrary to the provisions of this chapter exists and whether or not the health officer may abate. (Ord. 439 § 7, 1960)

 

8.28.060 Violation deemed a misdemeanor.
        Any owner or person having control or possession of any place or premises upon which there is existing a breeding place for flies, who refuses or neglects to abate the same or to take corrective measures to prevent its recurrence in accordance with the written notice from the health officer within the time specified in the notice shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 439 § 8, 1960)

 

8.28.070 Abatement provisions construed as added remedy.
        Provisions of this chapter in reference to abatement are to be construed as an added remedy of abatement of the nuisance declared and not in conflict or derogation of any other actions or proceedings or remedies otherwise provided by law. (Ord. 439 § 9, 1960)

Chapter 8.32 MOBILE X-RAY UNITS
8.32.010 Definitions.
        The following words shall have the following meanings:

        A.    “Mobile X-ray operator” means any person, or other entity, who owns or legally possesses, or operates a mobile X-ray unit.

        B.     “Mobile X-ray unit” means any X-ray generator which is, or can be, used for the purpose of making medical diagnostic photofluorographic films of persons, and which is installed in or upon a motor vehicle or trailer so that it may be transported from place to place. (Ord. 774 § 2, 1970)

 

8.32.020 Compliance with state laws required.
        All mobile X-ray units shall comply with the requirements of the Radiation Control Law, Division 20, Chapter 7.6 of the California Health and Safety Code, together with regulations enacted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 774 § 1, 1970)

 

8.32.030 License—Required.
        No mobile X-ray unit shall be operated unless the operator thereof has been licensed as provided in this chapter. No mobile X-ray unit shall be operated by any person other than the applicant or the persons specified in his license. (Ord. 774 § 7, 1970)

 

8.32.040 License—Application—Investigation.
        Any person or entity desiring to operate a mobile X-ray unit within the city shall make application to the county health officer on forms prescribed by him for issuance of a license. The county health officer shall cause to be conducted an investigation of the applicant for a license to determine, among other things, the following items of information:

        A.    Whether or not the unit has a valid state registration as provided by Division 20, Chapter 7.6 of the California Health and Safety Code;

        B.     Whether or not the applicant has complied with applicable laws, ordinances and regulations, including those relating to the reporting to the health officer of abnormal X-ray findings pursuant to regulations of the State Department of Public Health;

        C.     Whether the proper public notices, as required by state law, regulations enacted pursuant thereto, and local ordinances, have been posted in or upon the mobile unit;

        D.    The location and mailing address of all film files to be maintained by the mobile unit as provided in this chapter;

        E.     Whether the applicant and his specified personnel are qualified by reason of training and experience to operate a mobile X-ray unit in such a manner as to provide reasonable assurance of protection to health, life and property;

        F.     Whether the applicant’s equipment, facilities, proposed uses and procedures are such as to provide reasonable assurance of protection to health, life and property;

        G.    Such other information as shall be required by the county health officer. (Ord. 774 § 3, 1970)

 

8.32.050 License—Application—Determinations required for granting, renewing or reinstating.
        No license shall be granted, renewed or reinstated unless the county health officer determines, upon completing his/her investigation, that the mobile X-ray unit is, or can be, operated in compliance with applicable laws, ordinances and administrative regulations, and in a manner not detrimental to the health of the patrons, employees and the general public, and that all operations of mobile X-ray equipment have been certified by the county health officer to operate same. (Ord. 774 § 4, 1970)

 

8.32.060 License—Time of granting—Expiration.
        Licenses may be granted at any time during the year, but all licenses shall expire at the end of the calendar year. (Ord. 774 § 5, 1970)

 

8.32.070 Conditions of operation—Compliance with required.
        All mobile X-ray units shall be operated so as to comply with the conditions set forth in Sections 8.32.080 through 8.32.160. (Ord. 774 § 6, 1970)

 

8.32.080 X-raying persons under fifteen years of age permitted when—Required signposting.
        No person under the age of fifteen years is to be X-rayed unless such person has had a positive tuberculin skin test and presents a written statement, signed by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts, showing the method and the date of such positive skin test. A sign shall be posted in a prominent location of the mobile X-ray unit stating that no person under the age of fifteen years is to be X-rayed unless such person has had a positive tuberculin skin test. (Ord. 774 § 6, 1970)

 

8.32.090 X-raying pregnant women—Required signposting.
        No pregnant woman shall be X-rayed in a mobile X-ray unit unless so ordered in writing by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts. A sign shall be posted in a prominent location on the mobile X-ray unit stating that no pregnant woman shall be X-rayed. (Ord. 774 § 6, 1970)

 

8.32.100 Completion of information form prior to being X-rayed required.
        The mobile X-ray operator shall require all persons, before being X-rayed, to complete an information form showing the following:

        A.    Name, age, sex, address, telephone number, the person’s physician’s name and address;

        B.     If a female, whether pregnant;

        C.     If under fifteen years of age, whether person has had a positive tuberculin skin test, and the date of such test. (Ord. 774 § 6, 1970)

 

8.32.110 Retention of X-ray films for ten-year period required—Required reports.
        All X-ray films shall be retained by the operator for at least ten years. Each patient shall receive from the mobile X-ray operator a report of his X-ray findings within thirty days. Every thirty days, the operator shall submit to the health officer a report of the total number of x-ray films taken during the preceding calendar month. (Ord. 774 § 6, 1970)

 

8.32.120 Providing X-ray films to patients physician.
        The mobile X-ray operator shall make X-ray films available for use by the physician of the person X-rayed, provided the person gives his consent in writing. The operator may make a reasonable charge for such services. (Ord. 774 § 6, 1970)

 

8.32.130 Signposting required.
        A.    A sign shall be posted in a prominent location on the mobile X-ray unit stating essentially the following:

 

  A chest X-ray film is a useful aid to the physician in diagnosing chest disease. It is not a complete examination. See your family doctor for an examination at least once a year.

 

        B.     The county health officer shall have the right to determine the location, size and wording of all required signs. (Ord. 774 § 6, 1970)

 

8.32.140 Advance notice of dates, times and places of use required.
        The mobile X-ray operator shall give the county health officer notice at least fourteen calendar days in advance concerning proposed dates, times and places of use of the unit. All such information will be forwarded by the county health office to the city. (Ord. 774 § 6, 1970)

 

8.32.150 Name and address of operator to be posted on vehicle and printed on letterhead and forms.
        The name and address of the mobile X-ray operator shall be plainly printed on each side of the exterior of the vehicle or trailer in letters at least three inches high. The name and address of the mobile X-ray operator shall appear on all forms, letters, pamphlets, or other printed matter used in conjunction with the unit. Neither sign nor printed matter shall contain any statements expressed or implied that the mobile X-ray unit is associated with any health department or other public or private health agency. (Ord. 774 § 6, 1970)

 

8.32.160 Operator required to comply with applicable city ordinances.
        The mobile X-ray operator shall comply with all applicable city ordinances and resolutions while operating within the city. (Ord. 774 § 6, 1970)

Chapter 8.36 HAZARDOUS MATERIAL DISCLOSURE
8.36.010 Intent and purpose.
        The city council finds and declares that:

        A.    Hazardous substances and hazardous wastes which are present in the community may pose acute and chronic health hazards to individuals who live and work in the city if exposed to such substances as a result of fires, spills, industrial accidents or other types of releases or emissions;

        B.     Emergency service personnel in the city have a need to know of the use and dangers of hazardous materials in the community in order to plan for and respond to potential emergencies and exposure to such materials;

        C.     Basic information on the location, type and the health risks of hazardous materials being used or stored in the city is not now available to firefighters, health officers, planners, elected officials and other emergency response personnel;

        D.    It is intended that the system of disclosure set forth in this chapter shall provide that information essential to firefighters, health officials, planners, elected officials and other emergency service personnel in meeting their responsibilities for the health and welfare of the community in such fashion that trade secrecy is not abridged;

        E.     It is further intended that this chapter implement the community’s right and need for basic information on the use and disposal of hazardous materials in the city and provide for an orderly system for the provision of such information.

        F.     It is further intended that this chapter shall incorporate the requirements of the Uniform Fire Code.

        G.    The adoption of this chapter does not exempt or preclude the user or handler of hazardous materials from compliance with federal or state statutes, in particular Section 25500 et seq. of the California Health and Safety Code. It is specifically noted that compliance under Section 25505 of the Health and Safety Code mandates that a business file a business plan with the city. (Ord. 1252, 1985)

 

8.36.020 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter the terms listed in this section shall be defined as follows; provided, however, references to statutes or regulations in existence at the time this chapter is adopted shall also include references to such statutes or regulations as they may be amended or changed in the future:

        A.    “Carcinogen” means a substance which causes cancer. For the purposes of this chapter, “carcinogens” are those substances specified on the list developed by the United States Department of Health and Human Services on its Second Annual Report on Carcinogens.

        B.     “CAS number” means the unique identification name as assigned by the Chemical Abstracts Services to specific chemical substances.

        C.     “Chemical name” means the scientific designation of a substance in accordance with the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry or the system developed by the Chemical Abstracts Services.

        D.    “Common name” means a designation of identification such as code name, code number, trade name or brand name used to identify a substance other than by its chemical name.

        E.     “Disclosure form” means the written request for information prepared pursuant to Sections 8.36.040 and 8.36.050 of this chapter.

        F.     “Handle” means to generate, treat or dispose of a hazardous material in any fashion.

        G.    “Handler” means any person who handles a hazardous substance.

        H.    “Hazardous material” means any substance or hazardous waste as defined in subsections I or J of this section, or any material designated pursuant to Section 8.36.030 of this chapter.

        I.      “Hazardous material” means any substance or product:

        1.     For which the manufacturer or producer is required to prepare a MSDS for the substance or product pursuant to the Hazardous Substances Information and Training Act (commencing with Section 6360, Chapter 2.5, Part 1 of Division 5 of the California Labor Code) or pursuant to any applicable federal law or regulation; or

        2.     Listed in Section 25316 of the Health and Safety Code; or

        3.     Which is listed as a radioactive material set forth in Chapter 1, Title 10, Appendix B, Code of Federal Regulations; or

        4.     Which is listed as a legal carcinogen from the California Administrative Code, Title 8, Subchapter 7, Group 16 and those substances specified in subsection A of this section; or

        5.     Which the Director of the Department of Food and Agriculture classifies as pesticides; or

        6.     Which the EPA classifies as priority organic pollutants.

        J.      “Hazardous waste” or “extremely hazardous waste” means any material that is identified in:

        1.     Section 25225 or 25117 of the California Health and Safety Code and set forth in Sections 66680 and 66684 of Title 22 of the California Administrative Code; or

        2.     The Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40, Sections 261.31 through 261.33.

        K.    “Health official” means the health officer of the county of Orange or his deputy.

        L.     “MSDS” means a Material Safety Data Sheet prepared pursuant to Section 6390 of the California Labor Code or pursuant to the regulations of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration of the United States Department of Labor.

        M.    “Person” means an individual, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation, partnership or association.

        N.    “Physician” means any person who holds a valid certificate from the state of California to practice the healing arts.

        O.    “SIC code” means the identification number assigned by the Standard Industrial Classification Code to specific types of businesses.

        P.     “Storage” or “storing” means the containment of substances or materials in such a manner as not to constitute disposal of such substances or materials.

        Q.    “Use” means and includes the handling, processing or storage of a hazardous substance.

        R.     “User” means any person who uses a hazardous substance or handles a hazardous waste. (Ord. 1252, 1985)

 

8.36.030 Additional designation of hazardous materials.
        A substance may be deemed a hazardous material or hazardous waste upon a finding by the fire chief that the substance, because of its quantity, concentration or physical or chemical characteristics, poses a significant present or potential hazard to human health and safety or to the environment if released into the community. The fire chief may use the Uniform Fire Code published by the Western Fire Chiefs to assist in determining the types and amounts of such substances to be disclosed. Should the fire chief at any time determine that otherwise exempted materials should be subject to disclosure, the fire chief may require the submission of a disclosure form. (Ord. 1252, 1985)

 

8.36.040 Filing of a hazardous material disclosure form.
        A.    Any person who uses or handles a hazardous material must semiannually, during the months of January and July, submit a completed disclosure form to the fire department.

        B.     Any person who, during the calendar year, for the first time becomes a user or handler of any hazardous material must submit a completed disclosure form to the fire department within fifteen days of becoming a user or handler. Thereafter any such user or handler shall comply with the provisions of subsection A of this section.

        C.     The fire department may, upon written notice, require the submittal of a disclosure form of any user or handler. The user or handler shall submit a completed disclosure form within fifteen days.

        D.    Any person required to submit a disclosure form pursuant to this section shall file with the fire department an updated disclosure form within fifteen days of any of the following:

        1.     A change in business address;

        2.     A change in business ownership;

        3.     A change of business name;

        4.     Cessation of business operations;

        5.     The use or handling of a previously undisclosed hazardous material;

        6.     A significant change in the use, handling or manufacturing of a hazardous material for which disclosure has been previously made;

        7.     A one hundred percent increase in the quantity of a previously disclosed material;

        8.     Any change in the location where previously disclosed materials were stored;

        9.     Any change in the emergency contacts listed under Section 8.36.050A8. (Ord. 1252, 1985)

 

8.36.050 Required disclosure form.
        A.    The disclosure form shall be developed, maintained and updated by the fire chief, and shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

        1.     A copy of the MSDS for every hazardous material used by the person completing the disclosure form;

        2.     CAS number as may be required by the fire department;

        3.     SIC code as may be required by the fire department;

        4.     U.N. identification number as may be required by the fire department;

        5.     A listing of the chemical name and any common names of every hazardous material used by the person completing the disclosure form;

        6.     The maximum amount of each hazardous material which is handled or used at any one time by the user over the course of the year;

        7.     Sufficient information on how and where the hazardous materials are handling or used by the user including submission of general floor plans of the facility and specific site plans which designate exact locations where chemicals are stored, so as to allow safety personnel to prepare adequate emergency response plans for potential releases of hazardous materials;

        8.     The names and phone numbers of at least two persons representing the business and who would be able to assist emergency personnel in the event of an emergency involving the business during business and nonbusiness hours. At least one contract shall be designated as the individual who possesses the greatest technical information regarding the hazardous materials located on the site;

        9.     The hazard characteristics of every hazardous material disclosed, including, but not limited to, toxicity, flammability, reactivity and corrosivity as may be required by the fire department.

        B.     Upon request all users must provide the following information:

        1.     To the fire department, any information determined by the fire department to be necessary to protect the public health, safety or the environment;

        2.     To any physician, where the physician determines that such information is necessary to the medical treatment of his or her patient (Ord. 1252, 1985)

 

8.36.060 Exemptions from disclosure.
        A.    The following materials or persons are exempt from the disclosure requirements of Section 8.36.040 of this chapter:

        1.     Hazardous materials or substances contained in food, drug, cosmetic or tobacco products;

        2.     Any person using or handling less than five hundred pounds or fifty-five gallons per year, whichever is the lesser, of a hazardous material shall be exempted from the requirement of disclosure of that use or handling unless the fire chief has provided notice that the weight or volume limits of this exemption for a specific hazardous material has been lowered in response to public health concerns or to meet the intent and requirements of the Uniform Fire Code;

        3.     Hazardous materials contained solely in consumer products packaged for use by and distributed to the general public unless the product is repackaged or altered in any way; provided, however, the manufacture and distribution of these products are not exempt. However, pesticides, herbicides and ammonium nitrate fertilizers over the required disclosure amounts are not exempt from disclosure;

        4.     Any person, while engaged in the transportation of hazardous materials, including storage directly incident thereto, provided that such materials are accompanied by shipping papers prepared in accordance with the provisions of 49 Code of Federal Regulations, Subchapter C, as now in existence or as hereafter amended or changed;

        5.     Infectious waste generated by hospitals, medical centers, clinics and other health care facilities that are regulated under Title 22 of the California Administrative Code.

        B.     The exemptions contained in this section shall not apply to the handling of carcinogens, except to the extent that such carcinogens handled or used solely for personal purposes.

        C.     No MSDS shall be required for any hazardous material for which an MSDS is not available at the time disclosure is required; provided, however, that such MSDS shall be submitted to the fire department within fifteen days after receipt by the user of the MSDS. (Ord. 1252, 1985)

 

8.36.070 Identification of areas.
        A.    When required by the fire chief, work areas in which any person uses or handles hazardous material shall be identified as such by such measures as the fire chief may specify including, but not limited to, signs, color coding, posting lists of material and MSDS or other notices.

        B.     When required by the fire chief, any person submitting a disclosure form may be required to install an approved key box for emergency utilization of MSDS, floor plans, site plans and access keys. The location of the required key box shall be as designated by the fire chief.

        C.     The fire chief may direct that these items be revised and reposted or reinstalled at any time. The city shall bear no expense for initial or subsequent work required of a user under this section. The user shall have thirty days in which to complete any work ordered under this chapter. (Ord. 1252, 1985)

 

8.36.080 Fees.
        The city council may establish by resolution a schedule of fees to be paid by persons subject to this chapter which is sufficient to cover the costs of administration and implementation resulting from this chapter. The city council may adopt penalty assessments for late filings. (Ord. 1252, 1985)

 

8.36.090 Disclosure of information.
        A. Upon receipt of a disclosure form, the fire department shall maintain files of all disclosure forms received. Subject to the provisions of Section 8.36.100 relating to trade secrets, these files shall be open to the public during normal business hours.

        B.     The fire department shall keep a record of all persons who request access to the hazards materials disclosure forms. The records shall include:

        1.     The person’s name, address and telephone number, as determined by the showing of appropriate identification;

        2.     Name and address of the person, business or governmental agency such person represents;

        3.     Identification of the specific file(s) examined or requested to be copied;

        4.     Reason for which the person requests the information. (Ord. 1252, 1985)

 

8.36.100 Trade secrets.
        A.    A user may designate some, or all, of the information on the disclosure form as a trade secret. Any information designated as a trade secret contained on the disclosure form shall not be disclosed to anyone except:

        1.     An officer or employee of a governmental entity in connection with the official duties of such officer or employee under any law for the protection of health;

        2.     Contractors of governmental entities when, in the opinion of the fire chief, disclosure is necessary and required for the protection of health and the performance of a contract.

        3.     Any physician where the physician determines that such information is necessary for the medical treatment of his or her patient.

        B.     Any officer or employee of the city, or former officer or employee, who by virtue of such employment or official position has obtained possession of or has access to information, the disclosure of which is prohibited by this section, and who, knowing that disclosure of the information is prohibited, knowingly and wilfully discloses the information in any manner to any person not entitled to receive it, shall be in violation of this section. For purposes of determining a violation of this section, a contractor who has been furnished information pursuant to this section shall be deemed an employee of the city. Any physician who has been furnished information or who has obtained information pursuant to this section and who, knowing that disclosure of the information is prohibited, knowingly and wilfully discloses this information, shall be in violation of this section.

        C.     Upon receipt of a request for the release of information to the public which includes information which the user has notified the fire department is a trade secret pursuant to subsection A of this section, the fire department shall notify the user in writing of such request by certified mail. The fire department shall release the information thirty days after the day of mailing such notice, unless, prior to the expiration of such thirty days, the user institutes an action in an appropriate court for a declaratory judgment that such information is subject to protection under subsection B of this section or an injunction prohibiting disclosure of such information to the general public is granted by a court of competent jurisdiction.

        D.    The provisions of this section shall not permit a user to refuse to disclose information required to be disclosed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1252, 1985)

 

8.36.105 Deposits of hazardous materials—Cleanup or abatement—Liability for costs.
        A.    The fire department is authorized to clean up or abate the effects of any hazardous substance or waste unlawfully released, discharged or deposited upon or into property or facilities within the city. The following described persons shall be jointly and severally liable to the city for the payment of all costs incurred by the city as a result of such cleanup or abatement activity:

        1.     The person or persons whose negligent or willful act or omission proximately caused such release, discharge or deposit;

        2.     The person or persons who owned or had custody or control of the hazardous substance or waste at the time of such release, discharge or deposit, without regard to fault or proximate cause; and

        3.     The person or persons who owned or had custody or control of the container which held such hazardous substance or waste at the time or immediately prior to such release, discharge or deposit, without regard to fault or proximate cause.

        B.     In the event that any person undertakes, either voluntarily or upon order of the fire chief or other city official, to clean up or abate the effects of any hazardous substance or waste unlawfully released, discharged or deposited upon or into any property or facilities within the city, the fire chief may take such action as is necessary to supervise or verify the adequacy of the cleanup or abatement. The persons described in subsection A of this section shall be liable to the city for all costs incurred as a result of such supervision or verification.

        C.     For purposes of this section, “hazardous materials” means any material that, because of its quantity, concentration or physical or chemical characteristics, poses a significant present or potential hazard to human health and safety or to the environment if released into the workplace or the environment.

        D.    The remedies provided by this section shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law. Said fees shall be set by resolution of the city council.

        E.     The authority to recover costs under this section shall not include actual fire suppression services which are normally or usually provided by the fire department. (Ord. 1352 § 1, 1989)

 

8.36.110 Enforcement.
        The fire chief or an authorized representative is authorized and empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The enforcement may include the inspection of hazardous materials in use, storage or disposal, review of hazardous materials records, the sampling and testing of hazardous materials and other activities directly related to the enforcement of this chapter. No person shall obstruct or interfere with the fire department in the performance of these duties. (Ord. 1252, 1985)

 

8.36.120 Violations.
        Any violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1252, 1985)

Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE AND WELFARE
Chapter 9.02 REGULATION OF THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Chapter 9.04 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA SALE AND DISPLAY
Chapter 9.06 HARMFUL MATTER
Chapter 9.08 INTOXICATING LIQUOR
Chapter 9.10 NARCOTICS AND GANG-RELATED CRIME EVICTION PROGRAM
Chapter 9.12 INDECENT EXPOSURE
Chapter 9.16 GAMBLING
Chapter 9.20 FIREARMS
Chapter 9.22 FIREWORKS
Chapter 9.24 TRESPASSING
Chapter 9.26 TRESPASSING ON PUBLIC SCHOOL GROUNDS
Chapter 9.28 NIGHTTIME CURFEW FOR MINORS
Chapter 9.30 DAYTIME CURFEW
Chapter 9.32 NOISE CONTROL
Chapter 9.34 MULTIPLE POLICE RESPONSES/NOISE CONTROL
Chapter 9.36 ABUSE OF EMERGENCY SERVICES
Chapter 9.38 SOCIAL HOST ACCOUNTABILITY
Chapter 9.40 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES WARNING SIGNS
Chapter 9.50 EMERGENCY RESPONSE COST RECOVERY PROGRAM
Chapter 9.54 GRAFFITI
Chapter 9.58 RESTRICTED ACCESS TO AEROSOL SPRAY PAINT AND MARKER PENS/PURCHASE AND THEFT OF GRAFFITI TOOLS
Chapter 9.62 COMMUNITY SERVICE PROGRAM

Chapter 9.02 REGULATION OF THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS
9.02.010 Definitions.
        For the purpose of the provisions of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be construed to have the meanings herein set forth:

        “Business” means any sole proprietorship, joint venture, corporation or other business entity formed for profit making purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold as well as professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other professional services are delivered.

        “City” means the city of La Habra.

        “Employee” means any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect wages or profit, and any person who volunteers his or her services for a nonprofit entity.

        “Minor” means any natural person under eighteen years of age.

        “Nonprofit entity” means any corporation, unincorporated association or other entity created for charitable, philanthropic, educational character-building, political, social or other similar purpose, the net proceeds from the operations of which are committed to the promotion of the objectives or purposes of the entity and not to private gain. A public agency is not a “nonprofit entity” within the meaning of this section.

        “Person” means a natural person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business, trust, corporation, cooperative association, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee or any other legal entity.

        “Self-service display” means any open display of tobacco products and point-of-sale tobacco-related promotional products that the public has access to without the intervention of an employee.

        “Tobacco product” means any tobacco cigarette, cigar, pipe tobacco, smokeless tobacco, snuff or any other form of tobacco which may be utilized for smoking, chewing, inhaling or other manner of ingestion.

        “Tobacco retailer” means any person or governmental entity that operates a store, stand, booth, concession or other place at which sales of tobacco products are made to purchasers for consumption or use.

        “Tobacco vending machine” means any electronic or mechanical device or appliance the operation of which depends upon the insertion of money, whether in coin or paper currency, or other things representative of value, which dispenses or releases a tobacco product.

        “Vendor-assisted” means that only a store employee has access to the tobacco product and assists a customer by supplying the tobacco product, and the customer does not take possession of the tobacco product until it is purchased. (Ord. 1560 § 1, 1999)

 

9.02.020 Prohibitions.
        A.    No person, business, tobacco retailer or owner, manager or employee of any business or tobacco retailer shall engage in the sale of tobacco product without first posting a plainly visible sign at the point of purchase of tobacco products which has wording similar to:

 

THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW AND SUBJECT TO PENALTIES. PHOTO IDENTIFICATION IS REQUIRED OF PURCHASERS APPEARING TO BE UNDER 27 YEARS OF AGE.

 

        The letters of the sign shall be at least one-half-inch high.

        B.     No person, business, tobacco retailer or owner, manager or employee of any business or tobacco retailer shall sell, offer to sell or permit to be sold, any tobacco product to any purchaser who appears to be under twenty-seven years of age, without first verifying by means of photographic identification containing the bearer’s date of birth, that the purchaser is not under eighteen years of age, unless the seller has some other reasonable and reliable basis for determining the purchaser’s age.

        C.     No person, business, tobacco retailer or owner, manager or employee of any business or tobacco retailer shall sell, offer to sell or permit to be sold, any tobacco product not in the original packaging provided by the manufacturer and with all required health warnings.

        D.    No person, business or tobacco retailer or owner, manager or employee of any business or tobacco retailer shall sell, offer for sale, display for sale, or permit to be sold, offered for sale or displayed for sale, any tobacco product by means of a self-service display or by any means other than vendor-assisted sales.

        E.     No person, business or tobacco retailer or owner, manager or employee of any business or tobacco retailer shall locate, install, keep, maintain or use, or permit the location, installation, keeping, maintenance or use on his, her or its premises, any tobacco vending machine for the purpose of selling or distributing any tobacco product. (Ord. 1560 § 1, 1999)

 

9.02.030 Exceptions.
        Section 9.02.020(A), (B), (D) and (E) shall not apply to any establishment where access to the premises by persons under eighteen years of age is prohibited by law. (Ord. 1560 § 1, 1999)

 

9.02.040 Nonretaliation.
        A.    No person, business, tobacco retailer or owner or manager of any business or tobacco retailer shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner retaliate against any employee or applicant for employment because such employee or applicant agrees to abide by the provisions of this chapter.

        B.     No person, business, tobacco retailer or owner or manager of any business or tobacco retailer shall intimidate or threaten any reprisal or effect any reprisal for the purpose of retaliating against any person because such person seeks to attain compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1560 § 1, 1999)

 

9.02.050 Conflicts of law.
        This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit tobacco vending machines and distribution of tobacco product samples where they are otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. Nor shall this chapter be construed to cause for breach of any pre-existing private contract, or cause for interference with regulations imposed by state or federal law or related to interstate commerce. (Ord. 1560 § 1, 1999)

 

9.02.060 Penalty for violation.
        Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction and punishable as such, notwithstanding the fact that at the discretion of the city, the violation of any section of this chapter may be filed as a misdemeanor. The complaint charging such violation shall specify whether the violation is a misdemeanor or an infraction. Each day a violation of any provision of this chapter shall continue shall be a new and separate violation. (Ord. 1560 § 1, 1999)

Chapter 9.04 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA SALE AND DISPLAY
9.04.010 Drug paraphernalia defined.
        As used in this chapter, “drug paraphernalia” means as provided in Section 11364.5 of the Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 1132 § 1(part), 1981)

 

9.04.020 Segregation—Restricting access.
        No person shall maintain or operate any place of business in which drug paraphernalia is kept, displayed, offered in any manner, sold, furnished or given away unless such drug paraphernalia is completely and wholly kept, displayed or offered within a separate room or enclosure and in such a manner that such material is not visible from any other portion of the premises, and to which persons under the age of eighteen not accompanied by one of his/her parents or by his/her legal guardian are excluded. Each entrance to such room or enclosure shall be clearly and visibly marked or signed in a manner advising that minors are excluded from the room unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. (Ord. 1132 § 1(part), 1981)

 

9.04.030 Unaccompanied minors prohibited.
        No person under the age of eighteen years shall enter, be in, remain in or visit any room or enclosure in any place of business in which drug paraphernalia is kept, displayed or offered, or in any manner sold, furnished, transferred or given away, unless accompanied by one of his/her parents or by his/her legal guardian. (Ord. 1132 § 1(part), 1981)

 

9.04.040 Permitting unaccompanied minors access.
        No owner, manager, proprietor or other person in charge of any room or enclosure described in Section 9.04.020 shall permit or allow any person under the age of eighteen to enter, be in, remain in or visit the room unless accompanied by one of his/her parents or by his/her legal guardian. (Ord. 1132 § 1(part), 1981)

 

9.04.050 Violations.
        A.    Any violation of the provisions of this chapter by the owner or operator, manager or person otherwise in charge of any business establishment is a public nuisance and may be abated pursuant to the provisions of Section 731 of the Code of Civil Procedure. Any such violation shall also constitute grounds for revocation of any business license issued by the city. Any such revocation shall be preceded by a hearing before the city council on at least ten days’ written notice to the person to whom the license was issued, which notice shall advise of the nature of the alleged violation and the date, time and place of the hearing before the council.

        B.     The remedies provided by this section are cumulative and in addition to any other remedy provided by law including the penalty provisions generally applicable to violations of the terms of this code. (Ord. 1132 § 1(part), 1981)

Chapter 9.06 HARMFUL MATTER
9.06.010 Purpose and intent.
        The council of the city of La Habra finds and declares that:

        A.    The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public peace, morals, health, safety and general welfare by regulating the placement and appearance of adult material which is accessible to minors.

        B.     The public display of pictorial material depicting nudity and sexual conduct in publications contained in open newsracks located on businesses open to the public and assessable to minors is patently offensive and harmful to minors and other patrons when readily visible to them, and is detrimental to a healthy moral environment to which persons of the city are entitled.

        C.     Such public displays of harmful matter are thrust indiscriminately on children and unwilling adults and constitute assaults upon individual privacy.

        D.    The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of persons in the city. (Ord. 1538 § 1, 1998)

 

9.06.020 Definitions.
        For the purpose of the provisions of this chapter the following words and phrases shall be construed to have the meanings herein set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:

        “Blinder rack” means an apparatus containing any harmful matter for purposes of sale to the public, constructed or modified so that the bottom two-thirds of said harmful matter is obscured from view.

        “Harmful matter” means any matter, taken as a whole, which to the average person, applying contemporary statewide standards, appeals to the prurient interest, and is matter which, taken as a whole, depicts or describes in a patently offensive way sexual conduct and which, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.

        “Matter” means any book, magazine, newspaper, periodical, record or other printed or written material or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, or other pictorial representation or any mechanical, chemical or electrical reproduction or any other articles or material.

        “Minor” means any natural person under eighteen years of age. (Ord. 1538 § 1, 1998)

 

9.06.030 Harmful matter.
        No person shall display any harmful matter in a public place which is accessible to minors. Compliance with this section may be effected by the placement of blinder racks in front of the matter so that at least the lower two-thirds of the material is not exposed to view. (Ord. 1538 § 1, 1998)

 

9.06.040 Penalty for violation.
        A.    Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction, and punishable as such, notwithstanding the fact that at the discretion of the city or district attorney, the violation of any section of this chapter may be filed as a misdemeanor. The complaint charging such violation shall specify whether the violation is a misdemeanor or an infraction. Each day a violation of any provision of this chapter shall continue shall be a new and separate violation.

        B.     A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil process by means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances. (Ord. 1538 § 1, 1998)

Chapter 9.08 INTOXICATING LIQUOR
9.08.010 Definitions.
        As used in this chapter:

        “Alcoholic beverages” includes, but is not limited to, champagne, champagne punch, beer and mixed drinks.

        “Intoxicating liquor” includes any and all spirituous, vinous, malt or fermented liquors, liquids or compounds, whether medicated, proprietary, patented or not, and by whatever name called, containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume, which are potable or fit for use as, or which may be used, for beverage purposes. (Ord. 911 § 1(part), 1974; Ord. 81 §§ 2(part), 3, 1934)

 

9.08.020 Drinking and dispensing generally.
        Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to drink, dispense or partake of any alcoholic beverage in any store, wholesale house or merchandising establishment or any other public place except where expressly allowed by law, or in any private place without the consent of the owner or occupant. (Ord. 911 § 1(part), 1974; Ord. 81 § 2(part), 1934)

 

9.08.030 Drinking in public.
        It is unlawful and a nuisance for any person or persons to drink or partake of any intoxicating liquor on the sidewalks, streets, alleys or public thoroughfares within the city. (Ord. 81 § 1, 1934)

 

9.08.040 Consumption or sale in city facilities.
        Upon application approved by the city council, or their authorized designee as established by resolution, permission may be granted to consume or to sell alcoholic beverages in city facilities. No such application shall be approved unless the applicant furnishes with his application a copy of a temporary Alcoholic Beverage Control license if required and an executed agreement providing that the applicant shall hold the city free and harmless from any and all claims for personal injury or property damages alleged to have been caused by the granting of such application. (Ord. 1357 § 1, 1989; Ord. 911 § 1(part), 1974; Ord. 81 § 2(part), 1934)

Chapter 9.10 NARCOTICS AND GANG-RELATED CRIME EVICTION PROGRAM
9.10.010 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be construed to have the meanings herein set forth.

        A.    “Controlled substance” means any drug, substance or immediate precursor, as defined, identified or listed in the California Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Health and Safety Code, Sections 11006.5, 11018, 11019, 11020, 11021, 11054, 11055, 11056 and 11057.

        B.     “Drug-related nuisance” means any activity related to the possession, sale, use or manufacture of a controlled substance that creates an unreasonable interference with the comfortable enjoyment of the property and/or the health, safety and general welfare of any resident on the premises of any rented property or the residents of any public or private property immediately adjacent thereto. A drug-related nuisance shall include, but is not limited to, any activity that is commonly associated with illegal drug dealing, such as noise, steady traffic day and night to a particular unit, barricaded units, the display or observance of weapons, drug loitering as defined in Health and Safety Code, Section 11532, or other drug-related occurrences which, taken as a whole, tend to substantially affect or interfere with the beneficial use and enjoyment of any rented property and/or the health, safety and general welfare of any resident on the premises of any rented property or the residents of any public or private property immediately adjacent thereto.

        “Illegal drug activity” means a violation of any of the provisions of Chapter 6 (commencing with Section 11350) or Chapter 6.5 (commencing with Section 11400) of the Health and Safety Code, or any successor provisions thereto.

        “Gang-related crime” means any crime in which the perpetrator is a known member of a gang, or any crime motivated by gang membership in which the victim or the intended victim of the crime is a known member of a gang.

        “Landlord” means any owner of record, lessor or sublessor (including any person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity), or the agent, representative or successor thereof, who receives or is entitled to receive rent for the use of any rental property.

        “Premises” means any rental property and the land on which it and any other buildings of a complex are located, including, but not limited to, common areas, walkways, garage facilities, streets, alleyways, stairwells and elevators, and as the context permits or requires, any public or private property which is immediately adjacent thereto.

        “Rental unit” means any dwelling as defined in Section 18.04.200 of the La Habra Municipal Code, including, but not limited to, any single and multifamily residence, duplex, court, condominium and/or townhouse in the city of La Habra. The term “rental property” shall also include any mobile home or trailer for which rent is paid, or for which rent is paid for the land upon which the mobile home or trailer is located, or both. This term shall also mean any recreational vehicle, as defined in California Civil Code Section 799.24, if located in a mobile home, trailer or recreational vehicle park, and for which rent is paid, or for which rent is paid for the land upon which it is located, or both.

        “Tenant” means any tenant, subtenant, lessee, sublessee or any person entitled to the use or occupancy of a rental unit, or any other person residing in the rental unit. (Ord. 1565 § 1, 1999)

 

9.10.020 Duties of the landlord.
        A landlord shall not cause or knowingly permit:

        A.    Any premises under his or her control to be used or maintained for any illegal drug activity or gang-related crime, or in such a manner as to constitute a drug-related nuisance; or

        B.     Any tenant to use or occupy any premises under the landlord’s control, if the tenant commits, permits, maintains, solicits, or is involved in any illegal drug activity, gang-related crime, or drug-related nuisance on such premises;

        C.     Any rental property, which has been vacated according to the provisions of this chapter, to be rented, leased or otherwise occupied by the offending tenant(s) prior to the expiration of a twelve month period following such tenant(s) vacating the rental property. (Ord. 1565 § 1, 1999)

 

9.10.030 Administrative procedures.
        The city manager of the city, or his or her designated representative, may promulgate such administrative procedures as may be reasonably necessary to implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1565 § 1, 1999)

 

9.10.040 Recovery of possession by landlord.
        Notwithstanding any provision of the La Habra Municipal Code, and in compliance with a landlord’s duty under Section 9.10.020(B), a landlord may bring an action against any tenant to recover possession of any rental property upon any of the following grounds:

        A.    The tenant is committing, or permitting to exist, any illegal drug activity, gang-related crime, or drug-related nuisance on the premises; or

        B.     The tenant has been convicted of a crime wherein the underlying offense involves any illegal drug activity, gang-related crime, or drug-related nuisance that occurred on the premises. (Ord. 1565 § 1, 1999)

 

9.10.050 Enforcement and notice.
        A.    Provided the owner of record or agent thereof and any known manager, of any real property located within the city have been served with a written notice of violation by certified mail, return receipt requested, advising that the chief of police of the city of La Habra has determined that the landlord of the real property is in violation of Section 9.10.020 of this chapter, and has failed to comply with the provisions thereof within fifteen calendar days of the date of service of the notice, or has failed to file an appeal within such period as provided herein, the city may file an action for injunctive relief, or may utilize any other remedy at law or in equity to compel compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, all remedies available to abate a nuisance.

        B.     For purposes of this section, the written notice of violation shall also identify the address of the real property, the unit number, where applicable, the offending tenant(s), the specific violation(s), the date(s) and time(s) of any observed criminal activity and any resulting arrest(s). The notice shall also state that within fifteen calendar days of the date of the notice, a written appeal of the determination of violation may be filed with the city manager who shall cause the matter to be set for hearing.

        C.     The required written notice of violation shall further state that, as to all tenant(s) in the subject rental unit, the landlord is required to serve and diligently prosecute either a three day notice to quit or a thirty day notice to vacate. The term “diligently prosecute” means such prosecution by the landlord as is necessary to cause the subject rental unit to be completely vacated by all tenants. (Ord. 1565 § 1, 1999)

 

9.10.060 Appeal.
        A.    Within fifteen calendar days of service, any person served with a written notice of violation in accordance with this chapter may file a written appeal of the determination of violation with the city manager who shall cause the matter to be set for hearing. Written notice of the date and time of such hearing shall be served by first class mail, addressed to the appellant’s last known business address. Following the conclusion of the hearing, the city manager may affirm, reverse or reverse subject to conditions, the police chief’s determination of violation. The city manager’s decision shall be based upon written findings and shall be final.

        B.     In the event an appeal is not timely filed, or an appeal is denied, the city may immediately proceed to enforce the provisions of this chapter against the owner of record, by way of an action for injunctive relief or any other remedy at law or in equity to compel compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, all remedies available to abate a nuisance. (Ord. 1565 § 1, 1999)

 

9.10.070 Lien authorized.
        Any judgment for money, including permitted fees and costs, awarded to the city through an enforcement action pursuant to this chapter, may be recorded as a lien against the subject property in an amount not to exceed five thousand dollars; and, if multiple defendants exist, they shall be jointly and severally liable for any judgment so ordered. (Ord. 1565 § 1, 1999)

 

9.10.080 Prohibition and penalties.
        A.    It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter.

        B.     Any person violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be subject to the imposition of the following penalties:

        1.     For three or less violations occurring within any twelve consecutive month period, a violation of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation, two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same provision within any twelve consecutive month period, and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for a third violation of the same provision occurring within any twelve consecutive month period.

        2.     For four or more violations of this chapter occurring within any twelve consecutive month period, each violation shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1565 § 1, 1999)

 

9.10.090 Civil remedies and penalties.
        A.    The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil remedies, including, but not limited to, a restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or any other remedy at law or in equity for the abatement of such nuisance.

        B.     A court rendering a judgment pursuant to this chapter may, in addition to any other remedies at law or in equity, impose a civil penalty in the maximum amount permitted by law, payable to the city, and/or require the payment of the city’s attorneys’ fees, costs of investigation and discovery, and/or court costs. (Ord. 1565 § 1, 1999)

Chapter 9.12 INDECENT EXPOSURE
9.12.010 Exposure of private parts and female breasts.
        A.    Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who, while acting as a waiter, waitress or entertainer in an establishment which serves or offers for sale alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises of such establishment:

        1.     Exposes his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or

        2.     Exposes any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or

        3.     Exposes any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof.

        B.     Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who, while participating in live act, demonstration or exhibition in an establishment which serves or offers for sale alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises of such establishment:

        1.     Exposes his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or

        2.     Exposes any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or

        3.     Exposes any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof.

        C.     Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who permits, counsels or assists any person to violate any provision of this section. Any business whose owner(s) or manager(s) permits, counsels or assists any person to violate any provision of this section, and any business which is operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be, and is deemed to be, unlawful and a public nuisance. In addition to or in lieu of any criminal prosecution provided for herein, the city attorney may commence proceedings to revoke the business license pursuant to the procedure set forth in Section 5.28.320, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, at law or in equity in any court or administrative tribunal of competent jurisdiction, for the abatement, removal and enjoining thereof in the manner provided by law.

        D.    The provisions of this section shall not be construed to apply to any business that, on or before July 1, 1998, has been adjudicated by a court of competent jurisdiction to be a theater, concert hall, or similar establishment primarily devoted to theatrical performances, or to a business that has, by action of the city of La Habra taken on or before July 1, 1998, been acknowledged to be or allowed to operate as a theater, concert hall, or similar establishment primarily devoted to theatrical performances. (Ord. 1549 §§ 1, 2, 1999; Ord. 1263, 1986; Ord. 872 § 1, 1973)

 

9.12.020 Public nudity.
        A.    No person shall appear, bathe, sunbathe, walk or be in any public park, playground, street or other public land, or on any private property open to public view from any public right-of-way, public street, public park or public land, in such a manner that the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, anus, anal region or pubic hair region of any person is exposed to public view or is not covered by an opaque covering.

        B.     The provisions of this section shall not apply to:

        1.     Children under the age of five years;

        2.     Live theatrical performances performed in a theater, concert hall or other similar establishment; or

        3.     Art courses which qualify for state or federal student financial aid programs. (Ord. 1211, 1983)

 

9.12.030 Public excretion.
        A.    No person shall urinate or defecate in any public place or in any place open to the public or exposed to public view.

        B.     This section shall not apply to urination or defecation in any fixture provided for such purposes in any bathroom, restroom, dressing room or similar facility. (Ord. 1211, 1983)

Chapter 9.16 GAMBLING
9.16.010 Purpose.
        It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to prohibit all forms of gambling or the securing of anything by chance not prohibited by state law. (Ord. 95, 1941)

 

9.16.020 Prohibited.
        No person or persons shall play, participate in, conduct, allow to be conducted, played or participated in, or bet on, either for hire or otherwise, any game, games, devices or contrivances used as a means or method of gambling or securing anything of value in any way by chance within the city. (Ord. 95, 1941)

Chapter 9.20 FIREARMS
9.20.010 Discharge.
        No person shall shoot or discharge any gun, pistol, firearm or any air gun or pistol, or any spring gun or pistol, or any other device that shoots or propels a pellet or missile by any means, at any place within the city limits except in the defense of a person’s life. (Ord. 1211, 1983; Ord. 1120 § 1, 1980; Ord. 88 § 4, 1938)

 

9.20.020 Possession by minor.
        It is unlawful for any person to allow or to permit any minor to have or carry any such gun or device as set forth in Section 9.20.010 on any public place or upon any public thoroughfare or in any vehicle within the city unless in the immediate presence of his/her parent or guardian. (Ord. 1120 § 1, 1980)

Chapter 9.22 FIREWORKS
9.22.010 Definitions.
        For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

        A.    “Fireworks” means any device containing chemical elements and chemical compounds capable of burning independently of the oxygen of the atmosphere and producing audible, visual, mechanical, or thermal effects which are useful as pyrotechnic devices or for entertainment. The term “fireworks” includes, but is not limited to, devices designed by the manufacturer as fireworks, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, rockets, Daygo bombs, sparklers, party poppers, paper caps, chasers, fountains, smoke parts, aerial bombs, and firework kits. “Fireworks” includes both “dangerous fireworks” and “safe and sane” fireworks as those terms are defined in the Health and Safety Code.

        B.     “Property” means any private property, including, but not limited to, a home, yard or field, whether or not occupied as a dwelling and whether owned, leased, rented or used with or without compensation.

        C.     “Responsible person” includes, but is not limited to:

        1.     The person or persons who owns, rents, leases or otherwise has possession of the residence or other private property;

        2.     The person or persons in immediate control of the residence or other private property;

        3.     The person or persons who organize, supervise, sponsor, conduct, allow, control or controls access to the unlawful use, discharge, possession, storage or sale of fireworks. (Ord. 1778 § 1, 2017)

 

9.22.020 Use, discharge, possession, storage or sale of fireworks.
        A.    It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to use, discharge, possess, store or sell fireworks on public or private property without a permit issued by the chief of police for supervised public displays of fireworks by a jurisdiction, fair association, amusement park, or other organization.

        B.     It is unlawful and a public nuisance for a responsible person to allow the use, discharge, possession, storage or sale of fireworks on private property when the responsible person knows or should know of the use, discharge, possession, storage or sale of fireworks at the property. (Ord. 1778 § 1, 2017)

 

 

9.22.030 Enforcement.
        Violations of this chapter are punishable as set forth in Chapters 1.08 and 1.20 of this code, except that misdemeanor citations for violations of this chapter issued under Chapter 1.08 shall impose a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars. Nothing in this chapter limits any of the penalties provided in the Health and Safety Code or Penal Code with regard to the unlawful use, discharge, possession, storage or sale of fireworks. (Ord. 1778 § 1, 2017)

Chapter 9.24 TRESPASSING
9.24.010 Unlawful.
        It is unlawful for any person to be upon any publicly or privately owned property at any time, except upon lawful business, or with permission of the owner or person entitled to the possession of such property. (Ord. 354 § 1, 1958)

Chapter 9.26 TRESPASSING ON PUBLIC SCHOOL GROUNDS
9.26.010 Trespassing on school grounds.
        No person shall wilfully enter posted school grounds of any public school in this city during school hours without first obtaining written permission in advance either from the administrative office of the school or school district, except for the following persons:

        A.    Students, currently enrolled at that school, while in the presence and under the supervision of a teacher or some other authorized employee connected with the school;

        B.     Teachers, staff members and other bona fide employees or authorized licensees of the school district;

        C.     Authorized service providers and vendors conducting legitimate business with or for the school, its teachers, staff members and other bona fide employees. Authorized service providers and vendors include, but is not limited to counselors, social workers, utility service providers, etc;

        D.    Volunteers, guests, or other persons approved in writing, in advance, by a teacher, staff member or other authorized school district employee;

        E.     Parents of students currently enrolled at that school;

        F.     Law enforcement and other governmental employees and representatives having or conducting business at such school;

        G.    Attendees and invitees at scheduled school events or other functions that are open to the general public, only for so long as those events or functions are open to the general public and only in the specific area, building(s), or grounds authorized for the event or function;

 

        H.    Only those authorized persons attending functions of authorized groups pursuant to Education Code Section 40040 et seq.

        For purposes of this section, “school hours” shall be defined to extend from one hour before classes begin to one hour after classes end, and those hours shall be posted. (Ord. 1469 § 1, 1993)

Chapter 9.28 NIGHTTIME CURFEW FOR MINORS
9.28.010 Purpose.
        The provisions of this chapter are adopted in accordance with the authority granted to the city under the police power delegated to it by the Constitution of the state of California. Such police power provides the city with the authority to react when the potential exists for jeopardy to the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizens. The city is concerned with the level of juvenile violence, juvenile gang activity, and juvenile crime in the city. The crimes being committed by juveniles include serious offenses such as murders, drive-by shootings, drug-related crimes and other gang-related activities. Moreover, juveniles are particularly susceptible by their lack of maturity and experience to participate in unlawful and gang-related activities and to be victims of older perpetrators of crime. In addition, recent local, state and national statistics regarding juvenile crime and victimization indicate that enforcement of a nighttime curfew for juveniles decreases the percentage of juvenile victimization and increases the number of arrests for violent crimes during curfew hours. Based on the foregoing, the City believes that having an enforceable nighttime juvenile curfew ordinance is critical to preserving the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 1519 § 3, 1997)

 

9.28.020 Definitions.
        The following definitions are applicable to this chapter:

        “City” means the city of La Habra, a municipal corporation created under the laws of the state of California.

        “Curfew hours” means the period from ten p.m. any evening of the week, until six a.m. the following day.

        “Emergency” means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.

        “Establishment” means any privately-owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment.

        “Guardian” means: (1) a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or (2) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court.

        “Minor” means any person under eighteen years of age.

        “Operator” means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation.

        “Parent” means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person.

        “Public place” means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops.

        “Remain” means to: (1) linger, stay or be present; or (2) fail to leave the premises when requested to do so by a peace officer or the owner, operator or an employee of an establishment.

        “Responsible adult” means a person at least eighteen years of age, authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.

        “Serious bodily injury” means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. (Ord. 1519 § 4, 1997)

 

9.28.030 Curfew restrictions.
        A.    It is unlawful for any minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours.

        B.     It is unlawful for any parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly permit, or by insufficient control to allow, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours.

        C.     It is unlawful for any owner, operator or employee of an establishment to knowingly allow a minor to remain on the premises of an establishment within the city during curfew hours. (Ord. 1519 § 5, 1997)

 

9.28.040 Defenses to curfew restrictions.
        A.    It is a defense to prosecution under Section 9.28.030 that the minor was:

        1.     Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian, or by a responsible adult;

        2.     On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian, or the responsible adult, without detour or delay;

        3.     In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;

        4.     Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without detour or delay;

        5.     Involved in an emergency;

        6.     On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence;

        7.     Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from such an activity, without detour or delay;

        8.     Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution; or

        9.     Emancipated pursuant to law.

        B.     In addition to those defenses provided in Section 9.28.040(A), it is a defense to prosecution under Section 9.28.030(c) that the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the city’s police department of the fact that a minor was present on the premises of an establishment within the city during curfew hours and refused to leave such establishment after first being asked to leave. (Ord. 1519 § 6, 1997)

 

9.28.050 Enforcement.
        Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in the public place or on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any responses and other circumstances, no defense under Section 9.28.040 is present or applicable. (Ord. 1519 § 7, 1997)

 

9.28.060 Penalties.
        A person who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed. Penalties are provided as follows:

        A.    Any minor who violates the provisions of Section 9.28.030 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor upon conviction thereof. Minors shall be dealt with in accordance with juvenile court law and procedure as provided by applicable state law.

        B.     Any parent, guardian, owner, operator or employee of an establishment who violates the provisions of Section 9.28.030 shall be guilty of an infraction upon conviction thereof. Such infraction offense(s) shall be punishable as follows:

        1.     The initial violation of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine to be determined by the court not to exceed one hundred dollars.

        2.     The second violation of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine to be determined by the court not to exceed two hundred dollars.

        3.     The third or subsequent violation of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine to be determined by the court not to exceed five hundred dollars. (Ord. 1519 § 8, 1997)

Chapter 9.30 DAYTIME CURFEW
9.30.010 Purpose.
        The purpose and intent of this chapter is to prohibit any minor between the ages of six and eighteen who is subject to compulsory school requirements under state law from remaining on private property or in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city between the hours of eight a.m. and two-thirty p.m. on days when school is in session with certain exceptions. (Ord. 1695 § 1, 2008)

 

9.30.020 Definitions.
        The following definitions are applicable to this chapter:

        “City” means the city of La Habra, a municipal corporation created under the laws of the state of California.

        “Curfew hours” means the period between the hours of eight a.m. and two-thirty p.m. on days when school is in session and during the hours designated for schooling for such minor.

        “Emergency” means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.

        “Establishment” means any privately-owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment.

        “Guardian” means (1) a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or (2) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court.

        “Minor” means any person between the ages of six and eighteen years of age who is subject to compulsory education or compulsory continuation education or homeschooling requirements under state law (pursuant to Education Code Section 48200 et seq.). This definition shall also apply to minors whose enrollment status is that of suspension, expulsion, or transfers in progress.

        “Operator” means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation.

        “Parent” means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person.

        “Public place” means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, beaches, parks, playgrounds, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, theaters, game rooms, shops, shopping malls, or any other public place of business.

        “Remain” means to: (1) linger, stay or be present; or (2) fail to leave the premises when requested to do so by a peace officer or the owner, operator or an employee of an establishment.

        “Responsible adult” means a person at least eighteen years of age, authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.

        “Serious bodily injury” means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. (Ord. 1520 § 4, 1997)

 

9.30.030 Curfew restrictions.
        A.    It is unlawful for any minor to remain on private property or in any public place or on the premises of any establishment, other than the school the minor is attending, within the city during curfew hours.

        B.     It is unlawful for any parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly permit, or by insufficient control to allow, the minor to remain on private property or in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours.

        C.     It is unlawful for any owner, operator or employee of an establishment to knowingly allow a minor to remain in or upon the premises of the establishment within the city during curfew hours. (Ord. 1695 § 2, 2008)

 

9.30.040 Defenses to curfew restrictions.
        A.    It is a defense to prosecution under Section 9.30.030 that the minor was:

        1.     Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian, or by a responsible adult, or they are conducting activities which are “excused” within the meaning of Education Code Section 48205;

        2.     On an emergency errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian or by a responsible adult, without detour or delay;

        3.     Going to or from an employment activity, without detour or delay, or engaged in an employment activity, pursuant to a valid school work permit;

        4.     Going to or from a medical appointment, without detour or delay, and can demonstrate proof of that appointment;

        5.     Given permission to leave campus for the lunch period, has in his or her possession a valid lunch pass and has complied with the conditions and restrictions applicable to the lunch pass;

        6.     Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored, sanctioned, or arranged by the school, or going to or returning from such an activity, without detour or delay;

        7.     Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution and the California Constitution;

        8.     Given permission to leave campus, has in his or her possession a valid school-issued, off-campus permit and has complied with the conditions and restrictions applicable to the off-campus permit;

        9.     Not a resident of a school district within the city and possess a valid passport, visitor’s visa, or other form of reliable identification to establish that the minor is temporarily visiting within the city; or

        10.   Receiving instruction by a qualified tutor pursuant to Education Code Section 48224 or receiving home instruction through the private exemption pursuant to Education Code Section 48222.

        B.     In addition to those defenses provided in subsection A of this section, it is a defense to prosecution under Section 9.30.030(C) that the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the city’s police department of the fact that a minor was present on the premises of an establishment within the city during curfew hours and refused to leave such establishment after first being asked to leave. (Ord. 1695 § 3, 2008)

 

9.30.050 Enforcement.
        Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in the public place or on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any responses and other circumstances, no defense under Section 9.30.040 is present or applicable. (Ord. 1520 § 7, 1997)

 

9.30.060 Penalties for minors.
        A minor who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed. Any minor who violates the provisions of Section 9.30.030 shall be guilty of an infraction upon conviction thereof. Such infraction offense(s) shall be punishable as follows:

        A.    First-Offense Infraction. The initial violation of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine to be determined by the court not to exceed one hundred dollars and/or any other penalty provided by Welfare and institutions Code Section 258.

        B.     Second-Offense Infraction. The second violation of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine to be determined by the court not to exceed two hundred dollars and/or any other penalty provided by Welfare and Institutions Code Section 258.

        C.     Third- or Subsequent-Offense Infraction. The third or subsequent violation of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine to be determined by the court not to exceed five hundred dollars and/or any other penalty provided by Welfare and Institutions Code Section 258.

        D.    The court may set aside the penalties set forth herein if the minor produces proof satisfactory to the court that the following have occurred:

        1.     The minor has had no unexcused absences from school from the date of the citation; and

        2.     The minor has performed twenty hours of court-approved community service during times other than the minor’s hours of school attendance; and

        3.     The minor’s parent or guardian has attended a parenting class or a series of parenting classes approved by the court; and

        4.     The minor and parent or guardian have attended counseling as directed and approved by the court. (Ord. 1520 § 8, 1997)

 

9.30.070 Hearing requirement—Obligation to attend.
        A minor cited for a violation of this chapter must attend a court hearing on the violation and must be accompanied by his/her parent or guardian. If any such parent or guardian fails to attend the hearing with minor, and unless the interests of justice would otherwise be served, the court shall continue the hearing and shall issue a citation to such parent or guardian directing that person to appear at the continued hearing with the minor (pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Section 661). (Ord. 1520 § 9, 1997)

 

9.30.080 Penalties for parents or guardians.
        A parent or guardian who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed. Any parent or guardian who violates the provisions of Section 9.30.030 shall be guilty of an infraction upon conviction thereof. Such infraction offense(s) shall be punishable as follows:

        A.    First-Offense Infraction. The initial violation of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine to be determined by the court not to exceed one hundred dollars.

        B.     Second-Offense Infraction. The second violation of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine to be determined by the court not to exceed two hundred dollars.

        C.     Third- or Subsequent-Offense Infraction. The third or subsequent violation of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine to be determined by the court not to exceed five hundred dollars.

        D.    The court may set aside the penalties set forth herein if the parent or guardian produces proof satisfactory to the court that the following have occurred:

        1.     The minor has had no unexcused absences from school from the date of the citation; and

        2.     The parent or guardian has performed twenty hours of court-approved community service; and

        3.     The parent or guardian has attended a parenting class or a series of parenting classes approved by the court; and

        4.     The minor and parent or guardian have attended counseling as directed and approved by the court. (Ord. 1520 § 10, 1997)

 

9.30.090 Penalties for owners or operators or employees of an establishment.
        A owner, operator or employee of an establishment who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed. Any owner, operator or employee of an establishment who violates the provisions of Section 9.30.030 shall be guilty of an infraction upon conviction thereof. Such infraction offense(s) shall be punishable as follows:

        A.    First-Offense Infraction. The initial violation of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine to be determined by the court not to exceed one hundred dollars.

        B.     Second-Offense Infraction. The second violation of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine to be determined by the court not to exceed two hundred dollars.

        C.     Third- or Subsequent-Offense Infraction. The third or subsequent violation of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine to be determined by the court not to exceed five hundred dollars. (Ord. 1520 § 11, 1997)

Chapter 9.32 NOISE CONTROL
9.32.010 Declaration of policy.
        A.    In order to control unnecessary, excessive and annoying sounds emanating from areas of the city, it is declared to be the policy of the city to prohibit such sounds generated from all sources as specified in the ordinance codified in this chapter.

        B.     It is determined that certain sound levels are detrimental to the public health, welfare and safety, and contrary to public interest, therefore, the city council does ordain and declare that creating, maintaining, causing or allowing to create, maintain or cause any noise in a manner prohibited by or not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, is a public nuisance and shall be punishable as such. (Ord. 923 § 1(A), 1975; Ord. 880 § 1, 1973)

 

9.32.020 Definitions.
        The following words, phrases and terms, as used in the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall have the meaning as indicated in this section:

        A.    “Ambient noise level” means the all-encompassing noise level associated with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources, excluding the alleged offensive noise, at the location and approximate time at which a comparison with the alleged offensive noise is to be made.

        B.     “Cumulative period” means an additive period of time composed of individual time segments which may be continuous or interrupted.

        C.     “Decibel” (dB) means a unit which denotes the ratio between two quantities which are proportional to power: the number of decibels corresponding to the ratio of two amounts of power is ten times the logarithm to the base ten of this ratio.

        D.    “Emergency machinery, vehicles or work” means any machinery vehicle or work used, employed or performed in an effort to protect, provide or restore safe conditions in the community or for the citizenry, or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service.

        E.     “Fixed noise source” means a stationary device which creates sounds while fixed or motionless, including, but not limited to, industrial and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, compressors, generators, air conditioners and refrigeration equipment.

        F.     “Grading” means any excavating or filling of earth material or any combination thereof conducted to prepare a site for construction or other improvements thereon.

        G.    “Impact noise” means the noise produced by the collision of one mass in motion with a second mass which may be either in motion or at rest.

        H.    “Licensed” means the issuance of a formal license or a permit by the appropriate jurisdictional authority, or where no permits or licenses are issued, the sanctioning of the activity by the jurisdiction as noted in public records.

        I.      “Mobile noise source” means any noise source other than a fixed source.

        J.      “Noise level” means the “A” weighted sound pressure level in decibels obtained by using a sound level meter at slow response with a reference pressure of twenty micronewtons per square meter. The unit measurement shall be designated as dB(A).

        K.    “Noise variance board” means an administrative board of five members appointed by the board of supervisors of the county of Orange, per Title 4, Division 6, Article 1 of the codified ordinances of the county of Orange.

        L.     “Person” means a person, firm, association, copartnership, joint venture, corporation or any entity, public or private in nature.

        M.    “Simple noise tone” means a noise characterized by a predominant frequency or frequencies so that other frequencies cannot be readily distinguished.

        N.    “Sound level meter” means an instrument meeting American National Standard Institutes Standards S1.4-1971 for Type 1 or Type 2 sound level meters or an instrument and the associated recording and analyzing equipment which will provide equivalent data.

        O.    “Sound pressure level” of a sound, in decibels, means twenty times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound to a reference pressure, which reference pressure shall be explicitly stated.

        P.     “Residential property” means a parcel of real property which is zoned, developed, and used for residential purposes, other than transient uses such as hotels and motels. (Ord. 923 § 1(B), (C), (D), 1975; Ord. 880 § 2, 1973)

 

9.32.030 Noise level measurement criteria.
        Any noise level measurements made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be performed using a sound level meter as defined in subsection N of Section 9.32.020. (Ord. 880 § 3, 1973)

 

9.32.040 Assignment of residential properties to noise zones.
        The residential properties described in this section are assigned to the following noise zones:

        Noise Zone 1: All residential properties, whether incorporated or unincorporated. (Ord. 923 § 1(E), 1975; Ord. 880 § 4, 1973)

 

9.32.050 Noise standards—Exterior.
        A.    The following noise standards, unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall apply to all residential property within a designated noise zone:

 

Noise Standards

 

Noise Zone

Noise Level

Time Period

1

55 dB(A)

7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m.

 

50 dB(A)

10:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m.

 

        B.     It is unlawful for any person at any location within the incorporated area of the city to create any noise, or to allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person, which causes the noise level, when measured on any other residential property either incorporated or unincorporated, to exceed:

        1.     The noise standard for a cumulative period of more than thirty minutes in any hour; or

        2.     The noise standard plus five dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than fifteen minutes in any hour; or

        3.     The noise standard plus ten dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than five minutes in any hour; or

        4.     The noise standard plus fifteen dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour; or

        5.     The noise standard plus twenty dB(A) for any period of time.

        C.     In the event the ambient noise level exceeds any of the five noise limit categories set forth in subsection B1 through B5 of this section, the cumulative period applicable to the category shall be increased to reflect the ambient noise level. Furthermore, the maximum permissible noise level shall never exceed the maximum ambient noise level.

        D.    Each of the noise limits specified in subsection A shall be reduced by five dB(A) for impact or simple tone noises, or for noises consisting of speech or music. (Ord. 923 § 1(F), 1975; Ord. 880 § 5, 1973)

 

9.32.060 Noise standards—Interior.
        A.    The following noise standards, unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall apply to all residential property within a designated noise zone:

 

Noise Standards

 

Noise Zone

Noise Level

Time Period

1

55 dB(A)

7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m.

 

45 dB(A)

10:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m.

 

        B.     It is unlawful for any person at any location within the incorporated area of the city to create any noise, or to allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person, which causes the noise level, when measured within any other dwelling unit on any residential property to exceed:

        1.     The noise standard for a cumulative period of more than five minutes in any hour; or

        2.     The noise standard plus five dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour; or

        3.     The noise standard plus ten dB(A) for any period of time.

        C.     In the event the ambient noise level exceeds any of the three noise limit categories set forth in subsection A1 through A3 of this section, the cumulative period applicable to the category shall be increased to reflect the ambient noise level. Furthermore, the maximum permissible noise level shall never exceed the maximum ambient noise level.

        D.    Each of the noise limits specified in subsection A shall be reduced by five dB(A) for impact or simple tone noises, or for noises consisting of speech or music. (Ord. 923 § 1(G), 1975; Ord. 880 § 6, 1973)

 

9.32.070 Activities exempt from chapter provisions.
        The following activities shall be exempted from the provisions of this chapter except as regulated under Sections 12.28.090 and 12.28.100 of this code:

        A.    School bands, school athletic and school entertainment events;

        B.     Outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows and sporting and entertainment events provided the events are conducted pursuant to a permit issued by the city pursuant to Chapter 5.32 relative to the staging of said events;

        C.     Activities conducted on public parks, public playgrounds, and public or private school grounds;

        D.    Any mechanical device, apparatus or equipment used, related to or connected with emergency machinery, vehicle or work;

        E.     Noise sources associated with construction, repair, remodeling, or grading of any real property, provided the activities do not take place between the hours of eight p.m. and seven a.m. on weekdays, including Saturday, or at any time on Sunday or a federal holiday;

        F.     All mechanical devices, apparatus or equipment which are utilized for the protection or salvage of agricultural crops during periods of potential or actual frost damage or other adverse weather conditions;

        G.    Mobile noise sources associated with agricultural operations provided such operations do not take place between the hours of eight p.m. and seven a.m. on weekdays, including Saturday or at any time on Sunday or a federal holiday;

        H.    Mobile noise sources associated with agricultural pest control through pesticide application; provided, that the application is made in accordance with restricted material permits issued by or regulations enforced by the agricultural commissioner;

        I.      Noise sources associated with the maintenance of real property provided the activities take place between the hours of seven a.m. and eight p.m. on any day except Sunday or federal holiday, or between the hours of nine a.m. and eight p.m. on Sunday or federal holiday;

        J.      Any activity to the extent regulation thereof has been preempted by state or federal law. (Ord. 1367 § 1, 1989; Ord. 923 § 1(H), 1975)

 

9.32.080 Noise level—Near schools, hospitals and churches.
        It is unlawful for any person to create any noise which causes the noise level at any school, hospital or church while the same is in use, to exceed the noise limits as specified in Section 9.32.050 prescribed for the assigned noise zone in which the school, hospital or church is located, or which noise level unreasonably interferes with the use of such institutions or which unreasonably disturbs or annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in three separate locations within one-tenth of a mile of the institution indicating the presence of a school, church or hospital. (Ord. 923 § 1, 1975; Ord. 880 § 9, 1973)

 

9.32.090 Noise level—Location of measurement.
        The location selected for measuring exterior noise levels shall be at any point on the affected residential property. Interior noise measurement shall be made within the affected residential unit. The measurement shall be made at a point at least four feet from the wall, ceiling or floor nearest the noise source. (Ord. 923 § 1, 1975; Ord. 880 § 11, 1973)

 

9.32.100 Enforcement authority—Interference with prohibited.
        A.    The county health officer and his/her duly authorized representatives are directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The county health officer and his/her duly authorized representatives are authorized, pursuant to Penal Code Section 836.5, to arrest any person without a warrant when they have reasonable cause to believe that such person has committed a misdemeanor in their presence.

        B.     No person shall interfere with, oppose or resist any authorized person charged with enforcement of this chapter while such person is engaged in the performance of his/her duty. (Ord. 923 § 1, 1975; Ord. 880 § 12, 1973)

 

9.32.110 Variance—Application—Fee—Applicants remain subject to prosecution.
        A.    The owner or operator of a noise source which violates any of the provisions of this chapter may file an application with the health officer for a variance from the provisions thereof wherein the owner or operator shall set forth all actions taken to comply with the provisions, the reasons why immediate compliance cannot be achieved, a proposed method of achieving compliance, and a proposed time schedule for its accomplishment. The application shall be accompanied by a fee as set by resolution of the city council and on file in the office of the city clerk. A separate application shall be filed for each noise source; provided, however, that several mobile sources under common ownership, or several fixed sources on a single property may be combined into one application.

        B.     Upon receipt of the application and fee, the health officer shall refer it with his/her recommendations thereon within thirty days to the noise variance board for action thereon in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

        C.     An applicant for a variance shall remain subject to prosecution under the terms of this chapter until a variance is granted. (Ord. 1213 §§ 2, 3, 1983; Ord. 923 § 1, 1975; Ord. 880 § 13, 1973)

 

9.32.120 Variance—Authority to grant—Terms and conditions—Violation unlawful.
        The noise variance board shall evaluate all applications for variance from the requirements of this chapter and may grant the variances with respect to time for compliance, subject to such terms, conditions and requirements as it may deem reasonable to achieve maximum compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The terms, conditions and requirements may include, but shall not be limited to, limitations on noise levels and operating hours. Each such variance shall set forth in detail the approved method of achieving maximum compliance and a time schedule for its accomplishment. In its determinations the board shall consider the magnitude of nuisance caused by the offensive noise; the uses of property within the area of impingement by the noise; the time factors related to study, design, financing and construction of remedial work; the economic factors related to age and useful life of equipment; and the general public interest and welfare. Any variance granted by the board shall be by resolution and shall be transmitted to the health officer for enforcement. Any violation of the terms of the variance shall be unlawful. (Ord. 923 § 1, 1975; Ord. 880 § 14, 1973)

 

9.32.130 Variances—Appeals.
        A.    Within fifteen days following the decision of the variance board on an application the applicant, the health officer, or any member of the city council, may appeal the decision to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the secretary of the variance board. In the case of an appeal by the applicant for a variance, the notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a fee to be computed by the secretary on the basis of the estimated cost of preparing the materials required to be forwarded to the city council as discussed hereafter in this section. If the actual cost of such preparation differs from the estimated cost, appropriate payments shall be made either to or by the secretary.

        B.     Within fifteen days following receipt of a notice of appeal and the appeal fee, the secretary of the variance board shall forward to the city council copies of the application for variance; the recommendation of the health officer; the notice of appeal; and all evidence concerning the application received by the variance board and its decision thereon. In addition, any person may file with the city council written arguments supporting or attacking the decision and the city council may in its discretion hear oral arguments thereon. The city clerk shall mail to the applicant a notice of the date set for hearing of the appeal. The notice shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the hearing date.

        C.     Within sixty days following its receipt of the notice of the appeal, the city council shall either affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the variance board. Such decision shall be based upon the city council’s evaluation of the matters submitted to the city council in light of the powers conferred on the variance board and the factors to be considered, both as enumerated in Sections 9.32.110 and 9.32.120. As part of its decision the council may direct the variance board to conduct further proceedings on the application. Failure of the city council to affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the variance board within the sixty-day period shall constitute an affirmance of the decision. (Ord. 923 § 14, 1975)

Chapter 9.34 MULTIPLE POLICE RESPONSES/NOISE CONTROL
9.34.010 Definitions.
        “Party” means a gathering, event or assemblage of a group of persons who have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or for a social activity on private residential and/or commercial property including but not limited to residential dwelling units, saloons, bars, nightclubs, pool halls, restaurants, theaters or amphitheaters.

        “Person” means any individual and includes a corporation, partnership, company, association, organization or league and any other entity which owns, leases or controls property. The term “person” includes person responsible for the event.

        “Person responsible for the event, assembly or gathering” means the person who owns the property where the party takes place, the person in charge of the premises and/or the person who organized the event, assembly or gathering. If the person responsible for the event, assembly or gathering is a minor, then the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) of that minor will be jointly and severally liable for the costs incurred for the police services. If the person who organized the event, assembly or gathering is not present, then the president of the group or club in a leadership position is responsible.

        “Public nuisance” means behavior constituting a violation of the provisions of: (1) Chapter 11 of Title 7 of the California Penal Code, and (2) Sections 407 or 415 of the California Penal Code, and (3) Section 9.20.010 of the La Habra Municipal Code, or (4) other noise, explosions or audible conduct that is unreasonably loud, raucous, excessive or jarring to persons within the area of audibility in a residential area which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood. (Ord. 1475 § 1, 1994)

 

9.34.020 Noise restrictions—General.
        A.    When any loud, unruly or disorderly party occurs or is held, and the senior ranking police officer at the scene determines that the disturbance constitutes a public nuisance and is a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general public welfare, that senior officer shall notify, in his discretion, either the owner of the premises, the person in lawful custody of the premises or the person responsible for the party and inform them that person, or if that person be a minor, the parents or guardians of that minor person, shall be personally liable for the costs incurred for providing police personnel for a second or subsequent response to the same location due to a continuation of the same conduct. If the senior officer can determine that the person who organized and is responsible for the party is not physically present at the time that there is a threat, but there is another person present who maintains a leadership position amongst the majority of those persons present at the party, then that person shall be deemed for the purposes of this section to be the person responsible for the party.

        B.     The first response, and warning, shall be deemed to be a normal police service at no additional charge.

        C.     If the responding officers on a second or subsequent response determine that the disturbance continues to constitute a public nuisance as defined in this chapter and poses an immediate threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, the officers shall take appropriate actions to immediately abate the public nuisance, including arrest and/or citation of persons violating the law, closure and dispersal of any party.

        D.    Personnel utilized on a second or subsequent response shall be deemed to be on special assignment, and the costs incurred shall be beyond normal services provided. The costs of such special assignment shall include personnel and equipment costs, damage to city property and injuries to personnel.

        E.     The costs incurred by the city for multiple responses to loud, unruly or disorderly parties or assemblages shall be the responsibility of the owner of the premises, the person in lawful custody of the premises, or the person responsible for said assemblage, or in the event that person is a minor, that person’s parents or guardians. (Ord. 1475 § 1, 1994)

 

9.34.030 Collection of costs of special police assignment.
        The costs provided in this section shall be collected in the following manner:

        The costs incurred by the city for multiple responses shall be forwarded to the La Habra city finance department where the cost of the special assignment shall be computed and an amount assessed which reflects the actual costs of services rendered as established by resolution of the city council of the city. (Ord. 1475 § 1, 1994)

 

9.34.040 Joint and several liability.
        If the owner and occupant of the property are different persons, they shall be jointly and severally liable for the amount set forth in the invoice. (Ord. 1475 § 1, 1994)

 

9.34.050 Liability of occupant who is not owner.
        If the owner of the property is not the occupant of the property and if the occupant of the property does not pay the amount set forth in the invoice within thirty calendar days after the invoice becomes final or the hearing officer confirms the invoice or after the invoice has been confirmed by the board of appeals, the city shall take appropriate steps to collect the amount set forth in the invoice from the occupant of the property, including causing a lawsuit to be filed on behalf of the city against the occupant for the amount set forth in the invoice. (Ord. 1475 § 1, 1994)

 

9.34.060 Nonpayment.
        When the full amount due to the city for second or subsequent response costs, as set forth in this chapter, is not paid by the person or persons responsible therefore within thirty calendar days of the date of the billing for such costs, the chief of police shall file with the city clerk a certified statement showing the response costs incurred, the date costs were incurred and the location of the property to which the response was made. The recordation of such a certified statement by the city clerk with the Orange County recorder shall constitute a lien on the property. The remedy provided in this section shall not constitute an election of remedies by the city. (Ord. 1475 § 1, 1994)

 

9.34.070 Appeal—Hearing on statement of costs of abatement.
        A.    The invoice shall notify the host that a hearing to respond in opposition to the proposed action shall be available if such written request is received by the chief of police within thirty calendar days of the billing for such costs. The request protesting payment shall be in writing, shall be signed by the appellant, and shall set forth the facts and reasons upon which the appeal is based. The host shall be permitted to present any evidence or argument challenging the invoiced amount or liability for any amount.

        B.     If a written request protesting payment of the amount set forth in the invoice is received within thirty days, an impartial and noninvolved reviewer (hereinafter referred to as hearing officer) shall conduct an administrative hearing within an additional sixty calendar days after receipt of the written request protesting payment on a date set by the hearing officer. The city manager or his designee shall appoint the hearing officer who shall possess the authority to recommend a final disposition of the matter.

        C.     Said notice of the hearing shall be personally served upon the appellant, if possible. If personal service is not possible, the notice of hearing shall be served to the owner of the property as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll and to the occupant of the property at the address of the property by certified mail, return receipt requested. All notices required under this subsection shall be served at least fourteen days in advance of the hearing and shall contain a copy of all the charges, reports and documentation upon which the invoice is based.

        D.    At the time fixed for the hearing, the hearing officer shall consider the cost abatement statements, the protest and objections raised by the protesting party or parties, and shall hear the testimony of all competent persons desiring to testify pertaining to the costs of abating the public nuisance and any other pertinent matters, subject to reasonable limitations of cumulative testimony and other procedures as may be set forth, subject to council approval.

        E.     The hearing officer may revive, correct or modify the invoice as he/she considers just and thereafter shall confirm the invoice. The hearing officer shall excuse the owner or the occupant of the property from payment of the amount set forth in the invoice if the hearing officer determines that the owner or occupant was not in possession of the property at the time of the disturbance or could not have reasonably prevented the disturbance, unless the person responsible for the disturbance was the minor child of the owner or occupant of the property. The hearing officer shall excuse the owner or occupant of the property from the payment set forth in the invoice if the hearing officer determines that the owner or the occupant took reasonable steps to stop the disturbance following the first response by the police department.

        F.     The decision of the hearing officer shall be in writing and shall state the reasons therein for the decision to confirm the invoice.

        G.    The decision of the hearing officer shall be served by certified mail, return receipt requested, within fourteen calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing. Upon proof of mailing, the decision of the hearing officer shall be final.

        H.    The final decision of the hearing officer may be appealed to the planning commission by the owner or the occupant of the property or by any member of the city council. The planning commission shall constitute the board of appeals for any decision of the hearing officer. Notice of the appeal to the board of appeals shall be filed with the city clerk within fourteen calendar days after the decision of the hearing officer is final. A late notice of appeal will not be considered. Questions raised during the appeal process to the board of appeals shall be limited to those issues raised in the notice of appeal as set forth in subsection A of this section. The board of appeals shall conduct a hearing within an additional forty-five calendar days after timely filing of the notice of appeal with the city clerk. The board of appeals reserves the right to postpone a scheduled hearing upon good cause. The hearing officer shall give notice of the hearing by the board of appeals not less than fourteen calendar days prior thereto.

        I.      The filing of a timely notice of appeal shall stay further proceedings by the city until the board of appeals has made its final determination.

        J.      The board of appeals may uphold, reverse or modify any final determination appealed from. The decision of the board of appeals shall become final and conclusive as to all matters in controversy upon proof of service thereof by registered mail upon those persons aggrieved. Upon denial of an appeal, the appellant(s) shall have thirty days to pay the applicable response costs, or the city may commence proceedings to collect such sums as are due as provided by law and to place a lien upon the affected property. (Ord. 1475 § 1, 1994)

 

9.34.080 Special assessment.
        If the owner of the property does not pay the amount set forth in the invoice within thirty calendar days after the invoice becomes final or the hearing officer confirms the invoice, or after the invoice has been confirmed by the board of appeals, whichever is later, the city clerk shall order that the amount set forth in the invoice shall become a special assessment against the property on which the public nuisance was abated and that a notice of lien be filed. The assessment shall continue until it is paid, together with interest at the rate of seven percent per year computed from the date of confirmation of the invoice until payment. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and it shall be subject to the same penalties, procedures and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary taxes. All acts applicable to levy, collection and enforcement of property taxes shall apply to this special assessment. (Ord. 1475 § 1, 1994)

 

9.34.090 Notice of abatement lien.
        In the event of an assessment pursuant to Section _____ the city clerk shall cause to be filed in the office of the Orange County recorder a notice in substantially the following form:

 

  “Under the authority of California Government Code Sections 38771 through 38773.5, the City of La Habra did on _______________ 20_____, abate a nuisance upon the real property hereinafter described and then on _______________, 20_____ did assess the cost of the abatement not to exceed $__________ upon the real property. The record owner of such property is _________________________ (name and address). The City of La Habra claims a special assessment on the real property for the cost of the abatement in the amount of $__________. This amount is a special assessment against the real property until it is paid, with interest at the rate of seven (7%) percent per year from _______________, 20_____ (insert date of confirmation of invoice). The real property referred to above, and upon which the special assessment is claimed, is that certain parcel of land situated within the County of Orange, State of California, more particularly described as follows:

  _________________________

  _________________________

 

(Ord. 1475 § 1, 1994)

Chapter 9.36 ABUSE OF EMERGENCY SERVICES
9.36.010 Negligent or wrongful conduct police service fee.
        A.    Any person who is under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or any drug, or the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and any drug, whose negligent operation of a motor vehicle, boat, vessel or civil aircraft caused by that influence proximately causes any incident resulting in an appropriate emergency response, and any person whose intentionally wrongful conduct proximately causes any incident resulting in an appropriate emergency response is liable for the expense of an emergency response by a public agency to the incident.

        B.     In no event shall a person’s liability under this section for the expense of an emergency response exceed one thousand dollars for a particular incident. (Ord. 1303, 1987)

Chapter 9.38 SOCIAL HOST ACCOUNTABILITY
9.38.010 Purpose and intent.
        The city council of the city of La Habra finds, determines and declares that this chapter has been enacted based upon the following findings:

        A.    Loud or unruly gatherings on private property where alcoholic beverages are served to, consumed by, or in the possession of underage persons, are harmful to the underage persons themselves and a threat to the public health, safety or quiet enjoyment of residential property and the general welfare.

        B.     This chapter is a reasonable and necessary means to protect and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of youth and other residents of the city by facilitating the enforcement of laws prohibiting the service to, consumption by, or possession of alcoholic beverages by underage persons. The imposition of administrative and/or criminal liability upon social hosts and/or landowners who allow loud or unruly gatherings to occur on their premises, at their residences, or at rented facilities where alcoholic beverages are served to, consumed by, or in the possession of underage persons, is reasonable and necessary to protect and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of youth and other residents of the city.

        C.     This chapter is intended to protect the public health, safety and welfare, as well as the quiet enjoyment of residential property, and to hold accountable persons who actively or passively aid, abet or allow loud or unruly gatherings. Such persons will be held liable for the nuisances created by such gatherings and may be subject to the penalties and costs associated with responding to unruly parties.

 

9.38.020 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases used herein are defined as follows:

        “Alcohol” shall have the same meaning as Section 23003 of the California Business and Professions Code.

        “Alcoholic beverage” shall have the same meaning as Section 23004 of the California Business and Professions Code.

        “Loud or unruly gathering” shall mean a party or gathering of four or more persons at a residence, or on other private property, or rented public property, upon which loud or unruly conduct occurs. Such loud or unruly conduct constitutes a public nuisance and includes, but is not limited to:

        1.     Excessive noise pursuant to La Habra Municipal Code Chapter 9.34;

        2.     Excessive traffic which interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic;

        3.     Obstruction of public streets and/or presence of persons in the street causing a hazard to self and others;

        4.     Public drunkenness or public consumption of alcohol or alcoholic beverages in violation of California Penal Code Section 647(f);

        5.     Assaults, batteries, fights, domestic violence or other disturbances of the peace pursuant to the California Penal Code or the La Habra Municipal Code;

        6.     Vandalism pursuant to California Penal Code Section 594;

        7.     Littering pursuant to California Penal Code Section 374; or

        8.     Any other conduct which constitutes a threat to the public health, safety, or quiet enjoyment of residential property or the general welfare of others.

        “Underage person” shall mean any person less than twenty-one years of age. (Ord. 1734 § 1, 2012)

 

9.38.030 Prohibited acts.
        It is unlawful for a person to conduct or allow a loud or unruly gathering where alcohol is served to, consumed by, or in the possession of any underage person, or persons at a home, yard, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall, or meeting room, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a house party, or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation. (Ord. 1734 § 1, 2012)

 

9.38.040 Enforcement.
        Before taking any enforcement action under this chapter, a law enforcement officer shall determine that the following exists:

        1.     An underage person is consuming, possessing or being served alcohol;

        2.     Someone is hosting the event; and

        3.     The gathering is/was loud or unruly. (Ord. 1734 § 1, 2012)

 

9.38.050 Chapter not apply.
        A.    This chapter shall not apply to any location regulated by the California Department of Alcohol and Beverage Control.

        B.     This chapter shall not apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic beverages that occurs exclusive between a minor and his or her parent or guardian. (Ord. 1734 § 1, 2012)

 

9.38.060 Public nuisance—Cost recovery.
        Loud or unruly gatherings are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated by the city in any manner provided by law. In any action or proceeding to enforce this chapter, the city may collect the costs of enforcement. (Ord. 1734 § 1, 2012)

Chapter 9.40 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES WARNING SIGNS
9.40.010 Legislative purpose.
        The Surgeon General of the United States has recommended that women who are pregnant, or considering pregnancy, be advised not to drink alcoholic beverages, and to be aware of the alcoholic content in anything they eat because alcohol consumption during pregnancy, especially in the early months, can harm the fetus. In order to serve the public health, safety and welfare, the purpose of this article is to educate the public by requiring that warning signs be placed at all locations where alcoholic beverages are sold to the public. (Ord. 1363 § 1, 1989)

 

9.40.020 Definitions.
        The following terms used in this article shall have the meanings indicated below:

        A.    “Alcoholic beverages” means and includes, without limitation, beer, malt liquors, wine and distilled spirits.

        B.     “Enforcement officer” means the chief building official or his or her designee. (Ord. 1363 § 1, 1989)

 

9.40.030 Duty to post signs.
        Any person or entity who owns, operates, manages, leases or rents a premises offering wine, beer, distilled spirits, malt liquors or other alcoholic beverages for sale, or who dispenses such beverages for consideration to the public, shall cause signs to be posted in compliance with the following:

        A.    For alcoholic beverages intended for consumption off the premises where sold or distributed at least one notice or sign shall be placed in the retail establishment so as to assure that it is readable and likely to be read either at the retail point of sale or each point of display. Signs or notices placed at the point of display shall be placed no more than ten feet from any display of any alcoholic beverage container in a manner associating the sign or notice with the display.

        B.     For alcoholic beverages provided for consumption on the premises at tables served by food or beverage persons at least one notice or sign shall be placed so as to assure that it is readable and likely to be read by the public being served on the premises, or a notice or sign shall be conspicuously displayed at each of the tables.

        C.     For alcohol sold or distributed through over-the-counter service at least one notice or sign shall be placed in the retail establishment so that it is readable and likely to be read from all counter locations available to the public.

        D.    Any sign required to be posted or displayed pursuant to this section shall bear the following warning message:

 

  “WARNING: Drinking Distilled Spirits, Beer, Coolers, Wine and Other Alcoholic Beverages May Increase Cancer Risk, and, During Pregnancy, Can Cause Birth Defects.”

 

(Ord. 1368, 1989; Ord. 1363 § 1, 1989)

 

9.40.040 Language.
        In the event that twenty-five percent or more of the public patronizing a premises offering for sale or dispensing, for consideration, wine, beer or other alcoholic beverages uses a language other than English as a primary language, any sign or notice required under Section 9.40.030 shall be worded in both English and the primary language or languages involved. (Ord. 1363 § 1, 1989)

 

9.40.050 Sign availability.
        Warning signs may be obtained from the chief building inspector. Vendors of alcoholic beverages may also prepare and post signs of their own making meeting the requirements of this article, at their expense. In no event shall the language of the warning sign be altered from that specified in Section 9.40.030(D). (Ord. 1363 § 1, 1989)

9.40.060 Enforcement.
        The enforcement officer shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of this chapter. The city manager shall have the authority to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the implementation of this article, including rules and regulations for alternative signs and placement of required signs. (Ord. 1363 § 1, 1989)

 

9.40.070 Violation—Penalties.
        Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars per day. (Ord. 1363 § 1, 1989)

Chapter 9.50 EMERGENCY RESPONSE COST RECOVERY PROGRAM
9.50.010 Definitions.
        “Expense of an emergency response” means those costs incurred by the city in making an appropriate emergency response to the incident, and shall be comprised of all costs directly arising because of the response to the particular incident, including, but not limited to the cost of providing police, firefighting, rescue and emergency medical services at the scene of the incident, as well as the salaries of the personnel responding to the incident. (Ord. 1410 § 1, 1991)

 

9.50.020 Emergency response cost recovery program.
        Pursuant to the authority vested in the city by state statute, each person who is under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or any drug, or the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and any drug, whose negligent operation of a motor vehicle, boat, vessel or aircraft caused by that influence proximately causes any incident resulting in an appropriate emergency response, or whose intentionally wrongful criminal act proximately causes any incident resulting in appropriate emergency response, shall pay to the city the expense of such an emergency response. In no event shall a person’s liability under this chapter exceed the maximum allowable under state statute, and all costs assessed pursuant to this chapter shall reasonably relate to the actual cost of the expense incurred by the city. (Ord. 1410 § 1, 1991)

 

9.50.030 Collection of costs.
        A.    The expense of an emergency response shall be charged against the person liable for the expenses under this chapter. The charge constitutes a debt of that person to the city, and is collectible by the city in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract, expressed or implied.

        B.     Costs assessed pursuant to this chapter shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1410 § 1, 1991)

Chapter 9.54 GRAFFITI
9.54.010 Purpose.
        The purpose of this chapter is to provide a program for abatement of graffiti from public and private property to reduce blight and deterioration within the city, protect public safety, and for the expeditious removal of graffiti from structures on both public and private property. The city council finds and determines as follows:

        A.    The increase of graffiti, on both public and private property, is creating a condition within the city which results in blight and deterioration of property values and of the comfortable enjoyment of life and property for adjacent and surrounding residents and owners, and contributes to the overall detriment of the city.

        B.     Graffiti constitutes a public nuisance and a threat to public safety which must be abated to alleviate the detrimental impact of such graffiti on the city, and to prevent the further spread of graffiti.

        C.     Certain categories of graffiti that incite violence are especially harmful and must be removed as quickly as possible to avoid or minimize harm to persons and the whole community.

        D.    The city council strongly recommends that when a person is convicted of violating this chapter that the court impose a long community service sentence, in addition to any other penalties imposed by the court.

        E.     The rule of the common law, that penal statutes are to be strictly construed, has no application to this code. All the provisions of this chapter are to be construed according to the fair import of their terms, with a view to effect its objects and to promote justice. (Ord. 1720 § 2, 2010)

 

9.54.020 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:

        A.    “Adhesive stickers” means any sheet of paper, fabric, plastic or other substance or material with an adhesive backing.

        B.     “Aerosol paint container” means any aerosol container, regardless of the material from which it is made, which is adapted or made for the purpose of spraying paint or other substances capable of being applied on public or private property in a manner that defaces the property.

        C.     “Bona fide evidence of majority and identity” means any document evidencing or verifying the identity of an individual and that the individual is at least eighteen years of age, which has been issued by a federal, state or local government entity, and includes, but is not limited to, a motor vehicle operator’s license, a registration certificate issued under the Federal Selective Service

Act, or an identification card issued to a member of the armed forces.

        D.    “City council” means the city council of the city of La Habra.

        E.     “City manager” means the city manager of the city of La Habra or his/her designee.

        F.     “Continuously viewable” means within line of sight of an employee or store manager at all times during business hours. Continuously viewable shall include viewable via closed circuit security cameras.

        G.    “Director” means the director of community services of the city of La Habra or his/her designee.

        H.    “Etching cream” means any caustic cream, gel, liquid, or solution capable, by means of a chemical action, of defacing, damaging, or destroying surfaces.

        I.      “Etchers” or “etching tools” means any sharp or pointed instrument, device or other mechanism, including but not limited to, glass etchers, metal etchers, cutting and grinding instruments, awls, chisels, glass cutters, drill bits or any other instrument that is capable of scratching or otherwise marking any surface, including but not limited to, glass, mirrors, windows, steel, aluminum, brass, tin, fiberglass, wood, plastic, concrete or any other surface.

        J.      “Expense of abatement” includes, but is not limited to, court costs, attorney’s fees, costs of removal of the graffiti, costs of repair and replacement of defaced property, costs of administering and monitoring the participation of a defendant and his or her parents or guardians in a graffiti abatement program, disbursed reward money, and the law enforcement costs incurred by the city in identifying and apprehending the person who created, caused, or committed the graffiti on the publicly or privately owned real or personal property within the city.

        K.    “Graffiti” means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, symbol, configuration of letters and/or numbers or design that is marked, written, etched, scratched, drawn, scribed, stained, stuck on, affixed or adhered to by any means whatsoever or painted on any surface of public or private real or personal property, including but not limited to, buildings, walls, windows, signs, structures, places, rocks, landscape materials, or other surfaces and/or the interior or exterior of any other structure, regardless of the nature of the material of which the surface is composed. Graffiti shall also mean the unauthorized affixing of adhesive stickers to any surface whatsoever.

        L.     “Graffiti implement” means an aerosol paint container, etching cream, etching tool, marking pen, a paint or graffiti stick, spray actuators, or other similar devices that may be used to scar or deface property.

        M.    “Graffiti violations of law” are those violations referred to in Government Code Section 38772(d)(3), Penal Code Sections 594, 594.1, 594.2, 594.3, 594.8, 640.5, 640.6, 640.7 and 640.8, and any violation of this chapter.

        N.    “Marking pen” means any marker pen or any similar implement containing an ink, paint, or other pigmented liquid.

        O.    “Not accessible to the public” means that such supplies must be (1) stored under lock and key, and only the store manager or his/her designee shall have access to the supplies, or (2) stored behind or under a store counter that is only accessible to authorized store personnel.

        P.     “Paint stick” or “graffiti stick” means a device containing a solid form of paint, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of leaving a visible mark on a surface.

        Q.    “Parent” or “guardian” means a parent with legal custody, guardian, conservator, or relative caregiver of the minor. “Relative caregiver” means a relative, as defined in Section 6550(i) of the California Family Code, who assumed primary responsibility for the minor while the child was in the relative’s care and control, and who is not a biological or adoptive parent.

        R.     “Person responsible for the abatement costs” means (1) the person who defaced property by means of graffiti, or the parents or guardians of the person who defaced property by means of graffiti if the person is a minor, or (2) the owner or person in lawful possession of the property upon which the graffiti nuisance is maintained.

 

        S.     “Spray actuator” (also known as a “spray tip,” “nozzle,” or “button”) means an object or device that is capable of being attached to an aerosol or other paint container for the purpose of spraying the substance contained therein.

        T.     “Statement of costs” or “itemized statement of costs” means an itemized statement of the expense of abatement for one or more graffiti nuisance, which the director ordered removed using city funds. It shall include, but not be limited to, unit costs for materials, as well as hourly rates for city personnel responsible for the abatement. (Ord. 1720 § 2, 2010)

 

9.54.030 Graffiti—Unlawful to apply.
        A.    It shall be unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to any surface on any public or privately owned real or personal property within the city.

        B.     It shall further be unlawful for any person to solicit or command another person to apply graffiti, or for any person to aid or abet, or agree to aid or abet another person to plan to apply graffiti, including but not limited to, acting as a “lookout.” (Ord. 1720 § 2, 2010)

 

9.54.040 Declaration of nuisance.
        The application of graffiti by any person, pursuant to Section 9.54.030 of this chapter is declared to constitute a public nuisance, which may be summarily abated. (Ord. 1720 § 2, 2010)

 

9.54.050 Sale and possession.
        A.    Implement Possession. It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession any graffiti implement with the intent to apply graffiti, while upon public or private property.

        B.     Implement Possession by Minors. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen years to have in his or her possession any graffiti implement with the intent to apply graffiti, while upon public or private property.

        C.     Sale of Graffiti Implements to Minors. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a parent or guardian, to knowingly sell, exchange, give, loan, or otherwise furnish, or cause or permit to be exchanged, given, loaned or otherwise furnished, any graffiti implement to anyone under the age of eighteen years.

        D.    Proper Identification Presented Prior to Sale. No person shall sell any pressurized can containing paint or dye, marking pens, etchers or any other graffiti implement without first obtaining bona fide evidence of majority and identity from the purchaser. (Ord. 1720 § 2, 2010)

 

9.54.060 Public access to graffiti implements—Signage.
        A.    Restricted Access. Aerosol paint containers and actuators shall not be accessible to the public in the regular course of business without employee assistance, pending legal sale or disposition of such supplies.

        B.     Continuously Viewable Implements.

        1.     Every person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail commercial establishment selling paint sticks, marking pens, or etching creams shall store or cause such supplies to be stored in an area continuously viewable by store employees.

        2.     Etching Tools. Every person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail commercial establishment selling masonry or glass drill bits, carbide drill bits, glass cutters, grinding stones, awls, chisels or carbide scribes, or other similar implement shall store or cause such items to be stored in an area continuously viewable by store employees.

        C.     Customer Signage. Every retail commercial establishment selling graffiti implements shall post a sign in clear public view at or near display of such products stating: “Pursuant to Penal Code Section 594.1, Graffiti is against the law. Any person who defaces real or personal property with paint or any other liquid, tool, or device is guilty of a crime punishable by imprisonment of up to six (6) months and/or a fine up to $1,000.”

        D.    Additional Signage. Every retail commercial establishment selling graffiti implements shall place a sign in the direct view of such persons responsible for accepting customer payment for graffiti implements stating: “Pursuant to La Habra Municipal Code Title 9, Section 9.54.050, selling Graffiti Implements to persons less than eighteen (18) years of age is against the law and punishable by six (6) months in jail and/or a fine of $1,000.”

        E.     Merchandise Inventory. Upon request of a La Habra police officer or community preservation officer, any person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail commercial establishment selling graffiti implements shall provide copies of any merchandise inventory. (Ord. 1720 § 2, 2010)

 

9.54.070 Penalties.
        A.    Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor offense punishable by either six months in jail, a one thousand dollar fine, or both such fine and imprisonment.

        B.     In lieu of, or in addition to the penalties specified in this section, a minor or other person who is convicted of or pleads guilty or nolo contendere to graffiti violations shall be required to perform community service as ordered by the court, based on the following minimum requirements:

        1.     The minor or adult shall perform not less than forty hours of community service.

        2.     The period of community service shall be performed under the supervision of a community service provider approved by the chief of police.

        3.     Reasonable effort shall be made to assign the minor or other person to a type of community service that is reasonably expected to have the most rehabilitative effect on the minor or other person. (Ord. 1720 § 2, 2010)

 

9.54.080 Reward provisions.
        A.    Pursuant to Section 53069.5 of the Government Code, the city may offer a reward of up to two thousand dollars. The amount of the award is to be determined by the police chief, for information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person for violation of Penal Code Section 594 or Section 9.54.030 of this chapter, the use of graffiti, not to exceed one reward of two thousand dollars per violation. In the event of multiple contributors of information for a single violation, the reward amount shall be divided by the city in the manner deemed appropriate by the police chief. For the purposes of this section, diversion of the offending violator to a community service program, or a plea bargain to a lesser offense, shall constitute a conviction. The chief of police may award up to five hundred dollars to any person who provides credible information regarding any graffiti violation in the city, which leads to probable cause for an arrest of an individual(s).

        B.     Claims for rewards under this section shall be filed, processed, and paid in accordance with procedures established by the police chief.

        C.     The person convicted of committing the graffiti offense shall be liable for any rewards paid pursuant to this section and, if that person is an unemancipated minor, the parent or guardian of the minor shall be jointly and severally liable for any rewards paid pursuant to this section. (Ord. 1720 § 2, 2010)

 

9.54.090 Removal and prevention provisions.
        A.    It is unlawful for any person, who is the owner or who has primary responsibility for control of property or who has primary responsibility for the repair or maintenance of property (“property owner”), to permit property that is defaced with graffiti to remain so defaced for a period of seven days after notice of same, unless: (1) the property owner shall demonstrate by a preponderance of evidence that he or she does not have the financial or physical ability to remove the defacing graffiti; or (2) it can be demonstrated that the property owner has an active program for the removal of graffiti and has scheduled the removal of the graffiti as part of that program in which case it shall be unlawful to permit such property defaced with graffiti to remain defaced for a period of fifteen days after notice of same.

        B.     The existence of any surface of a structure on a parcel of land which has been defaced with graffiti after removal more than five times in twelve months by the city at its expense is a public and private nuisance, and may be abated by modifications to the structure or surface, or to the immediate surrounding area. The structure or surface may be required to be retrofitted, at the cost of the property owner, with such features or qualities as may be established by the city as necessary to reduce the attractiveness of the surface for graffiti, or as necessary to permit more convenient or efficient removal thereof.

        C.     Whenever the city becomes aware or is notified and determines that graffiti is located on publicly or privately owned property within the city, the city shall be authorized to use city funds for the removal of the graffiti, or painting or repairing the property, but shall not authorize or undertake to provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive area than that where the graffiti is located, unless the city manager determines in writing that a more extensive area is required to be repainted or repaired in order to avoid an aesthetic disfigurement to the neighborhood or community, or unless the property owner or the person causing the graffiti, or if a minor, his or her parent or guardian, agree to or are ordered to pay for the costs of repainting or repairing the more extensive area.

        D.    The owner of property on which is located a surface of a structure other than residential which has been defaced with graffiti after removal more than five times in twelve months, or the immediate surrounding area, shall permit the city to enter upon and make such modifications there, at the city’s cost. The modifications shall include such features or qualities as may be established by the city as necessary to reduce the attractiveness of the surface for graffiti, or as necessary to permit more convenient or efficient removal thereof.

        E.     To further discourage graffiti while providing overall consistency, utility fixtures and equipment shall be of a uniform paint-type and color. Any gas, electric, telephone, water, sewer, cable, telephone and other utility operation in the city of La Habra shall paint its above-surface metal fixtures with a uniform paint type and color which meets with the approval of the city manager. Since most utility fixtures and equipment are located in the public rights-of-way and are highly visible, graffiti on these structures shall be removed by the utility company within forty-eight hours of being reported to the utility. (Ord. 1720 § 2, 2010)

 

9.54.100 Use of city funds to remove graffiti.
        A.    The city may use city funds to remove graffiti from publicly or privately owned real or personal property located within the city, and to replace or repair public or privately owned property within the city that has been defaced with graffiti that cannot be removed cost effectively.

        B.     The city shall only remove the graffiti itself, or, if the graffiti cannot be removed cost effectively, the repair or replacement of the portion of the property that was defaced, and not the painting, repair, or replacement of other parts of the property that were not defaced.

        C.     The removal, repair, or replacement may be performed, in the case of publicly owned real or personal property, only after securing the consent of the public entity having jurisdiction over the property, and in the case of privately owned real or personal property, only after securing the consent of the owner or possessor.

        D.    The La Habra police department may promulgate procedures for pre-removal preservation of sufficient evidence of the graffiti for criminal prosecutions or proceedings pursuant to Section 602 of the Welfare and Institutions Code pertaining to the person or persons who inscribed the graffiti. These procedures shall be followed by the city prior to or during removal of the graffiti. (Ord. 1720 § 2, 2010)

 

9.54.110 Summary abatement.
        The city may summarily abate any nuisance at the expense of the persons creating, causing, committing, or maintaining it. (Ord. 1720 § 2, 2010)

 

9.54.120 Abatement cost recovery—Appeal.
        A.    The city shall summarily abate any nuisance resulting from the defacement of the property of another by graffiti.

 

        B.     The abatement may be made at the expense of the minor or other person creating, causing, committing or maintaining the nuisance.

        C.     Where the director is required to cause the abatement of a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, he/she shall keep an accounting of the cost thereof, including incidental expenses for the abatement. The term “incidental expenses” includes, but is not limited to, the actual expenses and costs of the city in the preparation of notices, specifications and contracts, inspection of the work, and the cost of printing and mailing any notices required by this chapter, as well as administrative costs.

        D.    Within thirty days of the conclusion of the abatement, the director shall submit an itemized statement of costs to the city manager. The city manager shall cause notice of statement of costs to be given to the person causing the nuisance, and to his/her parents or guardian in the event the person causing the nuisance is a minor, by United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person at his/her last known address. The statement of costs shall be due and payable within thirty days of the date of the statement.

        E.     The notice of the statement of costs shall include the following information:

        1.     The itemized statement of costs;

        2.     The date by which payment of the abatement costs must be made;

        3.     The date by which the appeal must be received by the city;

        4.     That the appeal must be in writing and where the appeal shall be mailed or delivered;

        5.     That the cost statement appeal hearing, if requested, shall take place within forty-five days of receipt of the written appeal;

        6.     Reference to the relevant sections in the La Habra Municipal Code; and

        7.     Contact information.

        F.     Statement of Costs Appeal.

        1.     Written Appeal. The person responsible for the cost of abatement of the graffiti nuisance may contest the statement of costs by filing a written request for a cost hearing with the city manager within twenty days of the date of the notice. The city manager shall set a hearing within forty-five days of receipt of the timely request for appeal, and shall notify the applicant of the date of the hearing by United States mail no less than fifteen days before the hearing. A copy of the statement of costs, and any supporting documentation, shall be provided to the appellant at the time of the notice of the date of the hearing.

        2.     Cost Hearing. At the cost hearing, the city manager shall hear and pass upon the statement of the director, together with any objections or protests raised by any of the persons liable to be assessed for the cost of abating the nuisance. The city manager may hear any relevant evidence at the cost hearing; the formal rules of evidence shall not apply. Thereupon, the city manager shall make such revision, correction and modification to the statement as he/she may deem just, after which the statement is submitted, or as revised, corrected or modified shall be conformed. The city manager shall issue a written decision within ten days of the hearing, and it shall include reference to Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure. The decision of the city manager shall be final.

        3.     Right to Judicial Review. If the city manager’s decision is in favor of the city, the appellant may seek judicial review of the city manager’s decision by filing a petition for writ of mandate pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6. (Ord. 1720 § 2, 2010)

 

9.54.130 Abatement cost liability for the person causing the graffiti nuisance—Special assessment against property.
        A.    The expense of abatement of any nuisance, resulting from the defacement by any person against the property of another by graffiti, shall be a lien against property of the person and a personal obligation against the person.

        B.     The expense of abatement of any nuisance, resulting from the defacement by a minor of the property of another by graffiti, shall be a lien against the property of a parent or guardian, having custody and control of the minor, and a personal obligation against the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor, pursuant to Government Code Sections 38772 and 38773.6. When the person causing the graffiti nuisance is a minor, then the parent or guardian of the minor shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor.

        C.     The property of the minor causing the graffiti nuisance, and the property of the parent or guardian of the minor, shall collectively or individually be referred to as the “assessed property.”

        D.    Assessment of costs/liens against the assessed property. In the event of non-payment of the statement of costs, the city manager may cause the cost of abatement of the graffiti nuisance to constitute a special assessment against the assessed property.

        1.     Pursuant to California Government Code Sections 38772 and 38773.6, all expenses as determined by the Hearing Officer in connection with such abatement shall be charged and become an indebtedness to the owner of the assessed property, as well as a lien upon the assessed property.

        2.     Pursuant to California Government Code Section 38773.6, the confirmed cost of abatement of a graffiti nuisance within the city shall constitute a special assessment against the lot or parcel of land that comprise the assessed property. After confirmation of the statement of cost, a copy thereof shall be transmitted to the Orange County Auditor/Controller, whereupon it shall be the duty of the Auditor/Controller to add the amounts of the assessment, or assessments, to the next regular bills of taxes levied against the respective lots and parcels of land that comprise the assessed property for municipal purposes, and thereafter the amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure for foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. (Ord. 1720 § 2, 2010)

 

9.54.140 Cost recovery against the property where nuisance is maintained.
        A.    The city may make the expense of abatement of nuisances a lien against the property on which it is maintained and a personal obligation against the property owner, in accordance with California Government Code Sections 38773 and 38773.5.

        B.     Assessment of costs/liens against property. In the event of non-payment of the statement of costs, the city manager may cause the cost of abatement of the graffiti nuisance to constitute a special assessment against the property where the nuisance was maintained, as follows:

        1.     Pursuant to California Government Code Sections 38773 and 38773.5, all expenses as determined by the city manager in connection with such abatement shall be charged and become an indebtedness to the owner of such structure or premises, as well as a lien upon the affected property as elsewhere herein provided.

        2.     Pursuant to California Government Code Section 38773.5, the confirmed cost of abatement of a nuisance upon any lot or parcel of land shall constitute a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel of land to which it relates. After confirmation of the statement of cost, a copy thereof shall be transmitted to the Orange County Auditor/Controller, whereupon it shall be the duty of the Auditor/Controller to add the amounts of the assessment, or assessments, to the next regular bills of taxes levied against the respective lots and parcels of land for municipal purposes, and thereafter the amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure for foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. (Ord. 1720 § 2, 2010)

 

9.54.150 Civil liability for acts of willful misconduct resulting in property damage.
        Notwithstanding any of the provisions of Sections 9.54.120 and 9.54.130, the city may seek civil restitution for the cost of abatement of any nuisance resulting from the defacement of the property of another by graffiti as follows:

        A.    Any person that causes any injury to or the defacement of the property of another by any act of graffiti shall be personally liable for any damages resulting from the graffiti, pursuant to California Civil Code Section 1714.

        B.     Any act of graffiti by a minor that results in any injury to or the defacement of property of another shall be imputed to the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor for all purposes of civil damages, including the cost of abatement to the prevailing party, and the parent or guardian having custody and control shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor for any damages resulting from the graffiti, not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars except as provided in subsection C of this section, for each tort of the minor.

        C.     The amount listed in subsection A of this section shall be adjusted every two years in accordance to the amounts set by the judicial council to reflect any increases in the cost of living in California, as indicated by the annual average of the California Consumer Price Index, pursuant to California Civil Code Section 1714.1.

        D.    The maximum liability imposed by this section is the maximum liability authorized under this section at the time that the act of graffiti by a minor was committed. (Ord. 1720 § 2, 2010)

 

9.54.160 Other legal and equitable remedies.
        The city, at its discretion, may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies for the collection of unpaid fines, interest and penalties, including but not limited to a collection agency. Pursuit of one remedy does not preclude the pursuit of any other remedies until the total fines, interest and penalties owed by a person under this chapter have been collected. (Ord. 1720 § 2, 2010)

Chapter 9.58 RESTRICTED ACCESS TO AEROSOL SPRAY PAINT AND MARKER PENS/PURCHASE AND THEFT OF GRAFFITI TOOLS
9.58.010 Aerosol spray paint container—Use restrictions in certain public places.
        No person shall have in his or her possession any aerosol spray paint container having any substance commonly known as paint or dye, or marker pens with tips exceeding four millimeters in width, while in any public park, playground, swimming pool, recreational facility or other public building owned or operated by the city of La Habra, or while loitering in or near an underpass, bridge abutment, storm drain, and other similar type of infrastructures not normally used by the public. This does not apply to authorized employees of the city, nor authorized employees of an individual or company under contract with the city which requires the use of such materials. (Ord. 1450 § 1, 1993)

 

9.58.020 Aerosol spray paint container—Use restrictions on school property.
        No person shall have in his or her possession any aerosol spray paint container having any substance commonly known as paint or dye while on any school property, grounds, facilities, buildings or structures, nor in the areas immediately adjacent to these specified locations. This does not apply to authorized employees of the school, nor authorized employees of an individual or company under contract with the school which requires the use of such materials. (Ord. 1450 § 1, 1993)

 

9.58.030 Restricted access prior to sale.
        Every person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail commercial establishment selling aerosol spray paint containers or marker pens shall cause aerosol spray paint containers and/or marker pens, to be stored in an area viewable by, but not accessible to, the public without employee assistance, pending legal sale or disposition of such containers or marker pens. (Ord. 1450 § 1, 1993)

 

9.58.040 Sale to minors prohibited.
        No person may sell aerosol spray paint or marker pens with tips exceeding three-eighths of an inch in width to any person under eighteen years of age. (Ord. 1465 § 2, 1993)

 

9.58.050 Signage and display requirements for certain aerosol containers and marker pens.
        A.    Every person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail commercial establishment selling aerosol spray paint, dye or polish containers, or marker pens with tips exceeding three-eighths of an inch in width, containing anything other than a solution which can be removed with water after such solution dries, shall place a sign in clear public view at or near the display of such products stating:

 

 

“GRAFFITI IS A CRIME. ANY PERSON DEFACING REAL OR PERSONAL PROPERTY NOT HIS OWN WITH PAINT OR ANY OTHER LIQUID OR DEVICE IS GUILTY OF A CRIME PUNISHABLE BY IMPRISONMENT OF UP TO ONE YEAR AND A FINE OF UP TO $1,000.00.”

 

        B.     Every person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail commercial establishment selling aerosol spray paint, dye or polish containers, or marker pens with tips exceeding three-eighths of an inch in width, containing anything other than a solution which can be removed with water after such solution dries, shall also place a sign in the direct view of such person or persons responsible for accepting customer payment for such containers or marker pens stating:

 

“IT IS A CRIME TO SELL OR OTHERWISE CONVEY AEROSOL SPRAY PAINT OR WIDE-TIPPED MARKERS TO PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE IN THE CITY OF LA HABRA. PUNISHMENT CAN BE A FINE OF $1,000.00 OR ONE YEAR IN JAIL.”

 

        C.     Every person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail commercial establishment selling aerosol spray paint, dye or polish containers, or marker pens with tips exceeding three-eighths of an inch in width, containing anything other than a solution which can be removed with water after such solution dries, shall assure, through placement of displays, workstations, mirrors or other arrangements or devices, that those products defined and described in this section can be easily and readily observed by retail establishment personnel during all times such establishment is open to the public.

        D.    Every person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail commercial establishment selling aerosol spray paint, dye or polish containers, or marker pens with tips exceeding three-eighths of an inch in width, and who chooses not to comply with the signage and line-of-sight display requirements set forth in subsection C of this section shall be required to display such paint or markers in such a manner as to make them inaccessible to a customer present in an area allocated for customer use without assistance from an employee of that establishment. (Ord. 1465 § 2, 1993)

 

9.58.060 License requirements for the sale of aerosol paint and certain markers.
        A.    Every retail establishment offering for sale aerosol spray paint or marker pens with tips exceeding three-eighths of an inch in width shall be required to hold a current municipal license for the sale of such products. Such license will be issued, upon application, by owner of retail establishment for an annual fee as established by city council resolution.

        B.     Such licenses will be maintained at the retail establishment and, on demand, presented for inspection to the municipal officer responsible for enforcing retail ordinances in the city. Such licenses will be renewable on the anniversary of issuance. (Ord. 1465 § 2, 1993)

 

9.58.070 Forfeiture.
        Any person, firm, or corporation violating this section shall forfeit upon conviction up to five hundred dollars for each offense, and in default of payment shall be imprisoned for a period not to exceed twenty days or until such forfeiture costs are paid. In the case of multiple or repeated violations of this section, retail establishments may be required by the city to show cause why the retail license for the sale of aerosol spray paint and certain markers should not be terminated or suspended by the city. (Ord. 1465 § 2, 1993)

Chapter 9.62 COMMUNITY SERVICE PROGRAM
9.62.010 Police diversion program— Community service with minimum hours and parental involvement.
        In lieu of, or as part of, requesting prosecution of a petition to declare a minor to be a ward of the court under Welfare and Institutions Code Section 602 (including but not limited to, offenses which, in the opinion of the police chief, constitute a violation of the city code), or in lieu of prosecuting a violation of this chapter as a crime against an adult, the police chief with the approval of (or according to rules and procedures approved by) the city manager, shall be authorized to offer the minor or adult an option to perform such community service as the police chief deems appropriate, but which community service shall, if offered at all, contain the following minimum elements:

        A.    The minor shall perform at least one hundred hours of community service.

        B.     At least one of the custodial parents, or if none, guardians, shall be in attendance at least twenty-five percent of the period of assigned community service.

        C.     The entire period of community service shall be performed under the supervision of a community service provider approved by the chief of police.

        D.    Reasonable effort shall be made to assign the subject minor or adult to a type of community service that is reasonably expected to have the most rehabilitative effect on the minor or adult. To the extent that the offense giving rise to the offer of community service constitutes a violation of this chapter reasonable effort shall be made by the chief of police to assign the minor to community service which constitutes in significant part, the removal of graffiti. (Ord. 1451 § 1, 1993)

 

9.62.020 Mandatory juvenile delinquent community service.
        Any minor determined to be a ward of the court under Welfare and Institutions Code Section 602 as a result of committing an offense in the city shall be required, at the city’s option, to perform community service, including graffiti removal service of not less than one hundred hours nor more than three hundred hours. (Ord. 1451 § 2, 1993)

 

9.62.030 Penalties for violation.
        Any and all violations of this chapter shall be punishable either as an infraction or a misdemeanor, at the discretion of the city attorney. (Ord. 1451 § 3, 1993)

Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 10.04 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 10.08 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 10.12 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
Chapter 10.16 MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
Chapter 10.20 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Chapter 10.24 LOADING, PASSENGER AND COACH ZONES
Chapter 10.26 BAIL SCHEDULE FOR PARKING OFFENSES
Chapter 10.28 RESTRICTED USE OF STREETS
Chapter 10.32 TRAINS
Chapter 10.36 ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLES
Chapter 10.40 BICYCLE LICENSES AND PLATES
Chapter 10.44 CROSSWALKS
Chapter 10.48 TRAFFIC IMPROVEMENT FEE
Chapter 10.52 TRAFFIC PHASING PLAN
Chapter 10.56 ORANGE COUNTY TAXI ADMINISTRATION PROGRAM
Chapter 10.58 FOOD VENDING VEHICLES

Chapter 10.04 DEFINITIONS
10.04.010 Vehicle Code definitions.
        Whenever any words or phrases in this title are not defined in this title, but are defined in the Vehicle Code and amendments thereto, such definitions shall apply. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.04.020 Applicability.
        The words and phrases set out in this chapter, when used in this title, shall for the purpose of this title have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.04.030 Central traffic district.
        “Central traffic district” means all streets and portions of streets within the area described by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.04.040 Coach.
        “Coach” means any motor bus, motor coach or passenger vehicle used as a common carrier of passengers. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.04.050 Curb.
        “Curb” means the lateral boundary of the roadway whether such curb is marked by curbing construction or not so marked; “curb” does not include the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking strips in the center of a street, nor from tracks or rights-of-way of public utility companies. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.04.060 Divisional island.
        “Divisional island” means a raised or painted island located in the roadway and separating opposing or conflicting streams of traffic. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.04.070 Holidays.
        “Holidays” means as set forth in the Government Code and this code. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.04.080 Loading zone.
        “Loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers and/or materials. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.04.090 Official time standard.
        Whenever hours are named in this title, they mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in this city. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.04.100 Parkway.
        “Parkway” means that portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.04.110 Passenger loading zone.
        “Passenger loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.04.120 Police officer.
        “Police officer” means every officer of the police department of this city or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.04.130 Stop.
        “Stop,” when required, means complete cessation of movement. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.04.140 Vehicle Code.
        “Vehicle Code” means the Vehicle Code of the state. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

Chapter 10.08 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
10.08.010 Authority of police.
        A.    It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, to enforce all street traffic laws of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city.

        B.     Officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal, in conformance with traffic laws; provided, that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.08.020 Traffic direction—Fire department officers.
        Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, shall have the authority to direct traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity, notwithstanding the provisions to the contrary contained in this chapter or the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.08.030 Traffic direction—Unauthorized.
        No person other than an officer of the police department or members of the fire department or a person authorized by the chief of police or a person authorized by law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal; except, that persons may operate, when and as provided in this title, any mechanical pushbutton signal erected. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.08.040 Construction areas.
        The department of engineering, or its duly authorized representatives with the approval of the department, may restrict the use of and regulate the movement of traffic on any highway:

        A.    In which the department is engaged in the construction of a street, water line, sewer line or storm sewer, within the existing highway;

        B.     Intersecting the project at or near the place of intersection whenever such work interferes with or endangers the safe movement of traffic through the work. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.08.050 Compliance by public employees.
        The provisions of this title shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States Government, this state, any county or city, and it is unlawful for any such operator to violate any of the provisions of this title, except as otherwise permitted in this title or by the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.08.060 Exempted vehicles.
        A.    The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles operated by the police or fire department, any public ambulance or any public utility vehicle or any private ambulance which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified by the Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call.

        B.     The exemptions provided for in subsection A of this section shall not, however, relieve the operator of any such vehicle from obligation to exercise due care for the safety of others or the consequences of the operator’s wilful disregard for the safety of others.

        C.     The provisions of this title regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work or any vehicle owned or operated by the United States Postal Service while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United States mail. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.08.070 Removal of vehicles from streets.
        Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the police department may remove or cause to be removed:

        A.    Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a street or highway or alley for more than a consecutive period of seventy-two hours;

        B.     Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway between the hours of seven a.m. and seven p.m. when such parking or standing is prohibited by ordinance or resolution and signs are posted giving notice of such removal;

        C.     Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or for the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice that such vehicle may be removed are erected or placed at least twenty-four hours prior to the removal. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.08.080 Speed regulation.
        Whenever it has been determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that speed limits, as established by the provisions of the Vehicle Code, must be altered to facilitate the safe, orderly and efficient movement of traffic on highways under the jurisdiction of the city, the city council may adopt resolutions regulating the speed of vehicles upon such streets in accordance with such provisions of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.08.090 Police services—Vehicle inspection and verification of infraction correction.
        An administrative fee may be charged to cover the cost of vehicle inspection to verify the correction of cited infractions as authorized by the California Vehicle Code. Said fee shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1409 § 3, 1991)

Chapter 10.12 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
10.12.010 Signs required for enforcement.
        No provision of the Vehicle Code or of this title for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate legible signs are in place giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.12.020 Authority of city traffic engineer generally.
        A.    The city traffic engineer shall have the authority and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic-control devices when and as required to make effective the provisions of this title.

        B.     Whenever the Vehicle Code requires for the effectiveness of any provision thereof that traffic-control devices be installed to give notice to the public of the application of such law the city traffic engineer is authorized to install or cause to be installed the necessary devices subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto.

        C.     The city traffic engineer may also place and maintain or cause to be placed or maintained such additional traffic-control devices as he deems necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations and rules as may be set forth in this title as may be determined by ordinance or resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.12.030 Intersection signals.
        A.    The traffic commission is charged with the duty to determine the necessity to install and maintain or cause to be installed and maintained official traffic-control signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard.

        B.     The traffic commission shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required by field investigation, traffic counts and other traffic information as may be pertinent and its determinations therefrom shall be made in accordance with accepted traffic engineering and safety standards and procedures.

        C.     Whenever the traffic commission causes to be installed and maintained an official traffic-control signal at any intersection, it shall likewise cause to be erected and maintained at such intersection, street name signs clearly visible to traffic approaching from all directions unless such street name signs have previously been placed and are maintained at any such intersection. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.12.040 Centerline and lane markings.
        The city traffic engineer is authorized to have centerlines and lanes marked upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles and may place or cause to be placed signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the highway. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.12.050 Distinctive roadway markings.
        The city traffic engineer is authorized to have distinctive roadway markings as described in the Vehicle Code placed and maintained on those streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such marking or signs and markings. Such marking or signs and markings shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the State Department of Transportation pursuant to provisions of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.12.060 Turn lanes.
        The traffic commission is authorized to have official traffic-control devices placed within or adjacent to intersections and indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the traffic commission is authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right-hand or left-hand turns, and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.12.070 Prohibited turns.
        The traffic commission is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U turn, and shall have proper signs placed at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the prohibitions shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.12.080 Right turn on red.
        When the traffic commission determines that the making of right turns against red or stop indications at locations controlled by official traffic-control signals, would seriously interfere with the safe and orderly flow of traffic, the traffic commission shall cause to be erected and maintained signs prohibiting such movement. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.12.090 One-way streets and alleys.
        Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates any one-way street or alley, the city traffic engineer shall have placed and maintained signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.12.100 Stop signs.
        Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a through street, or any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop, the city traffic engineer shall have erected and maintained stop signs as follows:

        A stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersecting such through street or portion thereof so designated and at those entrances to other intersections where a stop is required and at any railroad grade crossing so designated; provided, however, that stop signs shall not be erected or maintained at any entrance to an intersection when such entrance is controlled by an official traffic-control signal. Every such sign shall conform with, and shall be placed as provided in the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.12.110 Barriers and signs—Erection—Interference.
        No person, public utility or department in the city shall erect or place any barrier or sign on any street unless it is of a type approved by the city engineer nor disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with or destroy any barrier or sign lawfully placed on any street by any person, public utility or by any department of this city. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.12.120 Removal and relocation.
        The traffic commission may recommend the removal, relocation or discontinuation of operation of any official traffic-control device not specifically required by the Vehicle Code or this title whenever it determines in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist or prevail. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.12.130 Hours of operation.
        The traffic commission shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic-control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this title. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.12.140 Street surface or curb markings.
        No person, unless authorized by this city, shall paint any street or curb surface; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any person who has complied with the provisions of any resolution or ordinance of this city pertaining thereto. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

Chapter 10.16 MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
10.16.010 Funeral processions and parades.
        No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles composing a funeral procession or parade; provided, that such vehicles are conspicuously so designated. The directing of all vehicles and traffic on any street over which such funeral procession or parade wishes to pass shall be subject to the orders of the police department. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.16.020 Commercial vehicles using private driveways.
        A.    No person shall operate or drive a commercial vehicle in, on or across any private driveway approach or sidewalk area or the driveway itself without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property, if a sign or markings are in place indicating that the use of such driveway is prohibited.

        B.     For the purpose of this section, “commercial vehicle” means a vehicle having a rated capacity in excess of three-fourths ton. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.16.030 Driving on sidewalks.
        No person shall ride, drive, propel or cause to be propelled any vehicle or animal across or upon any sidewalk, excepting over permanently constructed driveways and excepting when it is necessary for any temporary purpose to drive a loaded vehicle across a sidewalk; provided further, that such sidewalk area is substantially protected by wooden planks two inches thick, and written permission is previously obtained from the city engineer. Such wooden planks shall not be permitted to remain upon such sidewalk area during the hours from six p.m. to six a.m. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.16.040 New pavement or markings.
        No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any street when a barrier sign, cone marker or other warning device is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when any such device is in place indicating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.16.050 Obstructing intersection or crosswalk.
        No operator of any vehicle shall enter any intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.16.060 Limited access roadways.
        No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway, except at such entrances and exits as are lawfully established. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

Chapter 10.20 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
10.20.010 Applicability.
        A.    The provisions of this title prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times specified in this title, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device.

        B.     The provisions of this title imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code, resolutions or ordinances of this city prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.20.020 Signs and curb markings.
        A.    The city traffic engineer is authorized to install appropriate signs or paint upon the curb surface to indicate all no-stopping zones, no-parking areas and restricted-parking areas as defined and described in this title.

        B.     When such curb markings or signs are in place no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicles adjacent to any such vehicle curb markings or sign in violation of any of the provisions of this title. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.20.030 Where prohibited at all times.
        No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park or leave standing such vehicle in any of the following places, except as specifically permitted in the California Vehicle Code, and except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or other authorized officer, or traffic sign or signal:

        A.    Within any divisional island unless authorized and clearly indicated with appropriate signs or markings;

        B.     On either side of any street between the projected property lines of any public walk, public steps, street or thoroughfare terminating at such street, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;

        C.     In any area where the traffic commission determines that the parking or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;

        D.    In any area established by resolution of the city council as a no stopping, standing or parking area, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;

        E.     Upon, along or across any railway track in such manner as to hinder, delay or obstruct the movement of any car traveling upon such track;

        F.     In any area where the parking or stopping of any vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property;

        G.    On any street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, sweeping, repair or construction of the street or highway or the installation of underground utilities, or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic, or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice of such temporary or permanent no parking are erected or placed at least twenty-four hours prior to the effective time of such no parking;

        H.    At any place within twenty feet of a point on the curb immediately opposite the mid-block end of a safety zone, when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;

        I.      At any place within twenty feet of a crosswalk at an intersection in the central traffic district or in any business district when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; except, that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop;

        J.      Within twenty feet of the approach to any traffic signal, boulevard stop sign or official electric flashing device when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;

        K.    In a private driveway or so as to block a private driveway approach, or on private property without the direct or implied consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of such driveway, driveway approach or property, or on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped, parked or standing at the curb edge of the roadway. (Ord. 1651 §§ 1, 2, 2005; Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.20.040 Prohibited in parkways.
        No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.20.050 Parking for display.
        No person shall park a vehicle upon a public or private street, parking lot or any public or private property for the purpose of displaying such vehicle thereon for sale, hire or rental, unless the property is duly licensed and zoned by the city to transact that type of business at that location. This section shall not prohibit persons from parking vehicles on private residential property belonging to the owner of the vehicle. (Ord. 1060, 1978; Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.20.060 Repairing vehicles on streets.
        No person shall construct or cause to be constructed, repair or cause to be repaired, grease or cause to be greased, dismantle or cause to be dismantled any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this city. Temporary emergency repairs may be made upon a public street. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.20.062 Repairing, cleaning, etc., vehicle in city-owned off-street parking facility.
        A.    No person shall park a motor vehicle upon any city-owned off-street parking facility for the purpose of repairing such vehicle, excepting repairs necessitated by a bona fide emergency.

        B.     “Repair of motor vehicles” includes but is not limited to cleaning, washing, greasing, lubricating, adjusting, replacing fan belts, oil and air filters, and repair, removal or installation of any integral component part of an engine, driveline, chassis or body of any vehicle.

        C.     Violation of this section shall constitute an infraction. (Ord. 1423 § 1, 1992)

 

10.20.070 Washing or polishing on streets.
        No person shall wash or cause to be washed, polish or cause to be polished any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this city, when a charge is made for such service. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.20.080 Parking adjacent to schools.
        A.    The city council is authorized to have erected signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in its opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.

        B.     When official signs are erected prohibiting parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.20.090 Parking on grades.
        No persons shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway when upon any grade exceeding three degrees, within any business or residence district, without blocking the wheels of such vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means when signs are in place giving notice thereof. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.20.110 Commercial vehicle parking—Residential streets.
        A.    No person shall park or leave standing any commercial vehicle, motor truck, semitrailer, tractor or trailer having a manufacturer’s gross weight rating of ten thousand pounds or more on any street, or portion thereof, located in a residential district within the city except for such time as is reasonably necessary to make pickups or deliveries of goods, wares or merchandise from or to any building or structure located on the street or for such time as is reasonably necessary for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual or bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon which a building permit has been previously obtained from the city.

        B.     No person shall park or leave standing any commercial vehicle, motor truck, semitrailer, tractor or trailer having a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand pounds or more for more than two hours on any street, or portion thereof, located in all other areas (except residential districts) within the city except while continuously loading or unloading property for such time in addition to such two-hour period as is necessary to complete such work or when such vehicle is parked in connection with and in aid of the performance of a service to or on property for such time in addition to such two-hour period as reasonably necessary to complete such service.

        C.     This section shall not be construed as allowing parking or passage over any city street where such parking or passage over is otherwise prohibited or restricted by law. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.20.120 Commercial vehicle parking—Residential property.
        A.    No commercial vehicle (as described in Section 260 of the Vehicle Code) in excess of six thousand pounds unladen shall be parked on residential property where ingress and egress would require traversing residential or restricted streets.

        B.     Nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any vehicle exceeding six thousand pounds from having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise, nor shall parking on residential property be prohibited while actual bona fide repair, alterations, remodeling or construction is being made on such residential property. (Ord. 1211, 1983)

10.20.125 Commercial vehicle parking—Commercial property.
        A.    No commercial vehicle (as defined in Section 260 of the California Vehicle Code) in excess of six thousand pounds unladed shall be parked on commercial properties where such vehicle is not owned by the property owner and/or tenant, or is directly associated with the operation of the business.

        B.     Nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any vehicle exceeding six thousand pounds from having ingress and by direct route to and from restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, ware and merchandise, nor shall parking on commercial property be prohibited while actual bona fide repairs, alterations, remodeling or construction is being made on such commercial property.

        C.     A property owner shall post or cause to be posted, at the property owner’s sole cost and expense, signs which are readily visible to the general public in a form reasonably as follows:

 

Parking of commercial vehicles weighing over six thousand pounds is prohibited on this private property. LHMC § 10.20.125

 

(Ord. 1557 § 1, 1999)

 

10.20.130 Temporary parking signs.
        A.    Whenever the city traffic engineer determines that any emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions, or for other reasons, the city traffic engineer shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the city traffic engineer directs during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and the city traffic engineer shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter.

        B.     When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.20.140 Twenty-minute parking.
        A.    Green curb marking shall mean no standing or parking for a period of time longer than twenty minutes at any time between nine a.m. and six p.m. on any day except Sundays and holidays.

        B.     When authorized curb markings have been determined by the city council to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking in violation thereof. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.20.150 Forty-minute parking.
        When authorized signs have been determined by the city council to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m. on any day except Sundays and holidays, for a period of time longer than forty minutes. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.20.160 One-hour parking.
        When authorized signs have been determined by the city council to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m. on any day except Sundays and holidays, for a period of time longer than one hour. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.20.170 Two-hour parking.
        When authorized signs have been determined by the city council to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m. on any day except Sundays and holidays, for a period of time longer than two hours. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.20.180 Overnight parking.
        A.    Prohibition. It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop the vehicle and permit the same to remain standing on any public place except such as may be specifically designated by the chief of police for that purpose, for a period of time longer than thirty minutes between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. on any day, except legal holidays.

        B.     Permit.

        1.     Notwithstanding the other provisions of this code and this section, the chief of police may issue a permit permitting the holder thereof to park a passenger automobile in the area designated by the chief of police upon payment, in advance, of a fee as set by resolution per year for the first annual permit issued to a family and a fee as set by resolution for each additional permit to the same family at the same address. All permits shall expire on December 31st of each year; provided, however, that any first annual permit issued to a family after September 30th shall be an as set by resolution and shall expire on December 31st of the succeeding year.

        2.     The applicant for such permit shall file a written application setting forth:

        a.     The applicant’s name and address;

        b.     Whether the applicant is the owner or tenant at the address given;

        c.     If a tenant, the name of the applicant’s landlord;

        d.     The make, model and current license number of the automobile desired to be parked;

        e.     The number of off-street garage spaces or parking spaces available for the apartment building or premises in which the applicant resides, and the total number of apartments or tenants in the building; and

        f.      Such other similar and pertinent information as may be required by the chief of police.

        3.     The chief of police shall approve or disapprove the application. Upon receipt of an approved application and payment of the fee as stated, the city licensing clerk shall issue a permit. A permit shall be issued only to persons possessing no parking space for their car or cars on the premises where they reside. Permits may be refused or renewals of permits may be refused by the chief of police if facts stated in the application are found to be untrue, or if other parking space is available, or if the permittee has violated any conditions of the permit, or has violated provisions of this code relating to the parking of automobiles.

        4.     No refund shall be made for any unused period of the permit. No partial-month fee shall be charged.

        C.     Violations. The violation of any provision of this section is a misdemeanor punishable as provided in this code for punishment of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1213 §§ 2, 3, 1983; Ord. 1067, 1979)

 

10.20.190 Parallel parking on one-way streets.
        A.    Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within eighteen inches of the left-hand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing.

        B.     In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking.

        C.     The city council is authorized to determine when standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way street or when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two or more separate roadways and shall have signs giving notice thereof erected.

        D.    The requirement of parallel parking imposed by this section shall not apply in the event any commercial vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading freight or goods, in which case such vehicle may be backed up to the curb; provided, that such vehicle does not extend beyond the centerline of the street and does not block traffic thereby. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.20.200 Diagonal parking.
        A.    On any of the streets or portions of streets established by resolution of the city council as diagonal parking zones, when signs or pavement markings are in place indicating such diagonal parking, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park such vehicle except:

        1.     At the angle to the curb indicated by signs or pavement markings allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within the limits of such allotted space;

        2.     With the front wheel nearest the curb within six inches of such curb.

        B.     The provisions of this section shall not apply when such vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading passengers, freight or goods, in which event the provisions applicable in Section 10.20.190 shall be complied with. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.20.210 Parking spaces.
        A.    The city traffic engineer is authorized to have parking space markings installed and maintained to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbings where authorized parking is permitted.

        B.     When such parking space markings are placed on the highway, subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked other than within a single space unless the size or shape of such vehicle makes compliance impossible. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.20.220 No stopping, standing or parking zones.
        A.    The city traffic engineer shall designate established no stopping, standing or parking zones by having appropriate signs and/or curb markings placed and maintained indicating that the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles is prohibited and, where applicable, indicating the hours and days when stopping, standing or parking is prohibited. The city engineer or public works director may also designate additional no stopping, standing or parking zones on any public street or right-of-way of up to one hundred feet and at any place on a public street or right-of-way where necessary to eliminate an unusual traffic hazard.

        B.     During the hours and on the days designated on the signs and/or by the curb markings, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle on any of the streets or parts of streets established under the provisions of this chapter as no stopping, standing or parking zones. (Ord. 1790 § 2, 2018; Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.20.230 Parking in alleys.
        No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of persons or materials in any alley; provided, that the city council may by resolution designate an area of any alley which may be utilized for vehicle parking pursuant to such rules and permits as may be specified by the city council. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.20.240 Parking on city property.
        A.    Whenever the traffic commission determines that the orderly, efficient conduct of the city’s business requires that parking or standing of vehicles on city property be prohibited, limited or restricted, the traffic commission shall have the power and authority to order signs to be erected or markings to be placed indicating that the parking of vehicles is thus prohibited, limited or restricted.

        B.     When signs or markings authorized by the provisions of this section are in place, no person shall park or stand any vehicle contrary thereto. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.20.250 Curb markings—Designated.
        The city traffic engineer is authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this title and the Vehicle Code, to have placed, and when required in this title shall have placed, the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and such curb markings shall have the meanings as set forth in this section:

        A.    Red means no stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the Vehicle Code and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone.

        B.     Yellow means no stopping, standing or parking at any time between seven a.m. and six p.m. on any day except Sundays and holidays for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or freight and shall not consume more than three minutes for the loading or unloading of passengers nor more than twenty minutes for loading or unloading of materials and freight.

        C.     White means stopping only for the purpose of loading or unloading of passengers, or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox. Stopping shall not exceed three minutes and such restrictions shall apply between seven a.m. and six p.m. on any day except Sundays and holidays and except as follows:

        1.     When such zone is in front of a hotel or in front of a mailbox the restrictions shall apply at all times.

        2.     When such zone is in front of a theater the restrictions shall apply at all times, except when such theater is closed.

        D.    Green means no stopping, standing or parking for a period of time longer than twenty minutes at any time between nine a.m. and nine p.m. on any day except Sundays and holidays.

        E.     Blue means no stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the Vehicle Code. Parking is to be limited exclusively to the vehicles of physically handicapped persons. (Ord. 1183 §§ 1, 2, 1983; Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.20.260 Curb markings—Compliance.
        When the city traffic engineer, as authorized under this title, has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any legible curb markings in violation of any of the provisions of Section 10.20.250. (Ord. 1183 § 3, 1983)

 

10.20.270 Permit parking zones on designated streets.
        A.    Definitions. For the purposes of this section, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words, terms and phrases used in this section are defined as follows:

        1.     “Adjacent residence” means a residential dwelling unit fronting upon or having direct access to a residential street.

        2.     “Nonresidential vehicle” means a vehicle operated or parked by a person whose destination is to a nonresidential location.

        3.     “Permit parking zone” means certain residential streets, or portions thereof, which are designated by the council as a permit parking zone for the benefit of the adjacent residences, in which zone vehicles may not park unless an authorized permit or other indicia is displayed thereon or unless such vehicle is otherwise exempt as provided in this section.

        B.     Designation of Permit Parking Zones. The council, by resolution, may designate a permit parking zone and establish the days and hours during such days when parking in such permit parking zone shall be restricted.

        C.     Findings. Prior to designating certain residential streets, or portions thereof, as a permit parking zone, the council shall find with respect to such streets or portions:

        1.     That such zone is necessary to provide reasonably available and convenient parking for the benefit of the adjacent residences;

        2.     That the proposed zone is desirable to encourage the use of car pooling;

        3.     That the proposed zone is desirable to enhance or protect the quality of life in the area of the proposed zone; and

        4.     That the proposed zone will tend to encourage nonresident vehicles to park in off-street parking facilities.

        D.    Considerations. Before making its findings with respect to any proposed permit parking zone, the council shall consider such factors as it deems appropriate, including the following:

        1.     Whether nonresident vehicles do or may substantially and regularly interfere with the use by or for the benefit of adjacent residences of a majority of available public street parking spaces in the proposed permit parking zone, and whether such interference occurs at regular and significant intervals;

        2.     Whether nonresident vehicles driven or parked in the proposed permit parking zone are a source of unreasonable litter, noise, traffic hazards, environmental pollution or devaluation of real property in the area of the proposed permit parking zone;

        3.     Whether the occupants of adjacent residences in the proposed permit parking zone desire its establishment;

        4.     Whether a shortage of residential-related parking spaces exists in the area of the proposed permit parking zone; and

        5.     Whether an alternative solution is feasible or practical.

        E.     Posting Required.

        1.     The city traffic engineer shall designate established permit parking zones by placing and maintaining appropriate signs indicating that the parking of vehicles which do not display a permit issued for such zone is prohibited and the hours and days when such parking is prohibited.

        2.     During the hours and on the days designated on such signs, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicles to park such vehicle on any street in a permit parking zone unless there is displayed on such vehicle a valid permit issued for such zone or such vehicle is otherwise exempt.

        F.     Resident Parking Permits.

        1.     Application for resident parking permits. The applicant for resident parking permits shall file a written application with the chief of police, or his designee, which shall include their full name, home address, proof of residence and other pertinent information as may be required by the chief of police. The chief of police or his designee shall approve or disapprove the application.

        2.     Issuance of permits. The chief of police, or his designee, shall, upon receipt of an approved application and payment of the designated fee established by resolution of the city council, issue four resident parking permits per residence, for each residence that is adjacent to a portion of any section of street or roadway with permit parking restrictions. Should an occasion arise when additional permits are needed, an affected resident may contact the chief of police or his designee, who may temporarily suspend the need to display a resident parking permit.

        3.     Duration of permits. Resident parking permits issued by the city pursuant to this section shall be valid as long as the listed applicant resides at the affected residence. Resident parking permits are not transferable to a subsequent resident or to another residence or property.

        4.     Display of permits. The resident parking permit shall be a serial numbered device furnished by the city and shall be displayed in accordance with instructions furnished by the chief of police upon issuance of the permits.

        5.     Limitations of permits. The resident parking permit is intended to identify vehicles belonging to residents and/or their guests that are to be exempted from the posted limitations in a specific designated permit parking zone. The proper display of a resident parking permit does not permit any manner of parking a vehicle that would otherwise be in violation of other law(s).

        6.     Replacement of permits. Lost or missing resident parking permits, upon identification by serial number, may be replaced by the chief of police or his designee.

        G.    Exempt Vehicles. The posted restrictions of a permit parking zone shall not apply to any authorized emergency vehicle, city vehicle or public utility vehicle when used for official business, commercial vehicle when engaged in service to an adjacent residence, or to any vehicle owned and/or operated by the United States Postal Service.

        H.    Disestablishment. The council, by resolution, may disestablish or modify a permit parking zone whenever the council finds that it is in the public interest to do so.

        I.      Violations.

        1.     Parking a vehicle in violation of this section shall be an infraction. All persons designated by the chief of police are authorized and empowered to issue citations or remove or cause to be removed any vehicles parked on a street contrary to the provisions and exemptions of this section, and to store the vehicles. The owner or operator of any such vehicle shall be liable for the towing and storage costs associated with such removal.

        2.     It shall be a violation of this section for any person to falsely present himself as eligible for a resident parking permit or to knowingly furnish false information on an application therefor.

        3.     It shall be a violation of this section for any person utilizing a resident parking permit issued pursuant to this section to allow the use of or display of such permit on a vehicle for any purpose other than that for which the permit was issued. Any person who so uses or displays a resident parking permit on a vehicle other than for the purpose for which it was issued is likewise guilty of a violation of this section.

        4.     It shall be a violation of this section for any person to copy, produce, or otherwise bring into existence a facsimile or counterfeit resident parking permit. Any person who knowingly uses or displays a facsimile or counterfeit resident parking permit, with the intent to evade prohibitions or limitations on parking in a designated permit parking area is likewise guilty of a violation of this section. (Ord. 1378, 1990; Ord. 1369, 1989)

 

10.20.280 No stopping, standing or parking in city-owned public parks.
        A.    No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle, other than a city-owned vehicle, in any city-owned public park or recreation facility between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m., except as provided in Section 12.28.010.

        B.     When signs or markings posted in accordance with this section are in place, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle contrary thereto. (Ord. 1686 § 1, 2007)

 

10.20.290 Authority to tow vehicles.
        A.    Any vehicle, other than a city-owned vehicle, stopping, standing or parking in violation of Section 10.20.280 shall be subject to towing.

        B.     No vehicle may be removed unless signs are posted giving notice of towing. (Ord. 1686 § 2, 2007)

Chapter 10.24 LOADING, PASSENGER AND COACH ZONES
10.24.010 Establishment of loading zones.
        A.    The traffic commission is authorized to determine locations for loading zones as follows:

        1.     At any place in the central traffic district or any business district;

        2.     Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly.

        B.     In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.24.020 Curb markings for loading zones.
        A.    Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon all curbs within such zones.

        B.     Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white paint upon all curbs in such zones. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.24.030 Use of loading zones.
        A.    Permission granted in this chapter to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than twenty minutes.

        B.     The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial deliveries, also the delivery or pickup of express and parcel post packages for more than twenty minutes.

        C.     Permission granted in this chapter to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers includes the loading or unloading of personal baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than twenty minutes.

        D.    Within the total time limits specified in this section the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of the privileges granted by this chapter. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.24.040 Parking in yellow loading zones.
        No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers or material for such time as is specified in Section 10.24.030. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.24.050 Parking in passenger loading zones.
        No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any passenger loading zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for such time as is specified in Section 10.24.030. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.24.060 Coach zones.
        A.    The city traffic engineer is authorized to establish coach zones adjacent to curb space for the loading and unloading of buses or common carriers of passengers and to determine the location thereof.

        B.     Coach zones shall normally be established on the far side of an intersection. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

Chapter 10.26 BAIL SCHEDULE FOR PARKING OFFENSES
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ords. 1329, 1330, 1347 and 1348.

10.26.010—10.26.020

10.26.010 Establishment of parking bail.
        The municipal bail schedule for parking offenses referenced below and as set forth in Titles 10 and 18 of this code shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1473 § 1, 1994)

 

10.26.015 Penalty for violations of Title 10.
        Any violation of the provisions of this title shall constitute an infraction and be punishable as such. Each day a violation of any provision of this title shall continue shall be a new and separate violation. (Ord. 1557 § 2, 1999)

 

10.26.020 Bail schedule.
 

LHMC Reference

Description

10.08.070

Parked in excess of 72 hours

10.16.050

Obstructing intersection

10.20.030(A)

Parking upon a divisional island

10.20.030(C)

No parking where posted

10.20.030(D)

Red curb or sign

10.20.030(E)

Parking upon railroad track

10.20.030(F)

Parking which constitutes a hazard

10.20.030(G)

No parking at all times

10.20.030(H)

No parking at all times

10.20.030(I)

No parking at all times

10.20.030(J)

No parking at all times

10.20.030(K)

Blocking private driveway

10.20.040

Parking on parkways/crosswalks

10.20.050

Advertising “for sale”

10.20.060

Repairing on roadway

10.20.070

Washing/polishing vehicle on street

10.20.080(B)

Posted no parking adjacent to school

10.20.100(A)

Park vending vehicle more than 10 minutes

10.20.100(B)

Park vending vehicle without permit

10.20.100(C)

Park vehicle for hire without permit

10.20.100(D)

Park vending vehicle/vehicle for hire in location other than specified by permit

10.20.110

Commercial vehicle parking

10.20.110(A)

Commercial vehicle on residential street

10.20.110(B)

Commercial vehicle on business street

10.20.120

Overweight vehicle on residential property

10.20.130

Temporary emergency signs

10.20.140(B)

20-minute parking green curb

10.20.150

Posted 40 minute parking

10.20.160

Posted 1 hour parking

10.20.170

Posted 2 hour parking

10.20.180

Overnight parking

10.20.200

Angle parking/6 inches from curb

10.20.210

Vehicle occupying more than one space

10.20.220

Posted “no stopping”

10.20.230

Alley parking unless permitted

10.20.240

City property—posted

10.20.260

Curb marking violation:

 

Red—No stopping or parking

 

Yellow—Loading zone

 

White—Posted loading limitation

 

Green—20 minute loading zone

 

Blue—Handicapped parking zone

10.20.270

Permit parking zone without permit

10.36.030

Unlawful keeping or permitting of vehicle or parts

18.10.050

Vehicle parked on lawn

18.10.050(F)

Vehicle parked on lawn—temporary

18.10.090

House trailers, trailers, boats, airplanes

 

(Ord. 1473 § 1, 1994)

Chapter 10.28 RESTRICTED USE OF STREETS
10.28.010 Advertising vehicles—Sound trucks.
        No person shall operate or drive any vehicle used for advertising purposes or any advertising vehicle equipped with a sound-amplifying loud-speaking device upon any street or alley at any time, except upon a written permit signed by the chief of police. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.28.020 Truck routes.
        A.    Whenever any resolution of this city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street the use of which is permitted by any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons, the city traffic engineer is authorized to designate such street or streets by appropriate signs as “truck routes” for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons.

        B.     When any such truck route or routes are established and designated by appropriate signs the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons shall drive on such route or routes and none other; except, that nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of three tons coming from a “truck route” having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual, bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted streets for which a building permit has previously been obtained therefor.

        C.     The provisions of this section shall not apply to:

        1.     Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission, or to

        2.     Any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility.

        D.    Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the city council are declared to be truck routes for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight of three tons. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.28.030 Commercial vehicles.
        A.    Whenever any resolution of this city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street the use of which by any commercial vehicle is prohibited, the city traffic engineer shall have appropriate signs erected and maintained on those streets affected by such resolution.

        B.     Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the council are declared to be streets the use of which by any commercial vehicle is prohibited. The provisions of this section shall not apply to passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission.

        C.     Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and punished by a fine amount set forth by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1707 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

 

10.28.040 Temporary closure.
        A.    The city engineer is authorized to determine those streets or portions of streets which in his or her opinion must be temporarily closed to vehicular traffic in order to safeguard and protect persons engaged in celebrations, parades, local special events, construction and in other activities.

        B.     When signs have been placed giving notice of the provisions of this section, no person shall operate a vehicle in violation thereof. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

Chapter 10.32 TRAINS
10.32.010 Blocking streets.
        No person shall cause or permit any railway train or railway cars or similar vehicle on rails to stop or stand or to be operated in such manner as to prevent the use of any street for the purposes of travel for a period of time longer than ten minutes; except, that this provision shall not apply to railroad trains, cars or similar vehicles on rails while blocking or obstructing a crossing because of an accident which requires the operator of the train, car or similar vehicle on rails to stop at or near the scene of the accident. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.32.020 Grade crossing warnings.
        The city traffic engineer shall erect and maintain, or cause to be erected and maintained, railroad warning approach signs upon the right-hand side of each approach of every highway, under the jurisdiction of this city, to a grade crossing of a railroad or electric interurban railway at a reasonable distance from the crossing. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

Chapter 10.36 ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLES
10.36.010 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this chapter:

        “Appeals officer” means the city manager or his designee.

        “Hearing officer” means the chief of police or his designee.

        “Highway” means and includes any publicly maintained or owned highway, street, road, alley, sidewalk, parkway, off-street parking lot or structure, bridge, culvert, drain and any facility or other area in the city necessary for the construction, improvement and maintenance of streets and roads.

        “Owner of the land” means the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.

        “Owner of the vehicle” means the last registered and legal owner of record.

        “Public property” does not include “highway.”

        “Vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 1499 § 1, 1996)

 

10.36.020 Nuisance declared.
        In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the city council makes the following findings and declarations:

        A.    That the accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property, promotes blight and deterioration, invites plundering, creates fire hazards, constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, creates a harborage for rodents and insects and is injurious to the health, safety and general welfare.

        B.     Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof, on private or public property not including highways, except as expressly permitted in this chapter, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.36.030 Unlawful keeping or permitting.
        It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to abandon, park, store, leave or permit the abandonment, parking, storing or leaving of any licensed or unlicensed vehicle or parts thereof which is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative condition upon any private property or public property not including highways within the city for a period in excess of three days unless such vehicle or parts thereof is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not plainly visible from the street or other public or private property, or unless such vehicle is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.36.040 Failure to remove or abate.
        It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof or refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this chapter or state law where such state law is applicable. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.36.050 Administrative cost.
        The city council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs, excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or parts thereof, under this chapter. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.36.060 Exceptions.
        A.    This chapter shall not apply to:

        1.     A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property;

        2.     A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise.

        B.     Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter 10, commencing with Section 22650, of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code, and this chapter. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.36.070 Other provisions supplemented.
        This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It supplements and is in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances enacted before or after the ordinance codified in this title by the city, the state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.36.080 Enforcement authority.
        Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property within the city, the chief of police shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.36.090 Right of entry.
        Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the chief of police. In the enforcement of this chapter such officer and his deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle, or parts thereof, declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.36.100 Notice of intention to abate.
        A ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered mail to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following forms:

 

  NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE.

 

  (Name and address of owner of the land)

 

  As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to (section of ordinance or municipal code) has determined that there exists upon said land an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle registered to _______________ license number __________, which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of (ordinance or municipal code chapter number.)

 

  You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice, and upon failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by the (city or county) and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed to you as owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of vehicle) is located. As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the (hearing body or officer) within such 10-day period, the (Chief of Police) shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such 10-day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a request for hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle or, in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing.

 

  Notice Mailed (date)_______________

  S/ _______________

  (Chief of Police)

 

  NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE.

 

  (Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record of vehicle—notice should be given to both if different)

 

  As last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of vehicle—make, model, license, etc.), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to (section of ordinance or municipal code) has determined that said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle at (describe location on public or private property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of (ordinance or municipal code chapter number).

 

  You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the mailing of this notice.

 

  As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the (hearing body or officer) within such 10-day period, the (locally designated officer) shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing.

 

  Notice Mailed (date):_______________

  S/ ____________________

  (Chief of Police)

 

(Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.36.110 Public hearing—Denial of responsibility.
        A.    Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of land received by the chief of police within ten days after the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost or removal of the vehicle or parts thereof against the property on which it was located. Said public hearing shall be held before a hearing officer, who shall be the chief of police or his designee. The hearing officer shall possess the authority to recommend a final disposition of the matter.

        B.     If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his/her land within such ten-day period, such statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his/her presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered mail, at least ten days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not received within such ten days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the city shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. (Ord. 1499 § 2, 1996; Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.36.120 Conduct of hearings.
        All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the hearing officer who shall hear all facts and testimony he or she deems pertinent. Such facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the private property or public property. The hearing officer shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his/her reasons for such denial. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.36.130 Removal order.
        The hearing officer may impose such conditions and take such other action as he or she deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. The hearing officer may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if, in his/her opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the hearing officer may find that a vehicle or parts thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as provided in this chapter, and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.36.140 Innocence of landowner.
        If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that the owner has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the hearing officer shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such owner of the land. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.36.150 Notice of decision.
        If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his/her land but does not appear, or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the hearing officer but does not appear, such owner or party shall be notified in writing of the decision. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.36.160 Appeal.
        A.    Any interested party may appeal the decision of the hearing officer by filing a written notice of appeal with such hearing officer within ten days after his/her decision.

        B.     Such appeal shall be heard by an appeals officer who may affirm, modify or reverse the order or take other action deemed appropriate. The appeals officer shall be the city manager or his designee. The designated appeals officer shall not be the same person as the designated hearing officer. The decision of the appeals officer shall become final and conclusive as to all matters in controversy upon proof of service thereof by registered mail upon those persons aggrieved.

        C.     The clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant and those persons specified in Section 10.36.100.

        D.    In conducting the hearing the city shall be limited by the technical rules of evidence. (Ord. 1499 § 3, 1996; Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.36.170 Removal by city—Disposition.
        Ten days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance, ten days from the date of mailing of the decision if such notice is required by Section 10.36.150, or fifteen days after such action of the appeals officer authorizing removal following appeal, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard or automobile dismantler’s yard. (Ord. 1499 § 4, 1996)

 

10.36.180 Reconstruction or repair.
        A.    After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable, except for the following vehicles:

        1.     Vehicles which qualify for horseless carriage license plates; or

        2.     Vehicles which qualify for historical vehicle license plates.

        B.     Vehicles meeting the exceptions set out in subsection A of this section, as described in the Vehicle Code, may be reconstructed or made operable. (Ord. 1211, 1983; Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.36.190 Notice to state.
        Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.36.200 Assessment of costs.
        If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to Section 10.36.130 are not paid within thirty days of the date of the order, or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. Such assessment shall have the same priority as other city taxes. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

Chapter 10.40 BICYCLE LICENSES AND PLATES
10.40.010 Definitions.
        As used in this chapter, the following terms and words shall have the following meanings:

        A.    “Bicycle” means and includes any device upon which a person may ride, which is propelled by human power through a system of belts, chains or gears and which has wheels at least twenty inches in diameter and a frame size of at least fourteen inches.

        B.     “Bicycle license receipt” means and includes that ownership card issued by the licensing agency or agent of the city upon receipt of the designated license fee.

        C.     “Bicycle plate” means and includes the license tag or decal designated by the state in accordance with Section 39001 of the Vehicle Code, to be permanently assigned to that bicycle by the state.

        D.    “Licensing agency” or “licensing agent” include that party or parties designated by the city council as the official licensing agency or agent for bicycles in the city. For the purposes of this chapter, the chief of police and the chief’s representatives are the licensing agency. The chief of police shall be given the authority to recommend for appointment by the city council any person or persons to assist this city in the capacity of bicycle licensing agent(s). Each licensing agency or agent shall license bicycles for persons residing in this city only; all other bicycle license applicants shall be referred to their respective city or jurisdiction of residency. (Ord. 944 § 2, 1976)

 

10.40.020 Required.
        No person residing in the city shall ride or propel any bicycle upon any public street, sidewalk, alley, bicycle lane or path, or any other public property, or have in his/her possession any bicycle which has not been licensed and for which the appropriate license fee has not been paid or which does not bear a bicycle plate as required by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 944 § 3, 1976)

 

10.40.030 Issuance.
        At the time that any person licenses a bicycle and pays the appropriate license fee in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the licensing agency or agent shall provide that person with a license receipt bearing the owner’s name, address, telephone number, bicycle plate number, the bicycle manufacturer, type and frame number and any other descriptive material concerning the bicycle deemed necessary by the licensing agency, and provision for the transfer of ownership of the bicycle. In addition, at the time of licensing, the bicycle owner shall be issued a permanent bicycle plate bearing the unique number permanently assigned to that bicycle by the state. (Ord. 944 § 4, 1976)

 

10.40.040 Sale or transfer of bicycle.
        Whenever any person sells, trades, disposes of or transfers any bicycle licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, he/she shall endorse upon the license receipt previously issued for such bicycle a written transfer of same, setting forth the name, address and telephone number of the transferee, the date of transfer, the signature of the transferor, and shall deliver such license receipt, so endorsed, to the licensing agency at the time of transfer. The transferee shall, within ten days after such transfer, apply to the licensing agency for a transfer of the license receipt. A fee as established by resolution shall be charged for the transfer of ownership. (Ord. 1213 §§ 2, 3,1983; Ord. 944 § 5, 1976)

 

10.40.050 Change of address.
        Whenever any bicycle licensee changes his/her place of residence, such licensee shall notify the licensing agency of such change of address within ten days. There shall be no charge for the change of address. (Ord. 1213 §§ 2, 3, 1983; Ord. 944 § 6, 1976)

 

10.40.060 Loss or theft.
        A.    In the event that any license receipt issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter is lost or stolen, the licensee of such bicycle shall immediately notify the licensing agency, and within ten days after such notification shall apply to the licensing agency for a duplicate license receipt, whereupon the licensing agency shall issued to such licensee a duplicate license receipt, upon payment to the licensing agency of a fee as established by resolution.

        B.     In the event that any bicycle plate issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter is lost or stolen, the licensee shall immediately notify the licensing agency of such loss, and shall within ten days apply to the agency for a new bicycle plate, whereupon the licensing agency shall issue to such licensee a new bicycle plate, upon payment to the licensing agency of a fee as established by resolution. (Ord. 1213 §§ 2, 3, 1983; Ord. 944 § 7, 1976)

 

10.40.070 Fees.
        The fees required to be paid pursuant to the provisions of this chapter are:

        A.    For such bicycle license, a fee as established by resolution per year or any portion thereof;

        B.     For each transfer of license receipt, a fee as established by resolution;

        C.     For each replacement of bicycle license receipt or bicycle plate, a fee as established by resolution;

        D.    For each impounding fee for bicycles found to be in violation of this chapter, a sum to be designated by the city council, not to exceed a sum as established by resolution pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 39011. (Ord. 1213 §§ 2, 3, 1983; Ord. 944 § 8, 1976)

 

10.40.080 Tampering.
        A.    It is unlawful for any person to tamper with, destroy, mutilate or alter any license receipt issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

        B.     It is unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate or in any way alter or tamper with any bicycle plate issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 944 § 9, 1976)

 

10.40.090 Bicycle dealers—Transaction reports.
        Any person engaged in the business of buying, selling or trading bicycles within the city is required to make a weekly report to the licensing agency giving the name, address and telephone number of all persons either buying, selling or trading bicycles and the bicycle manufacturer, type, frame number and bicycle plate number, if any. (Ord. 944 § 10, 1976)

 

10.40.100 Enforcement authority.
        The chief of police and the chief’s representative shall be granted all authority to enforce and carry out the provisions of this chapter pursuant to the provisions included in the Vehicle Code and all other laws of the state. (Ord. 944 § 13, 1976)

 

10.40.110 Violation—Impoundment.
        The licensing agency shall have the right to impound and retain possession of any bicycle in violation of the provisions of this chapter, and may retain possession of such bicycle until the provisions of this chapter are complied with. A fee to be determined by the city council, pursuant to Section 39011 of the Vehicle Code, shall be charged for each bicycle so impounded. (Ord. 944 § 11, 1976)

 

10.40.120 Violation—Fine.
        A fee to be determined by the city council pursuant to Section 39011 of the Vehicle Code shall be charged for violation of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 944 § 12, 1976)

Chapter 10.44 CROSSWALKS
10.44.010 Establishment.
        A.    Marked crosswalks shall be established and maintained at intersections where the traffic commission determines that there is particular hazard to pedestrians crossing the roadway subject to the limitation contained in subsection B of this section.

        B.     Other than crosswalks at intersections, no marked crosswalk shall be established in any block which is less than four hundred feet in length and such crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable at mid-block.

        C.     The traffic commission may cause to be placed signs at or adjacent to an intersection in respect to any crosswalk directing that pedestrians shall not cross in the crosswalk so indicated. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

 

10.44.020 Use.
        No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in the central traffic district or in any business district. (Ord. 1032 § 2, 1978)

Chapter 10.48 TRAFFIC IMPROVEMENT FEE
10.48.010 Purpose.
        It is intended to implement the goals and objectives of the growth management element and the circulation element of the general plan, and to mitigate the traffic impacts caused by new development within the city through the construction of certain traffic improvements. As a development traffic mitigation measure, future developments must incorporate fair share participation to the cost of maintaining level of service standards and to develop future transportation systems. (Ord. 1452 § 1, 1993)

 

10.48.020 Definitions.
        “Circulation improvements” includes but is not limited to the construction of or improvement to street rights-of-way, traffic signals, over crossings, underpasses, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street pavement, and drainage improvements incidental to street improvements necessary to provide traffic circulation consistent with the circulation component of the community development plan of the La Habra general plan 2020. For purposes of this definition street includes highway or road.

        “Development” means any new construction or use that requires the issuance of a building permit or other city use entitlement and which generates additional traffic impacts above that generated by the previous use of the land.

        “Development permits” means a building permit required by and issued pursuant to Chapter 15 of this code, or other city use entitlement such as but not limited to a conditional use permit, an environmental design review permit, a zone change, variance or subdivision required by Chapters 17 and 18 of this code.

        “Master plan of arterial highways” means the roadway system as defined in the circulation component of the community development plan of the La Habra general plan 2020.

        “PM peak hour trip ends” means the number of one-way (in and out) vehicular trips generated by a given land use during the one-hour period of highest traffic volume during the PM peak period of 3:30-6:30 p.m. (Ord. 1452 § 1, 1993)

 

10.48.030 Traffic improvement fees established.
        A.    A traffic improvement fee is hereby established on issuance of development permits for development in the city of La Habra to pay for their fair share of the needed circulation and roadway improvements.

        B.     In subsequent city council resolutions, the city council may review this fee to determine whether the fee amounts are reasonably related to the impacts of developments and whether the described public facilities are still needed.

        C.     As described in the fee resolution, this development fee shall be paid by each developer either prior to issuance of building permit or prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any project not required to obtain a building permit from the city of La Habra. (Ord. 1452 § 1, 1993)

 

10.48.040 Use of fee revenues.
        The revenues raised by payment of the traffic improvement fee shall be placed in a separate and special account as provided by council resolution and such revenues along with any interest earnings on that account, shall be used for the following purposes:

        A.    To pay for right-of-way acquisition, engineering, and construction of designated public facilities as identified in the resolution establishing each fee;

        B.     To reimburse the city for roadway improvements constructed by the city with local funds from other sources; or

        C.     To reimburse developers who have constructed designated public facilities having size, length or capacity beyond that needed to mitigate impacts of the individual development project as determined by city engineer or designee. (Ord. 1452 § 1, 1993)

 

10.48.050 Developer construction of facilities.
        Developers may be required to construct transportation improvements designated to be financed with traffic improvement fees in lieu of paying a development fee. If a developer is required, as a condition of approval of a development permit, to construct a transportation improvement that has been designated to be financed with traffic improvement fees. The cost of the improvements, paid for by the developer may be used as in-lieu credit against the traffic improvement fees as determined by the city engineer or designee. (Ord. 1452 § 1, 1993)

 

10.48.060 Administrative fees.
        The application shall be accompanied by a fee as established by resolution of the city council to defray the expense of administering this chapter. The fee is as follows:

        A.    Initial Traffic Impact Assessment Fee (preliminary traffic analysis and fee assessment). (Ord. 1454 § 1, 1993; Ord. 1452 § 1, 1993)

 

10.48.070 Appeal.
        A.    A developer of any project subject to the fee described in Section 10.48.030 may apply to the city for a reduction or adjustment to that fee, or a waiver of that fee. If an appeal of the assessed fee cannot be resolved after review and consideration by the city engineer or designee, an application shall be made in writing and filed with the planning department not later than ten days after the decision of the city engineer or designee. The item shall be scheduled for planning commission action in accordance with customary filing deadlines for projects submitted to the planning commission.

        B.     The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of waiver, reduction, or adjustment. The planning commission shall consider the application at the public meeting on the permit application. The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council, whose decision shall be final. If the reduction, adjustment or waiver is granted, any change in use within the project shall invalidate the waiver, adjustment or reduction of the fee.

        C.     The fee for an appeal is as follows:

        1.     Appeal Fee (review of assessed fee by city engineer or designee). (Ord. 1454 § 1, 1993; Ord. 1452 § 1, 1993)

Chapter 10.52 TRAFFIC PHASING PLAN
10.52.010 Purpose.
        It is intended that major development be adequately accommodated by the existing transportation system, and permitted to proceed only if: deficient areas are being addressed through new facilities; impacts on the system be mitigated in conjunction with the development; other trip generation reduction measures are adopted which will alleviate traffic impacts; and/or the project be phased to eliminate any significant impacts. (Ord. 1453 § 1, 1993)

 

10.52.020 Definitions.
        The following terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings indicated below:

        “Deficient intersection” means any intersection operating at an unsatisfactory level of traffic service, either prior to or as a result of a project, on any “major,” “modified major,” “primary,” “modified primary” or “secondary” street.

        “Eligible to vote” means all members lawfully holding office except those disqualified from voting due to a conflict of interest.

        “Feasible identified improvement” means a major improvement contemplated by, or consistent with, the circulation and land use elements of the city of La Habra, the cost of which is not so clearly disproportionate to the size of, and traffic generated by, the project that it would be unreasonable for the city to condition the project on construction of the improvement.

        “Level of Service D” means that the level of service defined as the Intersection Capacity Utilization (ICU) range of 0.81 to 0.90.

        “Major improvements” means a substantial physical change to an intersection or roadway or the construction of a new road, but shall not mean resurfacing, restriping or other similar changes.

        “Major,” “modified major,” “primary,” “modified primary,” or “secondary” street shall be defined by the General Plan of the City of La Habra, Circulation Element.

        “Project” shall be determined by reference to the California Environmental Quality Act (California Public Resources Code § 21000 et seq.) and the administrative guidelines established thereunder.

        “Unsatisfactory level of traffic service” means peak period traffic service which is worse than Level of Service D for one hour determined according to standard traffic engineering practices. (Ord. 1453 § 1, 1993)

 

10.52.030 Traffic impact limitation.
        A.    Limitation. No building permit shall be issued, and no construction shall be commenced, for any project not exempt from this chapter until the city engineer or designee or an appeal to the planning commission or city council makes the necessary findings that the proposed development complies with the provisions of this chapter.

        B.     Findings. Based upon a review of the project traffic study submitted by the applicant, the city engineer or designee shall make a finding such that:

        1.     The project will not, at a minimum, create nor make worse an unsatisfactory level of traffic service at any study street segment or intersection.

        2.     The project will provide for improvements so that an unsatisfactory level of traffic service will not be created nor made worse at the study locations.

        3.     An overall benefit to the traffic circulation system is provided as identified through a list of improvements, programs, and/or actions with estimates of costs that will (1) result in a level of service improvement of the overall circulation system to offset impacts which will remain unimproved, and (2) may be required to show improvements in air quality as specified in the growth management element of La Habra’s general plan 2020.

        4.     Feasible identified improvements cannot be provided based on available information indicating that project size, location and/or impacts when compared to the cost of necessary improvements creates an unreasonable burden on the project to the city to condition the project to complete the improvement(s) and, thus, payment of a fee by the project to fund construction of the improvements shall bear a prorated share to the traffic generated at the impacted intersection.

        C.     Application. Based upon the findings above, the project will provide required improvements or a traffic impact fee as determined by the city engineer or designee.

        D.    Exemptions. The city engineer or designee shall exempt any project from the requirements of this chapter:

        1.     If any commercial, industrial, or residential project which has less than forty trip ends during the p.m. peak hour within the traffic period from three-thirty to six-thirty p.m. shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter as determined by the city engineer or designee, using current ITE methodology or other appropriate studies. This exemption is subject to approval by the city engineer or designee, as circumstances could cause the exemption to be rescinded (i.e., the project is adjacent to a deficient intersection).

        2.     If the applicant shall find that the city has granted entitlements which are still active for the project prior to the effective date of this chapter and that the person to whom such entitlement was issued has in good faith and in reliance upon such permit diligently commenced for work and materials necessary therefor.

        E.     Action. The application for any building, grading or other permit on a project, which is not exempt from this chapter, shall be approved, conditionally approved or denied within one year from the date on which said application has been received and accepted as complete by the city. Construction of specific transportation improvements shall be completed within three years from first building permit or prior to the issuance of certificate of occupancy whichever comes first. Any appeal to the planning commission or the city council from an action by the city engineer or designee or the planning commission on an application or a determination by the city council to review an application, shall be made within ten working days. In the event action is not taken on an application within the time limits hereof, such failure shall be deemed approval of the project which otherwise is consistent with the ordinances and general plan of the city of La Habra.

        F.     Expiration.

        1.     Any approval granted in accordance with this chapter shall expire within six months of date of approval or when all permits expire, whichever is latest.

        2.     Any approval granted in accordance with this chapter which include phases shall submit a phasing improvement plan which will be reviewed on a yearly basis. (Ord. 1453 § 1, 1993)

 

10.52.040 Procedure.
        A.    An applicant shall provide a traffic analysis to determine the impacts of the proposed project on the transportation facilities which shall be found adequate in the professional judgment of the city engineer or designee.

        B.     The city engineer or designee may be contacted prior to initiation of the study to obtain a preliminary recommendation regarding matters such as traffic study period, study locations, cumulative project data, trip generation rates, analysis assumptions, etc. which may be useful information in preparation of the traffic study.

        C.     Ultimately, the city engineer or designee will determine recommended conditions based upon findings of the traffic impact analysis. (Ord. 1453 § 1, 1993)

 

10.52.050 Annual review.
        An annual evaluation of development phasing plans shall be conducted to ensure that road improvements or traffic impact fees were actually provided as required in order to determine whether development may continue. These efforts will review and evaluate the implementation of phasing plans specified in the condition of approval for traffic improvements required as project mitigation. If the improvements or traffic impact fees required have not been provided, development shall be deferred until compliance with the provisions of this program are achieved as specified in Section 10.52.030(B). (Ord. 1453 § 1, 1993)

 

10.52.060 Administrative fees.
        The application shall be accompanied by a fee as established by resolution of the city council to defray the expense of administering this chapter. The fees are as follows:

        A.    Traffic Impact Analysis Fee (project review for traffic impacts and appropriate mitigation measures).

        B.     Traffic Impact Analysis—Traffic Commission Fee (project review for traffic impacts and appropriate mitigation measures before traffic commission).

        C.     EIR/TIA—Traffic Commission Fee (environmental review and traffic impact analysis before traffic commission). (Ord. 1454 § 2, 1993; Ord. 1453 § 1, 1993)

 

10.52.070 Appeal.
        Any determination of the city engineer or designee shall be final unless there shall be an appeal of the determination by the applicant, or any other person aggrieved. Such appeal shall be made in writing and filed with the planning department not later than ten days after the date of the decision of the city engineer or his designee. The item shall be scheduled for planning commission action in accordance with customary filing deadlines for projects submitted to the planning commission. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of appeal. The planning commission shall consider the application at the public meeting on the permit application. The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council, whose decision shall be final. The fee for an appeal is as follows:

        A.    Appeal Fee (review of traffic impact and mitigation measures by planning commission or city council). (Ord. 1454 § 2, 1993; Ord. 1453 § 1, 1993)

Chapter 10.56 ORANGE COUNTY TAXI ADMINISTRATION PROGRAM
10.56.010 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases herein defined shall be construed in accordance with the following definitions.

        “City” means the city of La Habra.

        “City authorization” means city authorization to operate a taxicab business in the city.

        “Driver” means person who drives or controls the movements of a taxicab.

        “Driver’s permit” means a valid permit issued by OCTAP authorizing a person to drive or controls the movements of a taxicab.

        “OCTAP” means the Orange County Taxi Administration Program administered by the Orange County Transportation Authority.

        “Operate a taxicab” means to drive a taxicab and either solicit or pick up passengers for hire in the City.

        “Owner” means the registered owner or lessor of a taxicab.

        “Person” includes natural person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business, trust, corporation, or public entity.

        “Taxicab” means a vehicle operated within the jurisdiction of the city, capable of carrying not more than eight persons, excluding the driver, and used to carry passengers for hire. The term shall exclude a vehicle operating as a charter party carrier licensed as such by any state agency, including the Public Utilities Commission, or any other vehicle having a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by any state agency, including the Public Utilities Commission.

        “Taxicab business permit” means a valid permit issued by OCTAP authorizing person to operate a taxicab business.

        “Taxicab vehicle permit” means a valid permit issued by OCTAP authorizing a particular vehicle to be operated as a taxicab. (Ord. 1522 § 1, 1997)

 

10.56.020 City authorization required.
        A.    A person shall only operate a taxicab if the owner of that taxicab is authorized by the city to operate a taxicab business in the city.

        B.     An owner shall only allow a taxicab owned by the owner to be operated if the owner is authorized by the city to operate a taxicab business in the city.

        C.     The procedures for the city authorization to operate a taxicab business in the city shall be established by separate resolution or ordinance of the city council. (Ord. 1522 § 1, 1997)

 

10.56.030 Driver’s permit required.
        A person shall only operate a taxicab if that person possesses a driver’s permit and if city authorization has been obtained. An owner shall only allow a driver to operate a taxicab owned by the owner if that driver possesses a driver’s permit and if city authorization has been obtained. (Ord. 1522 § 1, 1997)

 

10.56.040 Taxicab vehicle permit required.
        A person shall only operate a taxicab if that vehicle displays a taxicab vehicle permit and if city authorization has been obtained. An owner shall only allow a taxicab owned by the owner to be operated in the city if that vehicle displays a taxicab vehicle permit and if city authorization has been obtained. (Ord. 1522 § 1, 1997)

 

10.56.050 Taxicab business permit required.
        A person shall only operate a taxicab business in the city if that person possesses a taxicab business permit and if city authorization has been obtained. (Ord. 1522 § 1, 1997)

 

10.56.060 Application for permits.
        Application for a driver’s permit, taxicab vehicle permit or taxicab business permit shall be made to OCTAP, upon a form provided by OCTAP and shall be accompanied by an application fee sufficient to cover the administrative costs of processing such application as established by the Orange County Transportation Authority. (Ord. 1522 § 1, 1997)

 

10.56.070 Testing for controlled substances and alcohol.
        A driver shall test negative for controlled substances and alcohol as required by applicable state statues. (Ord. 1522 § 1, 1997)

 

10.56.080 Insurance required.
        A driver operating a taxicab in the city shall carry with him/her at all times proof of insurance covering that vehicle, with such policy limits and coverage as established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the city council. Such proof of insurance must clearly identify the vehicle covered. (Ord. 1522 § 1, 1997)

 

10.56.090 Nontransferability.
        No permit issued under this chapter shall be assigned to, or used by, any person or vehicle other than the person or vehicle named in such permit. (Ord. 1522 § 1, 1997)

 

10.56.100 Equipment.
        A taxicab operated under the authority of this chapter shall be maintained according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1522 § 1, 1997)

 

10.56.110 Operational requirements.
        A.    A driver shall only carry a passenger to his/her destination by the most direct and accessible route.

        B.     A taxicab shall have all permits issued by OCTAP conspicuously displayed according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the city council.

        C.     A taxicab shall have the following information continuously posted in a prominent location in the taxicab passenger’s compartment according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the city council:

        1.     A schedule of rates and charges for the hire of the taxicab;

        2.     The driver’s name and address;

        3.     The owner’s name, address and telephone number;

        4.     The taxicab identification number;

        5.     The driver’s permit issued pursuant to this chapter;

        6.     The taxicab vehicle permit issued pursuant to this chapter; and

        7.     Any other information required by the city.

        D.    A driver shall give a receipt for the amount charged upon the request of the person paying the fare.

        E.     A taxicab shall only be operated if the passenger compartment is kept in a clean and sanitary condition.

        F.     A driver shall not leave his or her taxicab to solicit passengers.

        G.    The name or trade name of the owner and the number by which the taxicab is designated shall be printed, stamped or stenciled conspicuously on the outside of each taxicab according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1522 § 1, 1997)

 

10.56.120 Rates and charges.
        No driver shall charge rates and charges other than those established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1522 § 1, 1997)

 

10.56.130 Separate from business licensing.
        The requirements of this chapter are separate and independent from the business licensing and any other provisions under the city code. (Ord. 1522 § 1, 1997)

Chapter 10.58 FOOD VENDING VEHICLES
10.58.010 Purpose and findings.
        The city council of the city of La Habra expressly finds that parking of vehicles for food vending purposes near schools poses traffic hazards and special dangers to the safety and welfare of children and other residents in the city.

        It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish safety-related equitable, clear and concise regulations applicable to businesses and persons who engage in the operation of food vending from vehicles in the city. These regulations are intended to provide for greater safety by preventing traffic-related hazards, especially hazards to school children buying food or other products from food vending vehicles. (Ord. 1751 § 3, 2014)

 

10.58.020 Definitions.
        A.    “Business license” means a business license required by Chapter 5.04 of the La Habra Municipal Code.

        B.     “Food vending vehicle” means any vehicle, as that term is defined in the California Vehicle Code, which is equipped or primarily used for retail sales of produce and/or prepared, pre-packaged, or unprepared, unpackaged food or foodstuffs of any kind, on any public street, alley or highway or private street within the city. The inventory of these vehicles is not necessarily limited to edible items and may include non-food sundries.

        C.     “Operator” means any person or entity that:

        1.     Owns, controls, manages, and/or leases a food vending vehicle; and/or

        2.     Contracts with any person(s) to drive, operate, prepare food in, and/or vend from, a food vending vehicle; and/or

        3.     Drives, operates, prepares food in, or vends from, a food vending vehicle.

        D.    “Person” means any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or other entity of any kind or nature.

        E.     “School” means any public and/or private school in which instruction is given in any or all grades through grade twelve.

        F.     “Restocking” means the transfer of food, goods or merchandise to a food vending vehicle from any other person or vehicle and includes, but is not limited to, loading and delivery of food, goods and merchandise.

        G.    “Vend” or “vending” means soliciting, displaying, or offering produce, prepared or unprepared food, pre-packaged food and/or non-food sundries of any kind for sale or barter or exchange from a food vending vehicle on a public or private street, alley, highway or public place within the city. “Vend” or “vending” includes the movement or standing of a food vending vehicle for the purpose of searching for, obtaining and/or soliciting retail sales or produce, prepared food, pre-packaged food or non-food sundries, including, but not limited to, goods, wares, or merchandise. (Ord. 1751 § 3, 2014)

 

10.58.030 Operational requirements.
        A.    No person shall own, control, operate, manage, lease, or contract with any other person for the operation of a food vending vehicle in the city without a valid business license issued, in addition to any other license or permit required under any other chapter of this code, for each and every food vending vehicle.

        B.     All operators shall comply with the following regulations:

        1.     Each operator vending any produce or other food item for which a food handling permit or other health permit is required by law shall possess and at all times display such permit in conspicuous view upon each vending vehicle.

        2.     Each operator shall possess, and at all times display, in conspicuous view upon each such vehicle a city business license.

        3.     No food vending vehicle that is stopped, parked or standing on any street, alley, or highway shall display flashing neon or electronic display signs or visual displays that are intended to, or do in fact, distract drivers and draw attention to the food vending vehicle.

        4.     No food vending vehicle shall be permitted to operate within three hundred feet of the nearest property line of any property on which a school building is located, between the hours of seven a.m. and five p.m. of any school day, unless authorized to do so in writing by the school district, and with a special event permit, if applicable. This restriction shall not apply to high school buildings.

        5.     No food vending vehicle shall be permitted to operate within three hundred feet of the Children’s Museum during opening hours.

        6.     No food vending vehicle shall be permitted to operate within three hundred feet of a city park where children regularly gather within the hours of seven a.m. and seven p.m.

        7.     No food vending vehicle shall be parked, stopped, or left standing in any manner which blocks or impedes vehicular access to any driveway or restricts the free movement of other vehicles upon any public or private street.

        8.     All food vending vehicles shall be equipped with refuse containers large enough to contain all trash and refuse generated by the operation of such vehicle. The operator of the food vending vehicle shall pick up all trash and refuse generated by the operator’s vending during the time the vehicle is stopped, that is within not less than a twenty-five-foot radius of the vehicle, before such vehicle is moved.

        9.     Any food vending vehicle that is vending in the city for longer than one hour during any twenty-four-hour period must be parked within two hundred feet of an approved and readily available toilet and hand-washing facility, or as otherwise approved by the city, to ensure that restroom facilities are available to food vending vehicle employees whenever the vehicle is stopped to conduct business for more than a one-hour period. The food vending vehicle operator must provide written evidence that they have permission from an adjoining property owner to use their restroom facilities.

        10.   No vending shall be permitted except after the food vending vehicle has been brought to a complete stop and parked adjacent to the curb in a lawful manner.

        11.   Every food vending vehicle shall have the name, address, and telephone number of the holder of the business license permanently affixed on both the left and right sides of the vehicle. Such information shall be in letters and numerals not less than four inches in height and shall be in contrast to the color of the background upon which the letters are placed.

        12.   No operator of a food vending vehicle shall operate any sound amplification systems or other sound making devices or music systems to advertise, draw attention to, or announce the presence of any such vehicle while such vehicle is moving, stopped, standing, or parked upon any public or private street immediately contiguous to any residentially zoned property within the city.

        13.   No operator of a food vending vehicle shall use any amplified or non-amplified sounds or sound making devices while the vehicle is stopped, parked, or otherwise in a stationary position upon any public or private street immediately contiguous to any residentially-zoned property within the city. Any such sounds emanating from a food vending vehicle shall not be audible to a person with normal hearing for a distance of more than two hundred feet from the vehicle.

        14.   Restocking of a food vending vehicle is prohibited while the vehicle is on any public or private street or alley.

        15.   No food vending vehicle shall attach to or receive any electrical power or other utilities from any public or private property while the vehicle is located on any private or public street or alley.

        16.   No person shall vend from a food vending vehicle which is stopped, parked, or standing on any public street, alley, or highway when any prospective customer is sitting or standing in another vehicle.

        17.   No food vending vehicle shall be parked, stopped, or standing on any public street, alley, or highway when any prospective customer is located in any portion of the street, alley, or highway which is open to vehicular traffic.

        18.   Vending from a food vending vehicle while the vehicle is parked, stopped, or standing on any public or private street, alley, or highway is permitted only when that part of the food vending vehicle open to prospective customers is on the side of the vehicle immediately next to the right side of the public or private street, alley, or highway. Under no circumstances may vending occur from the left side of a food vending vehicle. Notwithstanding the above provisions, no person shall vend to any customer whose location creates a traffic hazard.

        19.   Vending is prohibited from a food vending vehicle that is parked, stopped, or standing on any public street, alley, or highway where the posted speed limit on the public street, alley, or highway is thirty-five miles per hour or greater.

        20.   No food vending vehicle shall install, place, fabricate, or otherwise use jacking, lifting, or static platforms whether they are hydraulic or mechanical, of any sort, within the public right-of-way in order to level the vehicle for operation. (Ord. 1758 § 2, 2015; Ord. 1751 § 3, 2014)

 

10.58.040 Exemptions.
        A.    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to food vending vehicles providing food, meals, or snacks to employees of businesses located on private property and stopped for a period of thirty minutes or less.

        B.     This chapter shall not apply to any city-sponsored event where the operator of the food vending vehicle is operating pursuant to a valid contract with the city. (Ord. 1751 § 3, 2014)

 

10.58.050 Food vending vehicles vending to private businesses—Vending on private property.
        A.    Vending to Private Businesses. Food vending vehicles may park on private property at the request and with the consent of the person who is in legal control of the property, or is performing lawful construction on the property, for sale of food and drink to the employees of the person who is in legal control of the private property or is performing lawful construction on the property in commercial, manufacturing, or planned development zones designated for commercial or manufacturing uses.

        1.     The following restrictions apply:

        a.     No sales shall be made to the general public.

        b.     A mobile vendor vehicle shall not be parked for a period of more than three hours.

        c.     Non-motorized vehicle or cart vendors are required to have a city of La Habra business license with them when vending.

        d.     Nothing in this section shall be construed to excuse food vending vehicles from complying with all the provisions of this chapter.

        B.     Vending on Private Property. Food vending vehicles shall be allowed on private property in conjunction with a special event permit for activities such as filming for movies, a party, fair, or carnival. Food vending vehicles operating on private property must obtain the consent of the person who is in legal control of the property and subject to the provisions of Title 18 of the La Habra Municipal Code. (Ord. 1751 § 3, 2014)

 

10.58.060 Violations.
        A.    Violations of this chapter may be punishable pursuant to Chapters 1.08 and/or 1.20 of this code.

        B.     Any food vending vehicle operated contrary to the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. The city attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or proceeding for the abatement or removal of the vehicle in the manner provided in Title 6 of this code. The city attorney may also apply to any court of competent jurisdiction to restrain and enjoin any person from operating a food vending vehicle contrary to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1751 § 3, 2014)

Title 11 RESERVED

Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Chapter 12.04 USE OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Chapter 12.06 CAMPING AND STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY
Chapter 12.08 CONSTRUCTION OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Chapter 12.12 STREET EXCAVATIONS
Chapter 12.20 PARKWAY TREES AND SHRUBS
Chapter 12.24 HAZARD WARNING DEVICES
Chapter 12.28 PARKS
Chapter 12.29 SKATE PARKS
Chapter 12.32 STREET NAMES
Chapter 12.36 UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
Chapter 12.40 SETBACK SCHEDULE
Chapter 12.44 SHARED MOBILITY DEVICES

Chapter 12.04 USE OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
12.04.010 Drainage onto public property.
        No person, firm or corporation shall discharge or allow to be discharged any sewage, waste material or concentrated flow of water onto the public streets, rights-of-way or public property in the city, except as follows:

        A.    Concentrated flows of stormwater shall be collected on the property and deposited upon a city street via conduit under the sidewalk and through the curb or into a stormwater collector system.

        B.     Water from deck drains and roof drains shall be conducted to the street via a conduit under the sidewalk and through the curb. (Ord. 969 § 1, 1977; Ord. 243 § 1, 1955)

 

12.04.020 Street permit for movement of overweight or wide vehicles, buildings and trucks into or through city—Fee.
        A.    There shall be a street permit, with fees as set by resolution, for the following:

        1.     For moving a building, wide load or overweight load into or through the city;

        2.     For the movement of federally authorized Surface Transportation Assistance Act (STAA) trucks into or through the city.

        B.     There shall be a permit issuance fee, as set by resolution, for each street permit. (Ord. 1297 §§ 1, 2, 1987)

 

12.04.030 Obstructions.
        It is unlawful for any person to place any obstruction of any kind upon any public street, sidewalk or public place in the city, or to authorize, procure or permit any obstruction to be placed therein or thereon, except such as may be required by employees or officers of the city, in the proper discharge of their duties, and unless such person is authorized to place such obstruction, in which event the same may be so maintained, pursuant to such rules and regulations as may be described by the city; provided, that any excavation or obstruction in any street shall between sunset and sunrise of each day be properly guarded with lights so as to safeguard against injury or accident. (Ord. 1502 § 2, 1996)

Chapter 12.06 CAMPING AND STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY
12.06.010 Purposes.
        The public streets and areas within the city should be readily accessible and available to residents and the public at large. The use of these areas for camping purposes or storage of personal property interferes with the rights of others to use the areas for which they were intended. The purpose of this chapter is to:

        A.    Maintain public streets and areas within the city in a clean and accessible condition, and

        B.     Make it unlawful to camp in areas which are not designed for camping. (Ord. 1489 § 1, 1995)

 

12.06.020 Definitions.
        Unless the particular provisions or the context otherwise requires, the definitions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning and application of words and phrases used in this chapter.

        “Camp” means to pitch or occupy camping facilities; to use camp paraphernalia.

        “Camp facilities” means and includes, but is not limited to, tents, huts or temporary shelters.

        “Camp paraphernalia” means and includes, but is not limited to, tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks or noncity designated cooking facilities and similar equipment.

        “Park” means a park, reservation, playground, recreation center or any other area in the city owned and used by the city and devoted to active or passive recreation.

        “Store” means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for safekeeping, to place or leave in a location.

        “Street” means and includes any publicly maintained or owned street, road, highway, alley, sidewalk, parkway, bridge, culvert, drain and any facility or other area in the city necessary for the construction, improvement and maintenance of streets and roads. (Ord. 1489 § 1, 1995)

 

12.06.030 Unlawful camping.
        It is unlawful for any person to camp, occupy camp facilities or use camp paraphernalia in the following areas, except as otherwise provided:

        A.    Any street;

        B.     Any off-street parking lot or structure that is maintained, owned or operated by the city. (Ord. 1489 § 1, 1995)

 

12.06.040 Storage of personal property in public places.
        It is unlawful for any person to store personal property, including camp facilities and camp paraphernalia, in the following areas, except as otherwise provided by resolution of the city council:

        A.    Any park;

        B.     Any street;

        C.     Any off-street parking lot or structure that is maintained, owned or operated by the city. (Ord. 1489 § 1, 1995)

 

12.06.050 Enforcement.
        Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 1.20, the chief of police and his designees shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of this chapter. Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1489 § 1, 1995)

Chapter 12.08 CONSTRUCTION OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Article I. Curbs, Gutters, Driveways and Sidewalks
12.08.010 Sidewalk defined.
        “Sidewalk,” as used in Sections 12.08.010 through 12.08.050, means that space nearest the property line, and which is ordinarily used by pedestrians to walk on. (Ord. 1210, 1983; Ord. 24 § 1, 1925)

 

12.08.020 Permit.
        Any person desiring to construct or reconstruct any sidewalk, curb return, gutter, pavement or driveway, or desiring to cut any such curb, curb return, gutter or sidewalk, in or upon any public street, alley or public place in the city shall, before entering upon such construction, or causing the same to be made, file with the city engineer a written application showing the nature and exact location of the construction proposed to be made, and the name of the person who shall perform the same. The city engineer shall thereupon issue a permit authorizing the construction of such work or improvement, subject to the same being located and constructed in conformity with the provisions of Sections 12.08.010 through 12.08.050, ordinances, rules, regulations and specifications of the city, the requirements of Chapter 12.12, and upon there having been paid to the city the required fees as may be established from time to time. (Ord. 1210, 1983; Ord. 1093, 1979; Ord. 24 § 2, 1925)

 

12.08.030 Inspection.
        It is unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation to construct or have constructed any sidewalk, curb, curb return, gutter or driveway in or upon any public street, alley or public place in the city, as provided in Section 12.08.020, unless the same is inspected during the progress of such construction by the city engineer, or his/her agent or representative. For the purpose of providing such inspection, the person, firm, association or corporation desiring to make such inspection shall notify the city engineer of his, her or its desire for such inspection not less than forty-eight hours in advance of the time fixed for the commencement of such work. (Ord. 1210, 1983; Ord. 24 § 2, 1925)

 

12.08.040 Sidewalk standards.
        All sidewalks constructed in the city after the adoption of the ordinance codified in Sections 12.08.010 through 12.08.050, and any sidewalks reconstructed, shall be not less than four feet in width, and shall be located in the street immediately adjacent to and measured from the property line of the property adjoining the side of the street in which the sidewalk is to be located. The sidewalk shall be constructed in conformity with specifications from time to time adopted and in force in the city, relating to and regulating the construction of sidewalks. (Ord. 1210, 1983; Ord. 24 § 1, 1925)

 

12.08.050 Parking width.
        The parking width shall be as follows:

        A.    In streets not over forty feet in width, no parking shall be had, the sidewalk and curb thereon to be joined.

        B.     In streets of over forty feet in width, there shall be a parking space between the four-foot space required in Section 12.08.040 for sidewalk and the curb, which curb shall be located ten feet from the property line, measurement to be taken from the inside face of the curb; provided, however, that the requirements of this subsection shall not prohibit the construction of sidewalk, pursuant to specifications and requirements of the city, between the outside sidewalk line and the curbline, if the property owner so desires. (Ord. 1210, 1983; Ord. 24 § 1, 1925)

 

Article II. Street Paving and Improvements
12.08.060 Right-of-way and easement dedication—Improvement required.
        A.    Any owner, lessee or agent constructing or causing to be constructed any paved parking area, building or dwelling or any additions thereto, shall also dedicate rights-of-way and easements and construct or cause to be constructed concrete curbs, gutters and sidewalks and street paving to the centerline of the street or from a concrete gutter to existing paving along all street frontages adjoining the lot or parcel on which the paved parking area, building, dwelling or addition thereto is to be constructed. All required improvements shall be installed at locations and grades designated by the city and shall be in accordance with “La Habra Standard Construction Details.” The street width shall be in accordance with the Master Plan of Arterial Highways, as amended, and Section 17.36.010.

        B.     Curbs, gutters, sidewalks and street paving already existing, and approved by the city engineer for continued use, need not be replaced. (Ord. 799 § 1, 1971; Ord. 750 § 1, 1969; Ord. 652 § 1, 1965; Ord. 543 § 1, 1962; Ord. 512 § 1, 1961; Ord. 379 § 2, 1958)

 

12.08.070 Failure to complete.
        The building official shall deny final public utility connections to any building or dwelling and the certificate of occupancy until the concrete curbs, gutters and sidewalks required under Sections 12.08.060 through 12.08.090 exist or are constructed or their construction is guaranteed to the satisfaction of the city council. (Ord. 1210, 1983; Ord. 379 § 3, 1958)

 

12.08.080 Variance.
        A.    Upon written application made to the city council, the city council may waive by resolution the effect of Sections 12.08.060 through 12.08.090 upon the applicant, when the city council finds that any one of the conditions set out in subsection B of this section exists. The decision of the council to approve or deny the application shall be final.

        B.     The conditions provided for in subsection A of this section are as follows:

        1.     The city council determines that because of the location of the property, the terrain or location of the property, or other similar reasons, the construction of the curbs, gutters and sidewalks would be impractical or unnecessary.

        2.     The city council determines that because of lack of adequate data in regard to grades, plans or surveys, the construction of the curbs, gutters and sidewalks should be waived.

        3.     The city council determines that construction of the curbs, gutters and sidewalks is included in a budgeted city project or an approved assessment district. (Ord. 379 § 4, 1958)

 

12.08.090 Nuisance.
        Any lot, street, alley or other feature made the subject of Sections 12.08.060 through 12.08.090 which is maintained contrary to these provisions constitutes a public nuisance. In addition, this article may be enforced by an applicable civil process. (Ord. 379 § 5, 1958)

Chapter 12.12 STREET EXCAVATIONS
12.12.010 Permit and deposits required.
        It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, company or association, to dig, cut into or make any excavation or opening in any public street, avenue, alley or other public place in the city, without first obtaining from the city engineer a permit so to do, and making the deposits with the city as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1210, 1983; Ord. 23 § 1, 1925)

 

12.12.020 Application for permit.
        Any person, firm, association, company or corporation desiring to make any excavations in the streets, alleys, avenues or other public places of the city shall file a written application with the city engineer for a permit to do the work, and with that written application shall file and furnish to the city engineer a map or drawing, showing the exact location of the excavations proposed to be made with reference to the street lines and corners of the property abutting the streets in which such excavation is to be made, together with the depth, length and width of such excavation. The application shall also show the use to which the portion of the street concerned is proposed to be put, and the location as to depth of any pipelines, conduits or other appliances to be placed therein. (Ord. 1210, 1983; Ord. 32 § 1, 1926; Ord. 23 § 2, 1925)

 

12.12.030 Deposit.
        The city engineer shall not issue any permit under this chapter until the person filing the application has deposited with the city treasurer such sums as may be required by the city to cover inspection fees and replacement costs. Deposit for replacement costs shall be as specified in a resolution adopted by the city council from time to time. The deposit shall be refunded six months after acceptance of and successful performance of the replacement. (Ord. 1210, 1983; Ord. 1093, 1979; Ord. 32 § 1, 1926; Ord. 23 § 2, 1925)

 

12.12.040 Permit expiration.
        A.    A street excavation permit shall expire within six months from the date application has been approved.

 

        B.     A street excavation permit shall become null and void if the work authorized thereon is not commenced within sixty days from the date application is approved or if such work is suspended or abandoned at any time during construction for a period of sixty days. (Ord. 1093, 1979)

 

12.12.050 Permit extension.
        The permittee may upon written request and payment of a fee as stipulated in a resolution duly passed by the city council obtain an extension of time not to exceed six months. The application for an extension of time shall be made prior to the expiration date. (Ord. 1093, 1979)

 

12.12.060 Failure to comply.
        If any person or contractor fails to comply with the requirements of the permit, the city code and/or the specifications of the city, the permit shall be suspended and the city council may deny issuance of further permits for a period of twelve months from the date of the suspension. (Ord. 1093, 1979)

 

12.12.070 Replacement.
        The permittee shall make replacement within sixty days from the date of issuance of the permit. Should the permittee fail to make replacement or repairs within the time specified, the city shall make or cause replacement to be made. Should the city make or cause the replacement to be made the entire deposit shall be forfeited to the city and no refund shall be made to the permittee. (Ord. 1093, 1979)

 

12.12.080 Temporary repair.
        The permittee shall immediately after backfill has been placed or at the end of each workday, whichever comes first, place temporary paving on all street cuts. Temporary paving shall be maintained in good order until final paving has been placed. Should the permittee fail to maintain the temporary paving in good order the city shall perform the maintenance or cause it to be performed. The cost incurred by the city shall be assessed to the permittee at two and one-half times the cost to the city. Further work specified in the permit shall be suspended until all costs to the city have been paid. (Ord. 1093, 1979)

 

12.12.090 Inspection.
        The city engineer shall inspect the work of making the excavation and shall require any person, firm, association, company or corporation making the same, or any of them, to repair the street, alley, avenue or other public place in the city in as good condition as the same was in before the excavation was made, and in case the same is not so replaced or repaired, the city engineer shall replace or repair the same and shall de-duct the cost of replacing or repairing the same or any part thereof from the amount of money deposited as required in this chapter. (Ord. 1210, 1983; Ord. 23 § 3, 1925)

 

12.12.100 Depth of pipe and conduit.
        Any person, firm, association, company or corporation who is granted a permit to excavate in, under or upon any street, alley, avenue or other public place in the city, and any person, firm, association, company or corporation who lays any pipe or conduit in or under any public street, alley, avenue or other public place in the city shall lay the same at a depth as follows:

        A.    In a public street, alley or avenue, not less than two feet six inches measured from the top of the pipe, conduit or wire laid to the finished surface of the street;

        B.     In an arterial highway as shown on the master plan of arterial highways, not less than three feet measured from the top of the pipe, conduit or wire laid to the finished surface of the street;

        C.     In a parkway or easement, not less than two feet measured from the top of the pipe, conduit or wire laid to the natural surface of the ground. (Ord. 1210, 1983; Ord. 23 § 5, 1925)

Chapter 12.20 PARKWAY TREES AND SHRUBS
12.20.010 Definitions.
        As used in this chapter:

        “Groundcover” means and includes grass, turf or perennial plants that normally grow in a prostrate manner so as to conceal the ground surface and do not exceed eight inches in height.

        “Maintenance” or “maintain” means and includes pruning, drop crotching, bracing, staking, treating for disease or injuries. Use of the term shall not include the watering or fertilizing of such trees.

        “Official tree” means and includes those trees designated and determined by the parkway maintenance division supervisor to be the best suited to plant along city streets because of their desirable characteristics of growth and beauty with reference to their crown, root structure, disease susceptibilities and adaptability to local climatic, soil and street conditions. A list of official trees will be available to the public at the foreman’s office during normal working hours.

        “Parkway maintenance division foreman” means the person having control and management of street tree maintenance operations for the city or the incumbent’s designated representative.

        “Shrub” means and includes woody vegetation or woody plant three feet or more in height having multiple stems and bearing foliage from the ground level up.

        “Undesirable tree” means and includes those trees planted along city streets prior to the official tree list and which do not qualify as official trees because of certain undesirable characteristics of growth with reference to their crowns, root structure, disease susceptibilities and are not adaptable to local climatic, soil or street conditions. (Ord. 1003, 1977)

 

12.20.020 Permission to plant, prune or remove trees.
        Any person desiring permission to plant, cut down, trim, prune, remove or in any way interfere with the natural growth of any tree planted along city streets or on other city property shall make a formal request in writing to the parkway maintenance division supervisor for permission therefor. The supervisor may require all or any part of such work so approved to be performed under the supervision of city parkway maintenance personnel. (Ord. 1003, 1977)

 

12.20.030 Location of trees.
        A.    The parkway maintenance division foreman shall regulate and control the planting and removal of any and all trees planted along any city street. The supervisor shall designate the species, kind, number, spacing and method of planting. No tree shall be planted closer than fifty feet to a parkway tree, closer than twenty feet to utility poles or light standards, closer than twenty feet from any driveway or approach or closer than ten feet from any gas meter, water meter or fire hydrant.

        B.     No tree shall be planted in a parkway which is less than thirty inches in width between the sidewalk and curb, except upon approval by division supervisor; provided, that species of designated official trees may be planted in other parkways not less than twenty-four inches in width between the sidewalk and curb. (Ord. 1003, 1977)

 

12.20.040 Tree maintenance responsibility—Clearance.
        A.    The parkway maintenance division foreman will, except for watering and fertilizing, direct and assume responsibility for maintenance, planting and removal of all official trees planted along city streets.

        B.     Property owners shall assume full responsibility for watering and fertilizing parkway trees immediately adjacent to their respective properties along city streets as needed to ensure tree survival.

        C.     Trees planted along city street shall be pruned to give a clearance of not less than twelve feet over sidewalks and not less than sixteen feet over streets as the size of the tree permits. (Ord. 1003, 1977)

 

12.20.050 Qualification to maintain trees.
        No person shall perform any maintenance, except for watering and fertilizing, upon any tree planted along a city street, or on any other city property, unless the person is determined to be qualified and whose actions are approved by the division supervisor. (Ord. 1003, 1977)

 

12.20.060 Impeding water to trees.
        No person shall place, or cause to be placed, any stone, cement or other substance about any tree planted along any street, or on city-owned property, which impedes the free entrance of water or aid to the roots, without leaving an open space of ground around the trunk of not less than eighteen inches. (Ord. 1003, 1977)

 

12.20.070 Attachments to trees—Harmful substances.
        A.    No person shall deface, mutilate or attach or place any rope, wire, sign, poster, handbill or other thing to or on any tree growing along any city street or public place.

        B.     No person shall allow any brine, oil, liquid dye, salt or other substances injurious or harmful to plant life to lie, leak, flow, drip into or onto, or to come into contact with the tree or the soil about the base of such plant. (Ord. 1003, 1977)

 

12.20.080 Plantings and groundcover.
        A.    No person shall plant, or cause to be planted, any tree, shrub, plant or groundcover between the sidewalk and curb, except as provided in this part.

        B.     Grass, turf or other groundcover planting are permitted, provided that such plantings shall not be allowed to attach themselves to or ascend the trunk of any tree.

        C.     Planting, cutting, mowing, watering, fertilizing and all other maintenance of grass, turf or other groundcovers in such parkways will be performed by the adjacent property owner.

        D.    Violation of this section shall cause notice to be served upon adjacent property owner requesting correction within ten days. Failure to comply will grant authority to the parkway maintenance division to provide for, and remove the violation.

        E.     All costs incurred by the division in the correction of such violation shall be billed to the adjacent property owner. (Ord. 1003, 1977)

 

12.20.090 Protection of trees during construction.
        In the erection, alteration, construction or repairing of any building or structure, the owner thereof shall place or cause to be placed barriers around all nearby trees located along the street, alley or other public place as shall effectively prevent injury to them. (Ord. 1003, 1977)

 

12.20.100 Nuisances.
        A.    Any tree, shrub or groundcover, growing or standing on private property in such a manner that any portion thereof interferes with any public street, sidewalk, alley or restricts the flow of traffic or visibility of such street, sidewalk, alley or intersection thereof to any person or persons lawfully using such streets, sidewalks, alleys or intersections shall constitute a public nuisance.

        B.     The parkway maintenance division foremen shall cause notice to be served upon such property owner directing that such public nuisance be abated within ten days. If such public nuisance is not corrected within ten days after notice is served, the parkway maintenance division will abate or cause to be abated by trimming, pruning, cutting or removing all or such portion of tree, shrub or plant as may be necessary to eliminate such public nuisance. All costs incurred in such work shall be billed to the property owner. (Ord. 1003, 1977)

 

12.20.110 Interference with maintenance.
        No person shall prevent, delay or interfere with the parkway maintenance division personnel in the performance of their duties. (Ord. 1003, 1977)

 

12.20.120 Appeals.
        Any person aggrieved by any determination exercised by this division may appeal such action to the division supervisor, supervisor, department head, city manager or city council. (Ord. 1003, 1977)

Chapter 12.24 HAZARD WARNING DEVICES
12.24.010 State manual adopted.
        The current California Department of Transportation publication, “Manual of Warning Signs, Lights and Devices for Use in Performance of Work upon Highways,” is adopted as the “City of La Habra Manual of Warning Signs and Devices,” by reference. (Ord. 904 § 2, 1974)

Chapter 12.28 PARKS
12.28.010 Hours.
        A.    It is unlawful for any person to wilfully enter or be present in any city-owned public park or recreation facility between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m.; provided, that the city council may by resolution duly approved and adopted modify the closing hours of any city-owned public park or recreation facility to any time between sunset and ten a.m.; and provided further, that:

        1.     Recreational activities conducted by the community services department are exempt; and

        2.     Duly authorized permits obtained from the community services department will allow community organizations and community groups to conduct or continue activities after the curfew. City council approval shall be required of all initial fundraising events or such other activities that may be referred to the council by the director of recreation.

        B.     The hours during which it is unlawful for any person to enter or be present in any city-owned public park or recreation facility, except as provided in this section, shall be posted in each such facility or park. (Ord. 859 § 1, 1973)

 

12.28.020 Glass—Sharp or pointed objects.
        No person shall place, throw, leave, keep or maintain any bottle, glass, crockery, sharp or pointed article or thing in such a manner that any person in a park is or may be cut or in any way injured thereby. (Ord. 859 § 1, 1973)

 

12.28.030 Littering.
        No person shall throw, place or dispose of any garbage, waste paper, combustible refuse or can in any place in a park other than into a garbage can, box or other receptacle maintained therein for that purpose. (Ord. 859 § 1, 1973)

 

12.28.040 Throwing objects.
        No person shall throw any object with the intent to cause bodily harm. (Ord. 859 § 1, 1973)

 

12.28.050 Discharging weapons.
        No person shall discharge or shoot any gun, slingshot, bow and arrow or any similar device except at a range or place designated for such purpose by the city. (Ord. 859 § 1, 1973)

 

12.28.060 Vandalism—Fires.
        No person other than a duly authorized park employee in the performance of his or her duties shall:

        A.    Cut, break or disturb any monument, sign, fence, bench, structure, apparatus, equipment or property in a park, or any portion thereof; or

        B.     Mark or place thereon or on any portion thereof, any mark, writing or printing; or

        C.     Attach thereto any sign, card, display or any similar device; or

        D.    Dig, remove, destroy, injure, mutilate or cut any tree, plant, shrub, bloom or flower or any portion thereof growing in any park; or

        E.     Remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand or gravel from any park; or

        F.     Light any fire unless maintained in a stove, fire ring or place provided for that purpose. (Ord. 859 § 1, 1973)

 

12.28.070 Animals.
        A.    No person shall bring into any school ground, public park or playground any horse, cattle, mule, goat, sheep or swine, unless pursuant to lawful permit issued by the community services department.

        B.     No person shall bring into any school ground, public park or playground any dog, except as may be permitted by the provisions of Section 6.20.140 of this code. (Ord. 1795 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1598 § 2, 2001)

 

12.28.080 Vehicles and bicycles.
        A.    No person shall bring into or operate in any park any motor vehicle; e.g., car, truck, jeep, motorcycle, minibike. City employees in the performance of official duties connected with and a part of their employment shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.

        B.     Bicycles shall be parked in stands provided at the perimeter of the parks, except that bicycles may be operated in bicycle paths and areas approved by the city council or pursuant to an authorized permit issued by the community services department. (Ord. 859 § 1, 1973)

 

12.28.090 Disturbing the peace.
        No person shall disturb the peace and quiet of any park by:

        A.    Any unduly loud or unusual noise; or

        B.     Tooting, blowing or sounding any automobile siren, horn, signal or noise-making device; or

        C.     Any tumultuous conduct; or

        D.    Playing or sounding any radio, tape deck or musical instrument in a loud or unusual manner. (Ord. 859 § 1, 1973)

 

12.28.100 Sound amplifying equipment.
        A.    No person shall use any electric amplifying equipment or other sound amplifying equipment in any park unless a permit therefor has been issued.

        B.     No sound amplifying system shall be used in any park for any purpose unless the permit, in addition to authorizing sound amplifying equipment, authorizes the exclusive use of the facility for the group for which the permit is obtained and in no event shall such amplifying equipment be used in such a manner as to create a loud or raucous noise. (Ord. 859 § 1, 1973)

 

12.28.110 Commercial solicitation and distribution.
        No person shall solicit in any manner or for any purpose to sell or offer for sale any goods, wares or merchandise, or distribute or pass out any commercial handbill, advertising matter or literature therein.

        A.    Literature to promote the program of the community services department is exempt.

        B.     Any concession operating under lease granted by the city council is exempt.

        C.     Any athletic team may solicit voluntary contributions from the spectators attending such game when such action is found by the community services department to be consistent with the policies of the department and the city. (Ord. 859 § 1, 1973)

 

12.28.120 Overnight camping.
        No person shall camp overnight in any park without a permit. Permits will be authorized by the community services department to any recognized youth group of a character-building nature, permitting its members, as a group, to camp overnight at a designated facility. The members of such groups will be supervised during such camping by an adequate number of responsible adults. Upon granting such permit, the members of the youth group and its adult supervisors may camp at the time, location and under the conditions specified in the permit. (Ord. 859 § 1, 1973)

 

12.28.130 Golfing.
        No person shall play or practice golf or use golf clubs in any area of a park not designated for such use. (Ord. 859 § 1, 1973)

 

12.28.140 Smoking prohibited.
        A.    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to:

        1.     Protect the public health, safety and general welfare by prohibiting smoking in recreational areas under circumstances where other persons will be exposed to secondhand smoke;

        2.     Assure a cleaner and more hygienic environment for the city, its residents, and its natural resources;

        3.     Strike a reasonable balance between the interests of persons who smoke and the interests of nonsmokers, including children, to breathe smoke-free air, recognizing the threat to public health and the environment which smoking causes;

        4.     Provide for the public health, safety, and welfare by discouraging the inherently dangerous behavior of smoking around non-tobacco users, by protecting children from exposure to smoking where they live and play; and by protecting the public from nonconsensual exposure to secondhand smoke; and

        5.     Supplement applicable state and federal laws pertaining to smoking and not to duplicate, contradict, or frustrate such laws. This chapter shall be construed consistently with that intention.

        B.     Definitions. Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this chapter:

        1.     “City park” means all city-owned or city-leased property designated as a city park, which area includes the parking lot for the city park.

        2.     “Smoke,” “vape,” “smoking” or “vaping” means and includes any of the following: (a) the direct burning or indirect heating of any cigar, cigarette, pipe, electronic cigarette, or any similar kind of smoking equipment or article, using any form of tobacco, plant product including marijuana, or other combustible substance in any form; or (b) the holding or carrying of a lighted or operated cigar, cigarette, pipe, electronic cigarette, or any other lighted smoking equipment or device; or (c) emitting or exhaling the smoke directly from a cigar, cigarette, pipe, electronic cigarette, or any other lighted smoking equipment or device. “Smoke” also means the gaseous or vaporous products or particles created by the use of a lighted or operated pipe, cigar, cigarette, electronic cigarette, or other kind of smoking equipment or article.

        C.     Prohibition.

        1.     It is unlawful for any person at any time to smoke in any of the following places:

        a.     City parks;

        b.     City park parking lots;

        c.     Within twenty feet of any city park;

        d.     Within twenty feet of any city park parking lot;

        e.     Within twenty-five feet of any playground or tot-lot sandbox area.

        2.     No person shall intimidate, threaten any reprisal, or effect any reprisal, for the purpose of retaliating against another person who seeks to obtain compliance with this section.

 

        D.    Posting of Signs Required. Conspicuous signs that contain all capital lettering at least one inch in height on a contrasting background stating this prohibition shall be posted in all public parks. (Ord. 1816 § 2, 2020)

Chapter 12.29 SKATE PARKS
12.29.010 Purpose and Intent.
        The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public peace, health, safety and general welfare of persons in the city by regulating the activity of skateboarding on public property which is accessible to the general public and to establish a skate park for people of all ages to skateboard and roller skate. (Ord. 1608 § 1, 2002)

 

12.29.020 Definitions.
        “Safety equipment” shall mean a helmet, elbow pads, and kneepads.

        “Skateboard” shall mean all wheeled objects, coasters, toys, conveyances, or similar devices used for transportation or sport which are propelled by human power and which are not classified as bicycles or two-wheel scooters.

        “Skate park” shall mean any public facility that is designed for, and maintained by the city for the purpose of recreational skate use. Skate park does not include any adjacent area that is part of a public park, public right-of-way, or other public area that is specifically designed and used for skateboarding or roller skating activities.

        “Roller skates” shall mean any footwear or device which may be attached to the foot or footwear to which wheels are attached and such wheels may be used by the wearer for moving or propulsion, including, but not limited to, in-line skates commonly known as roller blades. (Ord. 1608 § 1, 2002)

 

12.29.030 Skate parks.
        The city council may designate certain areas as a skate park. They will be designated by city council resolution and shall be posted with all signs currently required by the California Health and Safety Code Section 115800 et seq., or as such statutes may be amended.

        All persons using a skate park are required to wear safety equipment. Failure to wear safety equipment shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Section 12.29.050.

        All skate parks shall have signs posted stating that all persons using the skate park shall wear safety equipment and that failure to do so may result in the issuance of a citation pursuant to Section 12.29.050 of this code.

        The hours of operation of all skate parks shall be determined by the city council by resolution and shall be posted at such skate park.

        The city council authorizes the director of community services and the director of public works to change the rules and regulations of the skate park at any time for the daily administration of the park. (Ord. 1608 § 1, 2002)

 

12.29.040 Skate park regulations.
        It is unlawful for any person to:

        A.    Enter, remain in or use any skate park unless that person is wearing safety equipment while skating;

        B.     Use any skate park for any activity other than skateboarding, in-line skating or roller skating unless otherwise authorized by a permit issued by the parks or community services directors;

        C.     Consume any alcoholic beverage or be in possession of any open container of alcoholic beverage in any skate park; except that this provision does not apply to any act specifically prohibited or permitted by state law and thereby preempted from local regulation;

        D.    Skate, run, stand on, or jump from, or otherwise employ any exterior wall or fence surface of any skate park;

        E.     Use or be upon any skate park while wearing any audio headset;

        F.     Introduce, employ or use any unauthorized equipment, obstacle or apparatus not specifically permitted by this chapter within any skate park;

        G.    Enter or remain in any skate park with any food or beverage;

        H.    Play amplified music in any skate park, or on any public property adjoining any publicly-owned or publicly-operated skate park;

        I.      Use of profanity in any skate park;

        J.      Graffiti or tagging in any skate park;

        K.    Any behavior which is destructive to the skate park, harmful to others, or which interferes with other people’s use of the skate park. (Ord. 1608 § 1, 2002)

 

12.29.050 Penalty for violations.
        A violation of this chapter or any provisions thereof is punishable as provided in Section 12.29.050 of this code as follows:

        A.    Violations of this provision is an infraction punishable by:

        1.     A fine not exceeding fifty dollars for the first violation;

        2.     A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for the second violation of the same chapter within one year of a first violation;

        3.     A fine not exceeding one hundred and seventy-five dollars for each additional violation of the same chapter within one year of a first violation.

        B.     Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction and punishable as such, notwithstanding the fact that at the discretion of the city or the district attorney, the violation may be filed as a misdemeanor.

        C.     Repeat violators of the park rules may be prohibited from using the facility.

        D.    Violations of any provisions of this chapter shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil process by means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances. (Ord. 1608 § 1, 2002)

Chapter 12.32 STREET NAMES
12.32.010 Directional designations.
        A.    All streets within the city as appearing, described and named in the maps and profiles of tracts recorded in the office of the county recorder are declared to be public highways of and within the city, and the names of such highways and public streets as thereon shown and named shall be the same as set forth in those maps and profiles of tracts; except, that:

        1.     To and as a part of the name of each such street or avenue lying east of Euclid Street (formerly Hiatt Street) shall be affixed the prefix “East”;

        2.     To the portion of such street lying west of Euclid Street (formerly Hiatt Street) shall be affixed the prefix “West”;

        3.     As a part of the name of the street or avenue lying south of La Habra Boulevard (formerly Central Avenue) shall be affixed thereto the prefix “South”; and

        4.     To the portion of such street lying north of La Habra Boulevard (formerly Central Avenue) shall have affixed thereto the prefix “North.”

        B.     The portion of highway comprising the intersection of Euclid Street and La Habra Boulevard shall be named East La Habra Boulevard east of the centerline of Euclid Street, extended across La Habra Boulevard and that portion west of the centerline shall be designated West La Habra Boulevard.

        C.     All streets to be opened after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section shall bear like prefixes of “East,” “West,” “South” or “North,” respectively, as those set out in this section, from the points designated in this section. (Ord. 1210, 1983)

Chapter 12.36 UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
Article I. Districts
12.36.010 Definitions
        Whenever in Sections 12.36.010 through 12.36.120 the words or phrases defined in this section are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions:

        A.    “Commission” means the California Public Utilities Commission.

        B.     “Underground utility district” or “district” means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wire and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 12.36.040.

        C.     “Person” means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships and their agents and employees.

        D.    “Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures” means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, cross arms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service.

        E.     “Utility” includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. (Ord. 771 § 2, 1970; Ord. 747, 1968)

 

12.36.020 Hearing on establishment—Notice.
        A.    The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service.

        B.     The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least fifteen days prior to the date of such hearings.

        C.     Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 1209, 1983; Ord. 771 § 2, 1970; Ord. 747, 1968)

 

12.36.030 Report of city engineer.
        Prior to holding such public hearing, as provided in Section 12.36.020, the city engineer shall consult with all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for submission at the hearing containing, among other information, the extent of such utilities’ participation and the estimate of the total costs to the city and affected property owners. Such report shall also contain an estimate of the time required to complete such underground installation and removal of overhead facilities. (Ord. 1209, 1983; Ord. 771 § 2, 1970; Ord. 747, 1968)

 

12.36.040 Designation by resolution.
        If after any public hearing conducted as provided in Section 12.36.020 the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installations within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation of facilities. Such resolution shall include a description of the area composing such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (Ord. 771 § 2, 1970; Ord. 747, 1968)

 

12.36.050 Unlawful noncompliance.
        Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 12.36.040, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires as associated overhead structures in the district after the date when the overhead facilities are required to be removed by the resolution, except as the overhead facilities are required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 12.36.100, and for such reasonable time required to remove the facilities after the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in Sections 12.36.010 through 12.36.120.(Ord. 771 § 2, 1970; Ord. 747, 1968)

 

12.36.060 Emergency overhead facilities—Unusual circumstances.
        A.    Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 12.36.010 through 12.36.120, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten days, without authority of the city council in order to provide emergency service.

        B.     The city engineer may grant special permission, on such terms as the engineer deems appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. (Ord. 1209, 1983; Ord. 771 § 2, 1970; Ord. 747, 1968)

 

12.36.070 Exempted facilities.
        Sections 12.36.010 through 12.36.120 and any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.36.040 shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply to the following types of facilities:

        A.    Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer;

        B.     Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;

        C.     Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connection to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and overhead structures are not prohibited;

        D.    Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred volts;

        E.     Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from the location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street;

        F.     Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures used by a utility for furnishing communication services;

        G.    Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts;

        H.    Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. (Ord. 1209, 1983; Ord. 771 § 2, 1970; Ord. 747, 1968)

 

12.36.080 Notice to comply.
        A.    Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.36.040, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by the resolution or the adoption thereof. The city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location subject to the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission.

        B.     Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.36.040, together with a copy of Sections 12.36.010 through 12.36.120, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. (Ord. 771 § 2, 1970; Ord. 747, 1968)

 

12.36.090 Responsibility of utility companies.
        If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.36.040, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the Commission. (Ord. 771 § 2, 1970; Ord. 747, 1968)

 

12.36.100 Responsibility of property owners.
        A.    Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in Section 12.36.0’90 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served, all in accordance with the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission.

        B.     In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting the property does not comply with the provisions of subsection A of this section within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 12.36.040, the city engineer shall post written notice on the property being served and thirty days thereafter may authorize the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property. (Ord. 1209, 1983; Ord. 771 § 2, 1970; Ord. 747, 1968)

 

12.36.110 Responsibility of city.
        The city shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed under Sections 12.36.010 through 12.36.120 in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 12.36.040. (Ord. 771 § 2, 1970; Ord. 747, 1968)

 

12.36.120 Extension for compliance.
        In the event that any act required by Sections 12.36.010 through 12.36.120 or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.36.040 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. (Ord. 771 § 2, 1970; Ord. 747, 1968)

 

Article II. Service Lines After Construction or Conversion
12.36.130 Requirement at subdivision, reversion or conversion.
        Pursuant to the requirements of Sections 12.36.130 through 12.36.180, whenever any tentative tract or parcel maps or map for the reversion of lots to acreage is filed or whenever a building permit is requested for the development or redevelopment of new or relocated buildings or structures, or whenever a residential building or use is converted to any purpose or use other than that which existed at the time of conversion, then all electrical, telephone, community antenna television and similar service wires or cables, which provide direct service to the property being developed shall, within the exterior boundary lines of such property and the off-site service line from the point of source, be installed underground. (Ord. 1125, 1980; Ord. 771 § 4, 1970)

 

12.36.140 Requirement at addition or electrical renovation.
        Whenever a use or building permit is requested for the addition of floor space equal to or in excess of two hundred square feet is added to an existing building or structure in any zone except R-1, or whenever a new electrical service is installed in an existing building in any zone except R-1, then all electrical, telephone, community antenna television and similar service wires or cables which provide direct service to the property being developed shall, within the exterior boundary lines of such property, be installed underground. (Ord. 1125, 1980; Ord. 771 § 4, 1970)

 

12.36.150 Aboveground appurtenances.
        For the purposes of Sections 12.36.130 through 12.36.180, appurtenances and associated equipment such as, but not limited to, surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal bases and meter cabinets, may be placed aboveground. (Ord. 1125, 1980; Ord. 771 § 4, 1970)

 

12.36.160 Compliance.
        The developer or owner is responsible for complying with the requirements of Sections 12.36.130 through 12.36.180 and shall provide all necessary facilities on their premises so as to receive such services from the supplying utility or utilities subject to the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the State Public Utilities Commission. (Ord. 1125, 1980; Ord. 771 § 4, 1970)

 

12.36.170 Waiver, modification or delay.
        Where practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships inconsistent with the purposes of Sections 12.36.130 through 12.36.180 result from their literal interpretation or enforcement, the planning commission may waive, modify or delay the application of any undergrounding requirement upon written request by a building site owner. Such request shall be filed with the planning commission and shall contain any and all facts which are offered in support. (Ord. 1125, 1980; Ord. 771 § 4, 1970)

 

12.36.180 Deposit for delayed compliance.
        If the planning commission’s action is to delay the installation of required underground utilities as provided in Section 12.36.170, it may require the building site owner to file with the city a cash deposit, and record a covenant sufficient to provide for the future installation of the underground features which are to be delayed. The amount of the cash deposit shall be determined by the building director. (Ord. 1125, 1980; Ord. 771 § 4, 1970)

Chapter 12.40 SETBACK SCHEDULE
12.40.010 Designated.
        No building or improvement of any kind shall be constructed on either side of the arterial highways as they exist within the city as of or after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, closer to the centerline of those arterial highways than shown on the following schedule:

 

Setback Schedule

 

Highway

Setback
(feet)

Beach Boulevard: south of Whittier Boulevard:

 

West side

30

East side

112

Euclid Street: Whittier Boulevard to Imperial Highway

40

Euclid Street: Imperial Highway to south city limit

50

Harbor Boulevard: north city limit to Lambert Road

50

Harbor Boulevard: Lambert Road to south city limit

60

Idaho Street: Whittier Boulevard to south city limit

40

Imperial Highway:

 

North side

48

South side

52

La Habra Boulevard: Harbor Boulevard to west city limit

40

La Habra Boulevard: Harbor Boulevard to east city limit

50

Lambert Road: Harbor Boulevard to west city limit

50

Lambert Road: Harbor Boulevard to east city limit

60

Macy Street: Whittier Boulevard to Russell Street

40

Palm Street: Lambert Road to Whittier Boulevard

40

Russell Street: Valley Home Avenue to Macy Street

40

Whittier Boulevard:

 

Valley Home Avenue to Harbor Boulevard

50

Harbor Boulevard to east city limit

40

 

(Ord. 1422 § 1, 1992; Ord. 464 § 1, 1960; Ord. 434 § 1, 1960)

 

12.40.020 Zoning requirements.
        In addition to the setbacks required by the schedule set out in Section 12.40.010, it shall also be required that any buildings or improvement shall set back the normal required front or side yard as provided under Title 18 of this code. (Ord. 434 § 2, 1960)

Chapter 12.44 SHARED MOBILITY DEVICES
12.44.010 Purpose.
        The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit shared mobility devices from being placed in the public right-of-way or on public property, operated in the public right-of-way or on public property, or offered for use anywhere in the city, so as to allow for adequate pedestrian traffic flow and to promote public safety. (Ord. 1808 § 2, 2019)

12.44.020 Definition.
        For purposes of this chapter, “shared mobility device” means any wheeled device, other than an automobile or motorcycle, that is powered by a motor; is accessed via an on-demand portal, whether a smartphone application, membership card, or similar method; is operated by a private entity that owns, manages, and maintains devices for shared use by members of the public; and is available to members of the public in unstaffed, self-service locations, except for those locations which are designated by the city. (Ord. 1808 § 2, 2019)

 

12.44.030 General requirements.
        A.    It is unlawful to park, leave standing, leave lying, abandon, or otherwise place a shared mobility device in a public right-of-way or on public property anywhere within the city.

        B.     It is unlawful to operate a shared mobility device in a public right-of-way or on public property anywhere within the city.

        C.     It is unlawful to provide or offer for use a shared mobility device anywhere within the city. (Ord. 1808 § 2, 2019)

 

12.44.040 Violations.
        Violations of this chapter are punishable as set forth in Chapters 1.08 and 1.20 of this code. (Ord. 1808 § 2, 2019)

Title 13 PUBLIC SERVICES
Chapter 13.04 SEWER USE AND CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 13.08 SEWER CAPACITY CHARGES
Chapter 13.10 SEWER MAINTENANCE, REPAIR, DESIGN AND RESTRICTIONS OF DEPOSIT INTO SEWERS
Chapter 13.11 FATS, OILS AND GREASE CONTROL REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
Chapter 13.12 SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
Chapter 13.16 PAYMENT FOR WATER AND SEWER LINES
Chapter 13.20 TEMPORARY SANITARY FACILITIES
Chapter 13.24 WATER QUALITY ORDINANCE
Chapter 13.28 WELLS
Chapter 13.30 WELLS STANDARDS
Chapter 13.31 GROUNDWATER EXTRACTION AND EXPORTATION
Chapter 13.32 USE OF CITY WATER—DOMESTIC WATER FACILITY CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 13.36 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 13.40 WATER CONSERVATION AND WATER SUPPLY SHORTAGE PROGRAM

Chapter 13.04 SEWER USE AND CONSTRUCTION
13.04.010 Definitions.
        The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, have the following meaning:

        A.    “Building” means a structure entirely separated from any other structure by a space or by walls in which there are no communicating doors or windows or similar openings.

        B.     “Connecting sewer” means that portion of the sewer system which extends from the main sewer to the curb.

        C.     “Fixture” means any plumbing or sewer outlet requiring a trap or vent.

        D.    “House sewer” means that portion of the horizontal piping extending from a point two feet from the foundation wall of the building to its connection with the connecting sewer.

        E.     “Lot” means any piece or parcel of land as bounded, defined or shown upon the latest map, plan or deed in the office of the county recorder of Orange County, or upon the assessor’s map as prepared by the county assessor.

        F.     “Main sewer” means a main pipeline sewer of the city laid in the streets, alleys and along rights-of-way, provided for the collection of sewage from connecting sewers and conveying it to the outfall sewer. (Ord. 38 § 6, 1926)

 

13.04.020 Superintendent of sewers.
        For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the city council shall appoint a superintendent of sewers, who shall be authorized to enforce such regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter, and who shall hold office at the pleasure of the city council. (Ord. 38 § 3, 1926)

 

13.04.030 Inspection—Appointment of sewer inspector—Duties.
        A.    The superintendent of sewers may appoint, with the approval of the city council, a sewer inspector, as such inspector may be required for the proper performance of sewer inspection.

        B.     It shall be the duty of the superintendent of sewers or the sewer inspector to inspect, supervise, approve and make a complete record of all construction, repairs, connections and disconnections of connection sewers and house sewers built in the city. (Ord. 38 § 11, 1926)

 

13.04.040 Inspection—Right of entry.
        The superintendent of sewers or sewer inspector shall have the right to enter into or upon any property, structure or premises served by any public or private sewer for the purpose of examining and inspecting the construction or condition of any such sewer, and every person owning, controlling or occupying such property, structure or premises shall permit such entrance and give such aid as may be necessary or required for such examination or inspection. (Ord. 38 § 12, 1926)

 

13.04.050 Connection to proximate sewer required.
        It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make, or cause to be made, any connections with any cesspool or place for depositing sewage, except with and into sewage disposal lines within the city, and subject to inspection and such regulation by the city as provided in this chapter, or as may be prescribed from time to time by the city council, if and when the property or place so to be connected fronts upon or is located within one hundred fifty feet of a constructed, completed and accepted city main-line sewer; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall be construed and applied in conformity with and subject to the time limit prescribed in Section 13.04.060. (Ord. 38 § 1, 1926)

 

13.04.060 Permit—Required—Application.
        A.    It is unlawful for any person to construct any sewer works or make or attempt to make, or cause to be made, any connection with the main sewer lines of the city, without first having secured a permit therefor and having paid an application fee as prescribed by the city. Permit to make such connection shall be granted upon application made upon blank forms furnished by the city and in the manner as prescribed in such form. The application shall be filed with the city clerk, together with the application fee, and shall thereupon by the city clerk be referred to the superintendent of sewers, who shall be authorized to issue a permit for making such connection. The fee so paid shall be deposited in the city treasury.

        B.     All sewer connections and pipelines laid in connection therewith shall be under the supervision of the superintendent of sewers, and in conformity with the requirements and provisions relating to such connections prescribed by the city council. (Ord. 1093, 1979; Ord. 38 § 3, 1926)

 

13.04.070 Permit—Qualification—Nontransferability.
        A.    Permits will be issued only to persons, firms or corporations who have obtained a license to engage in the business of constructing sewers in the city.

        B.     A permit shall not be assignable or transferable, or used to aid or abet any unlicensed person, firm or corporation in the performance of any such work or operation for which such permit was issued. (Ord. 38 § 3, 1926)

 

13.04.080 Bonding of contractors.
        Any person, firm or corporation, as principal, agent or otherwise, desiring to engage in the business of constructing sewers within the city, shall, before a license so to do will be granted, file with the city clerk an indemnity bond with good and sufficient sureties and in an amount to be determined from time to time, such bond being payable to the city. The bond shall bind such person, firm or corporation to renew with materials of the same kind and quality and in the same manner as before, all streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs or public parkways in any way disturbed; to protect the city from all liabilities for damage to persons or property resulting in or from any opening or excavation made by such person, firm or corporation; to guarantee the payment when due of all the bills for material and labor incurred by the person, firm or corporation in the construction of sewers; to indemnify all persons, firms or corporations for whom the person, firm or corporation thereafter constructs sewers for damages sustained on account of the failure of the person, firm or corporation to construct the sewer in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 38 § 5, 1926)

 

13.04.090 Separate and joint connection.
        Every building or other structure situated in the city shall be separately and independently connected with a connecting sewer, except where more than one building or other structure is situated upon the same lot, in which case all such buildings and structures may be joined in the use of one house and connecting sewer; provided, that all such buildings and structures are owned by the same person or provided that all such buildings and structures are a part of a condominium or townhouse development. (Ord. 1210, 1983; Ord. 38 § 7, 1926)

 

13.04.100 Old sewers generally.
        No building or other structure shall be connected to an old sewer nor shall any old sewer line be used unless it will satisfactorily stand the test provided for in this chapter for new sewer, and a permit has been granted for so connecting and a certificate of inspection obtained from the superintendent of sewers or sewer inspector. (Ord. 38 § 7, 1926)

 

13.04.110 Existing house sewers.
        On any lot where there is an existing house sewer serving the building and upon which another building is to be placed, such building may be served from the existing house sewer, provided this sewer has first been inspected and approved by the superintendent of sewers or sewer inspector, and provided further, that wherever the existing sewer would be within the area to be occupied by the proposed building, it shall be reconstructed of cast iron soil pipe. (Ord. 38 § 7, 1926)

 

13.04.120 Materials.
        Connecting sewers or house sewers may be constructed of either vitrified clay, Portland cement concrete or cast iron soil pipe. (Ord. 38 § 7, 1926)

 

13.04.130 Grade.
        The grade of all main-line sewers shall be not less than 0.0035 feet per foot and all connecting and house sewers covered by this chapter shall not be less than one-fourth inch to the foot toward the outlet and all sections shall be laid in perfect line on the bottom and sides. (Ord. 1210, 1983; Ord. 38 § 8, 1926)

 

13.04.140 Size of pipe.
        All pipe laid on public property, excepting connecting and house sewers, shall be eight inches in diameter or larger. House or connecting sewers may be constructed of four-inch pipe, provided the number of fixtures served is not over thirty-six. If the number of fixtures exceeds thirty-six the size of pipe of each house or connecting sewer shall be six inches or larger. (Ord. 1210, 1983; Ord. 38 § 8, 1926)

 

13.04.150 Bends, connections, openings.
        A.    All changes in direction shall be made by the use of wyes and one-eighth bends, and any change from one size of pipe to another size shall be made by the use of a reducer. Where four-inch clay pipe is to be connected to a section of four-inch cast iron pipe, connection shall be made so that the flow line of each pipe shall be on the same line.

        B.     All wye and tee openings in sewers which are not used for connections shall be closed by the use of caps securely cemented. (Ord. 38 § 8, 1926)

 

13.04.160 Inspection before backfill.
        A.    No person, firm or corporation, as principal, agent or otherwise, shall backfill any trench or excavation made for the purpose of laying a sewer or any kind until the pipe laid therein has been inspected by the superintendent of sewers, or sewer inspector, and a certificate of inspection given. The entire length of the sewer and all connections, including the wye or tee at the main sewer, to the point at which the cast iron soil pipe begins, shall be fully exposed for inspection.

        B.     At least four hours’ notice shall be given when work is ready for inspection.

        C.     If any section of the pipe or any portion of the work is not in accordance with specifications which are a part of this chapter, or does not conform to all the requirements of this chapter, the sewer contractor shall make such changes or additions as are necessary to conform to the provisions contained in this chapter and shall, after such changes or additions are made, leave the pipe and work exposed, and do no backfilling until inspection has been made and acceptance given, as provided in this section. (Ord. 38 § 13, 1926)

Chapter 13.08 SEWER CAPACITY CHARGES
13.08.010 Applicability—Payment required.
        All property of every kind within the city limits which was not included within and part of the La Habra Sanitary District at the time of dissolution of the district shall upon being furnished sewer services and/or subdivided be charged and pay, in addition to other charges as established, a connection charge as set by resolution of the city council and on file in the office of the city clerk. The payment shall be made as a connection charge and prior to the connecting up or furnishing of sewer facilities to the property and the owner of the property. (Ord. 1213 §§ 2, 3, 1983; Ord. 328 § 1, 1957)

 

13.08.020 Prerequisite to subdivision.
        In connection with property subject to the charge provided for in Section 13.08.010 which is subdivided and for which a tract map is placed of record, after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the payment of such connection charge shall be a condition of the filing and approval of a tract map and shall be a part of the improvements to be made by the subdivider in accordance with the subdivision contract and a part for which the subdivision bond shall be liable. (Ord. 328 § 2, 1957)

 

13.08.030 Division of charges.
        In case property subject to the charge provided for in Section 13.08.010 is split up into lots or parcels the city may exclusively determine the amount to be paid as a connection charge for each lot or parcel and the charge may be uniform for all lots or parcels regardless of some variation in the size of such lots or parcels. (Ord. 328 § 3, 1957)

 

13.08.040 Prerequisite to sewer service.
        No sewer facilities shall be furnished or connection made for the furnishing of sewer facilities to the property or any person for which the charge provided for in this chapter is applicable unless such charge is or charges are paid. (Ord. 328 § 4, 1957)

 

13.08.050 Deposit of revenues.
        All funds derived from the sewer charge provided for in this chapter shall go into the general sewer fund. (Ord. 328 § 5, 1957)

 

13.08.060 City’s right to disconnect for nonpayment of connection charges.
        The connection of any sewer facilities without the payment of the charges gives the city the right to go upon private or public property and disconnect the sewer facilities, or to enforce the provisions of this chapter by civil process or any other method provided by law. (Ord. 328 § 6, 1957)

Chapter 13.10 SEWER MAINTENANCE, REPAIR, DESIGN AND RESTRICTIONS OF DEPOSIT INTO SEWERS
13.10.010 Purpose.
        To define responsibility for maintenance, repair and upkeep of main sewer, house sewer and connecting sewer; parameters for sewer design; and establish restrictions of deposit to sewer. (Ord. 1642 § 1, 2004)

 

13.10.020 Definitions.
        The terms in this chapter are defined in Section 13.04.010 of this code. (Ord. 1642 § 1, 2004)

 

13.10.030 Responsibility: Main sewer, house sewer and connecting sewer.
        A.    Main, House and Connecting Sewer Maintenance, Repair, and Upkeep.

        1.     The property owner or agent is responsible for the maintenance, repair and upkeep of the connecting sewer and house sewer from the property owner’s structure up to and including the point of connection (e.g. wyes, tees, saddles, manhole structures, etc.) to the main sewer line. The property owner or agent is responsible for all routine and emergency cleaning of the connecting sewer and house sewer lines.

        2.     The city is responsible for the maintenance, repair and upkeep of the main sewer. It shall be the responsibility of the city to keep the main sewer free and clear for the even flow of sewage.

        3.     Should repairs to or replacement of the house sewer or connecting sewer be needed which will require excavation in the public right-of-way, the property owner or agent must first obtain an encroachment permit from the city of La Habra before the work can begin. The permit must require each of the following:

        a.     That all work be performed by a contractor authorized pursuant to Sections 13.04.070 and 13.04.080 of this title, and who holds a C-36 Plumbing Contractor’s License or Class A Contractor’s License from the state of California.

        b.     All new connections, repairs or modifications shall be tested for infiltration per the standards set forth in the latest edition of the Standard Specifications for Public Works Contracts (Green Book).

        c.     That the property owner/agent is solely responsible for retaining said contractor and verifying his or her qualifications.

        d.     When the work on the house or connecting sewer has been completed, but prior to backfilling, an inspector from the city must inspect the installation in accordance with the requirements of Section 13.04.160 of this title.

        e.     After the inspection, the licensed contractor shall restore the encroachment area to the satisfaction of the city of La Habra.

        f.      In general, all work shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 13.04 of this title. (Ord. 1642 § 1, 2004)

 

13.10.040 Sewer design.
        All main, house and connecting sewers, manholes and other appurtenances shall be designed, constructed, tested and inspected in accordance with the city of La Habra standard drawings; the latest edition of Standard Specifications for Public Works Contracts (Green Book) or as approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 1642 § 1, 2004)

 

13.10.050 Restrictions of deposit in sewer.
        No person shall throw or deposit any material or liquid into any vessel or receptacle directly or indirectly connected to a public sewer that is not in conformance with current Orange County Sanitation District regulations. This shall include, but not be limited to, storm drain discharge, ground water discharge, toxic or malodorous gases or materials.       In addition, the city shall enforce the general and specific prohibitions of the national pretreatment program under Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Section 403.5, as they pertain to the city’s status as a collector system for the Orange County Sanitation District. No person shall therefore introduce any of the following into the city’s sewer system:

        1.     Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the sewer collection system or the Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW), including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit, or sixty degrees Centigrade, using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21

        2.     Pollutants which cause corrosive structural damage to the sewer collection pipes and structures, but in no case discharges with a pH lower than five, unless the works are specifically designed to accommodate such discharges.

        3.     Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts which will cause obstruction to the flow in the sewer collection system or the POTW, resulting in interference.

        4.     Any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference with the POTW.

        5.     Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case heat in such quantities that the temperature at the POTW Treatment Plant exceeds one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit (forty degrees Centigrade), unless the approval authority, upon request of the POTW, approves alternate temperature limits.

        6.     Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil in amounts that will cause interference or pass through.

        7.     Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gasses, vapors or fumes within the sewer collection system or the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems.

        8.     Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the POTW. (Ord. 1642 § 1, 2004)

Chapter 13.11 FATS, OILS AND GREASE CONTROL REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
13.11.010 Purpose and Policy.
        A.    The purpose of this chapter is to allow the maximum beneficial public use of the city’s sewer services and facilities while preventing blockages of the sewer lines resulting from discharges of FOG to the sewer facilities and to specify appropriate FOG discharge requirements for FSEs.

        B.     To comply with federal, state, and local policies regarding SSOs and to allow the city to meet applicable standards and provisions for the regulations of wastewater or waste containing FOG discharges to the sewer facilities. (Ord. 1647 § 2, 2004)

 

13.11.020 Definitions.
        A.    Unless otherwise defined herein, terms related to water quality shall be as adopted in the latest edition of Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Environment Federation. The testing procedures for waste constituents and characteristics shall be as provided in 40 CFR 136 (Code of Federal Regulations).

        B.     Other terms not herein defined are defined as being the same as set forth in the latest adopted applicable editions of the California Codes applicable to building construction adopted pursuant to the California Building Standards Law.

        C.     Words used in this section in the singular may include the plural and the plural the singular. Use of masculine shall mean feminine and use of feminine shall mean masculine. Shall is mandatory; may is permissive or discretionary.

        D.    Subject to the foregoing provisions, the following definitions shall apply in this section:

        “Best management practices (BMPs)” means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to prevent or reduce the introduction of FOG to the Sewer Facilities.

        “Change in operations” means any change in the ownership, food types, or operational procedures that have the potential to increase the amount of FOG generated and/or discharged by FSEs in an amount that alone or collectively causes or creates a potential for SSOs to occur.

        “City” means the city of La Habra and/or designated agency(ies) with appropriate jurisdiction.

        “City attorney” means the city attorney, or his/her designee, of the city of La Habra.

        “City manager” means the city manager of the city of La Habra or his or her designee.

        “Director of public works” means the director of the public works department of the city of La Habra or his/her designee.

        “Discharger” means any person who discharges or causes a discharge of wastewater directly or indirectly to a public sewer. Discharger shall mean the same as user.

        “Effluent” means any liquid outflow from the FSE that is discharged to the sewer.

        “Fats, oils and grease (FOG)” means any substance such as a vegetable or animal product that is used in, or is a by product of, the cooking or food preparation process, and that turns or may turn viscous or solidifies with a change in temperature or other conditions.

        “FOG control program” means the FOG control program required by and developed pursuant to RWQCB Order No. R8-2002-0014, Section (c)(12)(viii).

        “Food Service Establishment (FSE)” means facilities defined in California Health And Safety Code Section 113785 and any commercial entity, operating in a permanently constructed structure such as a room, building, or place, or portion thereof, maintained, used, or operated for the purpose of storing, preparing, serving, or manufacturing, packaging, or otherwise handling food for sale to other entities, or for consumption by the public, its members or employees, and which has any process or device that uses or produces FOG, or grease vapors, steam, fumes, smoke or odors that are required to be removed by a Type I or Type II hood, as defined in CURFFL Section 113785.

        “Food grinder” means any device installed in the plumbing or sewage system for the purpose of grinding food waste or food preparation by products for the purpose of disposing it in the sewer system.

        “Grease control device” means any grease interceptor, grease trap or other mechanism, device or process, which attaches to, or is applied to, wastewater plumbing fixtures and lines, the purpose of which is to trap or collect or treat FOG prior to it being discharged into the sewer system. “Grease control device” may also include any other proven method to reduce FOG subject to the approval of the city.

        “Grease cleaning fee” means a fee charged to an Owner/Operator of a FSE when there are physical limitations to the property that make the installation of the usual and customary grease interceptor or grease control device for the FSE under consideration, impossible or impracticable. The grease cleaning fee is an annual fee to equitably cover the costs of increased maintenance of the sewer system for inspection and cleaning of FOG and other viscous or solidifying agents that a properly employed grease control device would otherwise prevent from entering the sewer system.

        “Grease interceptor” means a multi-compartment device that is constructed in different sizes and is generally required to be located, according to the California Plumbing Code, underground between a FSE and the connection to the sewer system. These devices primarily use gravity to separate FOG from the wastewater as it moves from one compartment to the next. These devices must be cleaned, maintained, and have the FOG removed and disposed of in a proper manner on regular intervals to be effective.

        “Grease trap” means a grease control device that is used to serve individual fixtures and have limited effect and should only be used in those cases where the use of a grease interceptor or other grease control device is determined to be impossible or impracticable.

        “Hearing officer” means an individual designated by the director of public works to conduct certain procedural hearings required by this chapter.

        “Hot spots” means areas in sewer lines that have experienced sanitary sewer overflows or that must be cleaned or maintained frequently to avoid blockages of sewer system.

        “Inflow” means water entering a sewer system through a direct stormwater runoff connection to the sanitary sewer, which may cause an almost immediate increase in wastewater flows.

        “Infiltration” means water entering a sewer system, including sewer service connections, from the ground through such means as defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manhole walls.

        “Inspector” means a person authorized by the city to inspect any existing or proposed wastewater generation, conveyance, processing, and disposal facilities.

        “Interceptor” means a grease interceptor.

        “Interference” means any discharge which, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the city’s sewer system or is a cause of violation of the city’s NPDES or waste discharge requirements.

        “Limited food preparation establishment” means a limited food preparation establishment is engaged only in reheating, hot holding or assembly of ready to eat food products and as a result, there is a de minimus or no wastewater discharge containing a significant amount of FOG. A limited food preparation establishment does not include any operation that changes the form, flavor or consistency of food. A limited food preparation establishment is not considered a food service establishment for purposes of this chapter.

        “Manifest” means that receipt which is retained by the generator of wastes for disposing recyclable wastes or liquid wastes as required by the city.

        “New construction” means any structure planned or under construction for which sewer connection permits has not been issued.

        “NPDES” means the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System; the permit issued to control the discharge of liquids or other substances or solids to surface waters of the United States as detailed in Public Law 92-500, Section 402.

        “Person” means any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or public agency, including the state of California and the United States of America.

        “Program manager” means the individual designated by the director of public works to administer the FOG control program. A consultant retained under contract by the city may be designated as the FOG control program manager. The FOG control program manager is responsible for all determinations of compliance with the program, including approval of discretionary waivers, inspections and development and implementation of the best management practices and the rules and regulations for the city’s FOG control program.

        “Public agency” means the state of California and/or any city, county, special district, other local governmental authority or public body of or within this state.

        “Public sewer” means a sewer owned and operated by the city, or other local public agency, which is tributary to the city’s sewer facilities.

        “Regulatory agencies” means regulatory agencies means those agencies having regulatory jurisdiction over the operations of the city, including, but not limited to:

        A.    United States Environmental Protection Agency, Region IX, San Francisco and Washington, DC (EPA).

        B.     California State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB).

        C.     California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region (RWQCB).

        D.    South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD).

        E.     California Department of Health Services (DOHS).

        “Remodeling” means a physical change or operational change causing generation of the amount of FOG that exceeds the current amount of FOG discharged to the sewer system by the FSE in an amount that alone or collectively causes or creates a potential for SSOs to occur; or exceeding a cost of fifty thousand dollars to a FSE that requires a building permit, and involves any one or combination of the following: (1) Under slab plumbing in the food processing area, (2) a thirty percent increase in the net public seating area, (3) a thirty percent increase in the size of the kitchen area, or (4) any change in the size or type of food preparation equipment.

        “Rules and regulations” means non-punitive rules and regulations as adopted by the city council from time to time, and implemented by the FOG control program manager to accomplish the purposes of this chapter and the FOG control program.

        “Sewage” means wastewater.

        “Sewer facilities or system” means any and all facilities used for collecting, conveying, pumping, and disposing of wastewater.

        “Sewer lateral” means a building sewer as defined in the latest edition of the California Plumbing Code. It is the wastewater connection between the building’s wastewater facilities and a public sewer system.

        “Sanitary Sewer Overflow (SSO)” means a sewer spill, loss or discharge of sewage from a sanitary sewer system.

        “Twenty-five percent rule” means requirement for grease interceptors to be maintained such that the combined FOG and solids accumulation does not exceed twenty-five percent of the design hydraulic depth of the grease interceptor. This is to ensure that the minimum hydraulic retention time and required available hydraulic volume is maintained to effectively intercept and retain FOG discharged to the sewer system.

        “User” means any person who discharges or causes a discharge of wastewater directly or indirectly to a public sewer system. User shall mean the same as discharger.

        “Waste” means sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous or radioactive, associated with human habitation or of human or animal nature, including such wastes placed within containers of whatever nature prior to and for the purpose of disposal.

        “Wastewater” means the liquid and water-carried wastes of the community and all constituents thereof, whether treated or untreated, discharged into or permitted to enter a public sewer. (Ord. 1647 § 2, 2004)

 

13.11.030 Rules and regulations and interpretations.
        A.    The program manager is authorized and directed to develop and implement rules and regulations, as adopted by the city council, consistent with and to effectuate this chapter, including enforcement and administration of the FOG control program. Any such rule or regulation may be added, modified or deleted as necessitated by changes in law, increased demands of regulatory agencies with jurisdiction over the city’s sewer system or technological improvements or advances. Said rules and regulations shall be filed in the office of the director of public works and the program manager and maintained in an orderly manner readily accessible to the public. The city will provide a copy of said rules and regulations to all FSEs. The burden to secure and comply with the rules and regulations shall be upon the FSE and in accordance with the goals and purposes of the FOG control program.

        B.     The city manager, the director of public works, and persons designated and under the instruction and supervision of any of them, may investigate compliance of this chapter. (Ord. 1647 § 2, 2004)

 

13.11.040 Limited food preparation establishment.
A limited food preparation establishment is not considered a FSE for purposes of this chapter and is not subject to any of the requirements of this chapter, except as may be necessary to determine whether a business qualifies as a limited food preparation establishment. (Ord. 1647 § 2, 2004)

 

13.11.050 FOG control program.
        The city hereby creates and establishes its FOG control program in order to minimize SSOs by regulating, prohibiting and controlling the discharge of FOG to the city’s sewer system by FSEs, in compliance with RWQCB Order No. R8-2002-0014. (Ord. 1647 § 2, 2004)

 

13.11.060 Prohibitions.
        The following prohibitions and/or requirements shall apply to all FSEs:

        A.    The discharge into the sewer system of FOG the may accumulate and/or cause or contribute to blockages in the sewer system or at the sewer system lateral is prohibited.

        B.     The installation of food grinders in the plumbing system of new constructions of FSEs is prohibited. All existing food grinders shall be removed from FSEs within one hundred eighty days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

        C.     The introduction of any additives into a FSE’s wastewater system for the purpose of emulsifying FOG is prohibited, unless a specific written authorization from the program manager is obtained.

        D.    The disposal of any cooking oil into drainage pipes is prohibited. All waste cooking oils shall be collected and stored properly in receptacles, such as barrels or drums, for recycling or other acceptable methods of disposal, in accordance with applicable federal, state and local laws or regulations.

        E.     The discharge of wastewater from dishwashers to any grease trap or grease interceptor is prohibited.

        F.     The discharge of wastewater with temperatures in excess of one hundred forty degree Fahrenheit to any grease control device, including grease traps and grease interceptors is prohibited.

        G.    The use of biological additives for grease remediation or as a supplement to interceptor maintenance is prohibited, without prior authorization from the program manager.

        H.    The discharge of wastes from toilets, urinals, washbasins and other fixtures containing fecal materials to sewer lines intended for grease interceptor service is prohibited.

        I.      The discharge of any waste, including FOG and solid materials removed from the grease control device, to the sewer system is prohibited. Grease removed from grease interceptors shall be wastehauled periodically as part of the operation and maintenance requirements for grease interceptors.

        J.      Operation of grease interceptors with FOG and solids accumulation exceeding twenty-five percent of the total operating depth of the grease interceptor (twenty-five percent rule) is prohibited. (Ord. 1647 § 2, 2004)

 

13.11.070 FOG pretreatment required.
        All FSEs shall provide wastewater acceptable to the city, under the requirements and standards established herein before discharging to any public sewer. FSEs may be required to install, operate and maintain an approved type and adequately sized grease interceptor necessary to maintain compliance with the objectives of this chapter. The grease interceptor shall be adequate to separate and remove FOG contained in wastewater discharges from FSEs prior to discharge to the sewer system. Fixtures, equipment, and drain lines located in the food preparation and dean up areas of FSEs that are sources of FOG discharges shall be connected to the grease interceptor. Compliance shall be established as follows:

        A.    New construction of FSEs shall be required to install grease interceptors prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.

        B.     Existing FSEs undergoing remodeling or any change in operations may be required to install grease interceptors prior to the issuance of any building permit, certification of occupancy, final permit approval, or if none, prior to commencing the discharge of wastewater to the sewer system, unless a conditional waiver is obtained from the Program Manager, pursuant to this section.

        C.     Existing FSEs are required to install a grease interceptor if the program manager makes a determination (by inspection, sampling or other means) that the existing FSE(s) currently is or has the reasonable potential to adversely impact the sewer system by causing or contributing to hot spots, FOG-related blockages or interference sewer system flows, or SSOs. Said FSE(s) shall install a grease interceptor within one hundred eighty days after receipt of official notification from the city unless said FSE obtains a conditional waiver in lieu of a grease interceptor as detailed below.

        D.    Conditional Waive.

        1.     Any existing FSE may obtain a conditional waiver from the program manager, in order to avoid compliance with the grease interceptor requirement. The FSE bears the burden of demonstrating, to the program manager’s reasonable satisfaction, that the installation of a grease interceptor is not necessary and that acceptable alternatives such as, but not limited to, installation of a grease trap(s) or implementation of BMPs will be sufficient to prevent significant FOG discharges from the applicant FSE. Upon determination by the program manager that a conditional waiver may be granted, the FSE will be given notice in writing by the program manager that a waiver has been approved and that the FSE is relieved of the requirement to install a grease interceptor, so long as the waiver remains effective The program manager may impose terms and conditions on the issuance of a waiver and may impose conditions of the FSE’s business license in accordance with any approved waiver.

        2.     The conditional waiver shall be valid only so long as the FSE remains in compliance with all other requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the requirements to apply for a new or renewed business license and to implement BMPs.

        3.     A conditional waiver may be suspended or revoked at any time when any of the terms and conditions for its issuance is not satisfied or if the conditions upon which the conditional waiver was based change so that the justification for the exception no longer exists. Appeal of any suspension or revocation may be had, as provided in this chapter.

        E.     Conditional Waiver of Interceptor Requirement with a Grease Cleaning Fee. An existing FSE may obtain a conditional waiver from the installation of a grease interceptor from the program manager, if the FSE demonstrates that it is impossible or impracticable to install, operate or maintain a grease interceptor. The FSE bears the burden of demonstrating, to the program manager’s reasonable satisfaction, that the installation of a grease interceptor is not feasible or applicable. The program manager may issue a written waiver listing the conditions upon which said waiver is granted, relieving the FSE from the requirement to install an interceptor, upon a determination of one or more of the following conditions:

        1.     The FSE can substantively demonstrate that it employs an alternative pretreatment technology that is equivalent or better than a grease interceptor in controlling its FOG discharge;

        2.     The FSE provides evidence through downstream visual monitoring of the sewer system, for at least three months, at its own expense, that no visible accumulation of FOG in its lateral and/or tributary downstream sewer lines is occurring;

        3.     There is no potential for FOG from the FSE to cause or contribute to SSOs;

        4.     The FSE discharges of FOG are negligible and have an insignificant impact to the sewer system;

        5.     The FSE may use or may be required to install grease traps, in lieu of installation of a grease interceptor, and/or may be required to pay a grease cleaning fee, when:

        a.     There is not adequate space for the installation and/or maintenance of a grease interceptor.

        b.     There is not adequate slope for gravity flow between kitchen plumbing fixtures and the grease interceptor and/or between the grease interceptor and the private collection lines or the public sewer system.

        c.     No alternative pretreatment can be installed.

        The maintenance requirements of all grease traps shall be complied with, as specified in the rules and regulations.

        6.     The FSE must agree to either hire a contractor to clean and inspect the sewer main, as may be established in the rules and regulations, or pay an annual grease cleaning fee to the city for the increased cost to clean the sewer system. The grease cleaning fee shall be established by resolution or ordinance of the city council, and shall be based on the estimated annual increased cost of maintaining the sewer system for inspection and removal of FOG and other viscous or solidifying agents attributable to the FSE resulting from the lack of a grease interceptor or grease control device.

        F.     Revocation of Conditional Waiver. A conditional waiver may be revoked at any time when any of the terms and conditions for its issuance is not satisfied or if the conditions upon which the conditional waiver is based change so that the justification for the waiver no longer exists. The conditional waiver shall be valid so long as the FSE remains in compliance with the terms and conditions in the waiver.

        The program manager’s determination to revoke a conditional waiver shall be based upon, but not limited to, the evaluation of the following conditions:

        1.     Quantity of FOG discharge as measured or as indicated by the size of FSE based on seating capacity, number of meals served, menu, water usage, amount of on-site consumption of prepared food and other conditions that may reasonably be shown to contribute to FOG discharges.

        2.     Adequacy of implementation of BMPs and compliance history.

        3.     Change in sewer size, grade, condition based on visual information, deposits of FOG in the sewer by the FSE, and the history of maintenance and sewage spills in the receiving sewer system.

        4.     Changes in operations that significantly affect FOG discharge.

        5.     My other condition deemed reasonably related to the generation of FOG discharges by the program manager.

        G.    Period of Validity. The conditional waiver shall be valid only so long as the FSE remains in compliance with all requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the requirements to apply for a new or renewed business license and to implement BMPs. The conditional waiver may be suspended or revoked if any of the terms and conditions for its issuance are not satisfied. Appeal of any suspension or revocation may be had as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1647 § 2, 2004)

 

13.11.080 FSE compliance required for business license.
        Full compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be required for the valid issuance of any FSE business license pursuant to Title 5 of this code. The issuance, renewal or continued validity of a FSE business license may be subject to certain terms and conditions, as determined by the program manager based on the following:

        1.     The discharger’s current or anticipated operating data;

        2.     The city’s current or anticipated operating data;

        3.     Changes in the requirements of regulatory agencies which affect the city; or

        4.     A determination by the program manager that such conditions are appropriate to further the objectives of this chapter. (Ord. 1647 § 2, 2004)

 

13.11.090 Best management practices required.
        All FSEs shall implement BMPs in their operation to minimize the discharge of FOG to the sewer system. The requirements and guidelines for BMPs are to be followed, which may include kitchen practices and employee training that are essential to minimizing FOG discharges, and which may be specified in the rules and regulations. BMPs shall include, at a minimum, installation of drain screens, segregation and collection of waste cooking oil, and proper management, disposal of food waste into the trash or garbage, maintenance of kitchen exhaust filters and kitchen signage. All FSE shall provide employee training within one hundred eighty days of the effective date of this chapter, to all new employees within ten days of their employment, and to all employees twice each calendar year, on the BMPs. Training shall be documented and employee signatures retained indicating each employee’s attendance and understanding of the practices reviewed. Training records shall be available for review upon request by the program manager or an authorized inspector. (Ord. 1647 § 2, 2004)

 

13.11.100 Commercial properties.
        Property owners of commercial properties or their official designee(s) shall be responsible for the installation and maintenance of the grease interceptor(s) serving multiple FSEs that are located on a single parcel. (Ord. 1647 § 2, 2004)

 

13.11.110 Sewer system overflows, public nuisance, abatement orders and cleanup costs.
        FSEs found to have contributed to a sewer blockage, SSOs or any sewer system interferences resulting from the discharge of wastewater or waste containing FOG, may be ordered to install and maintain a grease interceptor, and may be subject to a plan or business license conditions to abate the nuisance and prevent any future health hazards created by sewer line failures and blockages, SSOs or any other sewer system interferences. SSOs may cause injury to public health, safety, and welfare of life and threaten life and property and are hereby declared public nuisances. Furthermore, sewer lateral failures and SSOs caused by FSEs alone or collectively, are the responsibility of the private property owner and FSE, and individual(s) as a responsible officer or owner of the FSE. If the city must act immediately to contain and dean up an SSO caused by blockage of a private or public sewer lateral or system serving a FSE, or at the request of the property owner or operator of the FSE, or because of the failure of the property owner or FSE to abate the condition causing immediate threat of injury to the health, safety, welfare or property of the public, the city’s costs for such abatement may be entirely borne by the property owner and/or operator of the FSE, and individual(s) as a responsible officer or owner of the FSE(s) and shall constitute a debt to the city and become due and payable upon the city’s demand for reimbursement of such costs. The owner or operator of any FSE which has caused or contributed to a SSO shall immediately notify the county of Orange Health Department. (Ord. 1647 § 2, 2004)

 

13.11.120 Grease interceptor requirements.
        A.    All FSEs shall provide wastewater acceptable to the city, under the requirements and standards established herein, before discharging to any public sewer. Any FSE required to provide FOG pretreatment shall install, operate, and maintain an approved type and adequately sized grease interceptor necessary to maintain compliance with the objectives of this chapter.

        B.     Grease interceptor sizing and installation shall conform to California Plumbing Code currently in effect. Grease interceptors shall be constructed in accordance with the design approved by the program manager and shall have a minimum of two compartments with fittings designed for grease retention.

        C.     The grease interceptor shall be installed at a location where it shall be at all times easily accessible for inspection, cleaning, and removal of accumulated grease.

        D.    Access manholes, with a minimum diameter of twenty-four inches, shall be provided over each grease interceptor chamber and sanitary tee. The access manholes shall extend at least to finished grade and be designed and maintained to prevent water inflow or infiltration. The manholes shall also have readily removable covers to facilitate inspection, grease removal, and wastewater sampling activities. (Ord. 1647 § 2, 2004)

 

13.11.130 Grease trap requirements.
        A.    FSEs may be required to install grease traps in the waste line leading from drains, sink and other fixtures or equipment where grease may be introduced into the sewer system in quantities that can cause blockage.

        B.     Sizing and installation of grease traps shall conform to the current edition of the California Plumbing Code, or as required by the program manager.

        C.     Grease traps shall be maintained by removing accumulated grease on a daily basis, or as often as required or necessary to ensure efficient operating conditions.

        D.    Grease traps shall be maintained free of all food residues and any FOG waste removed during the cleaning and scraping process.

        E.     Grease traps shall be inspected periodically to check for leaking seams and pipes, and for effective operation of the baffles and flow regulating device. Grease traps and their baffles shall be maintained free of all caked-on FOG and waste. Removable baffles shall be removed and cleaned during the maintenance process.

        F.     Dishwashers and food waste disposal units shall not be connected to or discharged into any grease trap. (Ord. 1647 § 2, 2004)

 

13.11.140 Grease interceptor maintenance requirements.
        A.    Grease interceptors shall be maintained in efficient operating condition by periodic removal of the full content of the interceptor which includes wastewater, accumulated FOG, floating materials, sludge and solids.

        B.     All existing and newly installed grease interceptors shall be maintained in a manner consistent with a maintenance frequency approved by the program manager pursuant to this section.

        C.     No FOG that has accumulated in a grease interceptor shall be allowed to pass into any sewer lateral, sewer system, storm drain, or public right of way during maintenance activities.

        D.    FSEs with grease interceptors may be required to submit data and information necessary to establish the maintenance frequency for grease interceptors.

        E.     The maintenance frequency for all FSEs with a grease interceptor shall be determined in one of the following methods:

        1.     Grease interceptors shall be fully pumped out and cleaned at a frequency such that the combined FOG and solids accumulation does not exceed twenty-five percent of the total design hydraulic depth of the grease interceptor. This is to ensure that the minimum hydraulic retention tithe and required available hydraulic volume is maintained to effectively intercept and retain FOG discharged to the sewer system.     

        2.     All FSEs with a grease interceptor shall maintain their grease interceptor not less than every six months.

        3.     Grease interceptors shall be fully pumped out and cleaned quarterly when the frequency described in (1) has not been established. The maintenance frequency shall be adjusted when sufficient data have been obtained to establish an average frequency based on the requirements described in (1) and guidelines adopted pursuant to the FOG control program. The city may change the maintenance frequency at any time to reflect changes in actual operating conditions in accordance with the FOG control program. Based on the actual generation of FOG from the FSE, the maintenance frequency may be increased or decreased.

        4.     The owner/operator of a FSE may submit a request to the program manager requesting a change in the maintenance frequency at any time. The FSE has the burden of responsibility to demonstrate that the requested change in frequency reflects actual operating conditions based on the average FOG accumulation over time and meets the requirements described in (1), and that it is in full compliance with the conditions of this chapter. Upon determination by the program manager that a requested revision is justified, the maintenance frequency shall be adjusted.

        5.     If the grease interceptor, at any time, contains FOG and solids accumulation that does not meet the requirements described in (1), the FSE shall be required to have the grease interceptor serviced immediately such that all fats, oils, grease, sludge and other materials are completely removed from the grease interceptor. If deemed necessary, the program manager may also increase the maintenance frequency of the grease interceptor from the current frequency.

        F.     Wastewater, accumulated FOG, floating materials, sludge/solids, and other materials removed from the grease interceptor shall be properly disposed of off site by wastehaulers, in accordance with all applicable federal, state and/or local laws. (Ord. 1647 § 2, 2004)

 

13.11.150 Monitoring and reporting conditions.
        A.    Monitoring for Compliance with this Chapter and Reporting Requirements.

        1.     All FSEs shall meet the requirements and standards for monitoring and/or sampling necessary to comply with the purposes of this chapter before discharging to any public sewer. Requirements for monitoring and/or sampling may be specified and described in the rules and regulations.

        2.     The program manager may require monitoring for compliance with this chapter in accordance with the rules and regulations in an effort to minimize the discharge of FOG to the sewer system.

        3.     The program manager may require periodic reporting of the status of implementation of BMPs, in accordance with the FOG control program.

        4.     Other reports may be required such as compliance schedule progress reports, FOG control monitoring reports, and any other reports deemed reasonably appropriate by the program manager to ensure compliance with this chapter.

        B.     Record Keeping Requirements. All FSEs shall be required to keep all manifests, receipts and invoices of all cleaning, maintenance, grease removal of/from the grease control device, disposal carrier and disposal site location for no less than two years. The FSE shall, upon request, make the manifests, receipts and invoices available to any city representative or inspector. These records may include:

        1.     A logbook of grease interceptor, grease trap or grease control device cleaning and maintenance practices.

        2.     A record of BMPs being implemented, including employee training.

        3.     Copies of records and manifests of wastehauling interceptor contents.

        4.     Records of sampling data and sludge height monitoring for FOG and solids accumulation in the grease interceptors.

        5.     Records of any spills and/or cleaning of the lateral or sewer system.

        6.     Any other information deemed appropriate by the program manager to ensure compliance with this chapter.

        C.     Falsifying Information or Tampering with Process. It shall be unlawful to make any false statement, representation, record, report, plan or other document that is filed with the city, to destroy any record required to be maintained by this chapter, or to tamper with or knowingly render inoperable any grease control device, monitoring device or method or access point required under this chapter. (Ord. 1647 § 2, 2004)

 

13.11.160 Inspection and sampling conditions.
        A.    The program manager or his/her designee may inspect or order the inspection and sample the wastewater discharges of any FSE to ascertain whether the FSE is complying with all requirements of this chapter. The FSE shall allow city representatives or inspectors access to the FSE premises, during normal business hours, for purposes of inspecting the FSE’s grease control devices or interceptor, reviewing the manifests, receipts and invoices relating to the cleaning, maintenance and inspection of the grease control devices or interceptor.

        B.     The program manager or his/her designee shall have the right to place, or order the placement on the FSE’s property, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. Where a FSE has security measures in force, the FSE shall make necessary arrangements so that representatives of the city shall be permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities/inspections.

        C.     In order for the program manager to determine the wastewater characteristics of the discharger for compliance with this chapter, the FSE shall make available for inspection and copying by the city all notices, monitoring reports, waste manifests, and records including, but not limited to, those related to wastewater generation, and wastewater disposal without restriction but subject to the confidentiality provision set forth in this chapter. All such records shall be kept by the FSE a minimum of two years. (Ord. 1647 § 2, 2004)

 

13.11.170 Right of entry.
        Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the program manager or his/her designee, reasonable access to all parts of the wastewater generating and disposal facilities for the purposes of inspection and sampling during all times the discharger’s facility is open, operating, or any other reasonable time. No person shall interfere with, delay, resist or refuse entrance to city representatives attempting to inspect any facility involved directly or indirectly with a discharge of wastewater to the city’s sewer system. if entry is refused, the program manager or his/her designee shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. In the event of an emergency involving an actual or imminent sanitary sewer overflow, city representatives may access FSEs, or adjoining businesses or properties which share a sewer conveyance system with a FSE, in older to prevent or remediate an actual or imminent SSO. (Ord. 1647 § 2, 2004)

 

13.11.180 Emergency notification requirements.
        A.    In the event a FSE is unable to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter due to a breakdown of equipment, accidents, or human error or the FSE has reasonable opportunity to know that his/her/its discharge will exceed the discharge provisions of this chapter, the discharger shall immediately notify the city by telephone at the number specified in the rules and regulations. If the material discharged to the sewer has the potential to cause or result in sewer blockages or SSOs, the discharger shall immediately notify the local health department or county, and the city.

        B.     Confirmation of this notification shall be made in writing to the program manager no later than five working days from the date of the incident. The written notification shall state the date of the incident, the reasons for the discharge or spill, what steps were taken to immediately correct the problem, and what steps are being taken to prevent the problem from recurring.

        C.     Such notification shall not relieve the FSE of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage or loss to the city or any other damage or loss to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the FSE of any fees or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other applicable law. (Ord. 1647 § 2, 2004)

 

13.11.190 Notification of planned changes.
        All FSEs shall notify the city at least sixty days in advance prior to any facility expansion/remodeling, or process modifications that may result in new or substantially increased FOG discharges or a change in the nature of the discharge. The FSE shall notify the city in writing of the proposed expansion or remodeling and shall submit any information requested by the city for evaluation of the effect of such expansion on the FSE’s FOG discharge to the sewer system. (Ord. 1647 § 2, 2004)

 

13.11.200 Purpose and scope of enforcement provisions.
        A.    The city finds that in order for it to comply with the laws, regulations, and rules imposed upon it by regulatory agencies and to ensure that the city’s sewer facilities are protected and are able to operate with the highest degree of efficiency, and to protect the public health and environment, specific enforcement provisions must be adopted to govern the discharges to the city’s system by FSEs.

        B.     Any determination relating to a notice of violation will be made by the program manager, with a right of appeal by the FSE to a hearing officer designated by the director of public works, as set forth in this chapter.

        C.     The city, at its discretion, may utilize any one, combination, or all enforcement remedies provided in this chapter in  response to any violations of this chapter, or any other remedies as provided by law. (Ord. 1647 § 2, 2004)

 

13.11.210 Determination of noncompliance.
        A.    Inspection Procedures.

        1.     Inspection of FSEs shall be conducted in the time, place, manner and frequency determined at the sole discretion of the program manager.

        2.     Noncompliance with BMPs, twenty-five percent rule for grease interceptors, maintenance frequency requirements for grease interceptors, or any provisions of this chapter may be determined by an inspection of the FSE.

        B.     Noncompliance Fees. Any FSE determined to be in noncompliance with any provision of this chapter shall pay a noncompliance fee. The purpose of the noncompliance fee is to compensate the city for costs of additional inspections and follow-up, sampling, monitoring, laboratory analysis, treatment, disposal, and administrative processing incurred as a result of the noncompliance, and shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any civil or criminal penalties as may be assessed. Noncompliance fees shall be in the amount set by ordinance or resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1647 § 2, 2004)

 

13.11.220 Compliance schedule agreement.
        A.    Upon determination that a FSE is not in compliance with this chapter, or needs to construct and/or acquire and install a grease control device or grease interceptor, the program manager may require the FSE to enter into a Compliance Schedule Agreement (CSA) pursuant to this section.

        B.     The issuance of a CSA may contain terms and conditions including but not limited to requirements for installation of a grease control device, grease interceptor and facilities, submittal of drawings or reports, audit of waste hauling records, best management and waste minimization practices, payment of fees, or other provisions to ensure compliance with this chapter.

        C.     The program manager shall not enter into a CSA until such time as all amounts owed to the city, including user fees, noncompliance sampling fees, or other amounts due are paid in full, or an agreement for deferred payment secured by collateral or a third party, is approved by the program manager.

        D.    If compliance is not achieved in accordance with the terms and conditions of a CSA during its term, the program manager may issue an order suspending or revoking the FSE business license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1647 § 2, 2004)

 

13.11.230 Business license suspension.
        A.    A hearing officer may suspend any FSE business license when it is determined that a FSE:

        1.     Has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a GSA order.

        2.     Knowingly provided a false statement, representation, record, report or other document to the city.

        3.     Refused to provide records, reports, plans, or other documents required by the city to determine discharge compliance, or compliance with this chapter, or knowingly destroyed such documents.

        4.     Falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or sample collection method.

        5.     Refuses reasonable access to the FSE premises for the purpose of inspection and monitoring.

        6.     Does not make timely payment of all amounts owed to the city for user charges, business license fees, inspection fees or any fees imposed pursuant to this chapter.

        7.     Causes interference, sewer blockages, or SSOs with the city’s collection, treatment, or disposal system.

        8.     Violates grease interceptor maintenance requirements, any condition or limit imposed on the FSE’s business license or any provision of this chapter or other applicable law.

        B.     When the program manager has reason to believe that grounds exist for business license suspension, he/she shall give written notice thereof by certified mail to the FSE setting forth a statement of the facts and grounds deemed to exist, together with the time and place where the charges shall be heard by a hearing officer. The hearing date shall be not less than fifteen calendar days nor more than forty-five calendar days after the mailing of such notice.

        1.     At the suspension hearing, the FSE shall have an opportunity to respond to the allegations set forth in the notice by presenting written or oral evidence. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the director of public works and approved by the city attorney.

        2.     The hearing officer shall prepare a written report setting forth a brief statement of facts found to be true, a determination of the issues presented, and conclusions.

        3.     The hearing officer shall issue his/her decision and order in writing within thirty calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing. The written decision and order of the hearing officer shall be sent by certified mail to the FSE or its legal counsel/representative at the FSE’s business address.

        C.     Effect.

        1.     Upon an order of suspension by the city becoming final, the FSE shall immediately cease and desist its discharge and shall have no right to discharge any wastewater containing FOG directly or indirectly to the city’s system for the duration of the suspension. The FSE shall also have no right to conduct business in the city for the duration of the suspension. All costs for physically terminating and reinstating service shall be paid by the FSE.

        2.     Any owner or responsible management employee of the FSE shall be bound by the order of suspension, and are responsible to ensure that all employees of the FSE comply with any such order.

        3.     An order of permit suspension issued by the hearing officer shall be final in all respects on the sixteenth day after it is mailed to the FSE unless an appeal is filed with the city clerk pursuant to this chapter regarding appeals to the city council no later than 5:00 p.m. on the fifteenth day following such mailing. (Ord. 1647 § 2, 2004)

 

13.11.240 Business license revocation.
        A.    A hearing officer may revoke any business license when it is determined that a FSE:

        1.     Knowingly provided a false statement, representation, record, report, or other document to the city.

        2.     Refused to provide records, reports, plans, or other documents required by the city to determine discharge compliance, or compliance with this chapter, or knowingly destroyed such documents.

        3.     Falsified, tampered with, or knowingly rendered inaccurate any monitoring device or sample collection method.

        4.     Failed to comply with any terms and conditions imposed on the FSE’s business license.

        5.     Discharged effluent to the city’s sewer system or conducted business while the FSE business license was suspended.

        6.     Refused reasonable access to the FSE premises for purpose of inspection and monitoring.

        7.     Did not make timely payment of all amounts owed to the city for user charges, business license fees, inspection fees or any fees imposed pursuant this chapter.

        8.     Caused interference, sewer blockages, or SSOs with the city’s sewage collection, treatment or disposal system.

        9.     Violated grease interceptor maintenance requirements, any condition or limit imposed on the FSE’s business license or any provision of this chapter or other applicable law

        B.     Notice and Hearing. When the program manager has reason to believe that grounds exist for the revocation of a business license, he/she shall give written notice by certified mall thereof to the FSE setting forth a statement of the facts and grounds deemed to exist together with the time and place where the charges shall be heard by the hearing officer designated by the director of public works. The hearing date shall be not less than fifteen calendar days nor more than forty-five calendar days after the mailing of such notice.

        1.     At the hearing, the FSE shall have an opportunity to respond to the allegations set forth in the notice by presenting written or oral evidence. The revocation hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures established by the director of public works and approved by the city attorney.

        2.     After the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall prepare a written report setting forth a brief statement of facts found to be true, a determination of the issues presented, and conclusions.

        3.     The hearing officer shall issue his/her decision and order in writing within thirty calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing. The written decision and order of the hearing officer shall be sent by certified mail to the FSE or its legal counsel/representative at the FSE’s business address. In the event the hearing officer determines to not revoke the permit, he/she may order other enforcement actions, including, but not limited to, a temporary suspension of the business License or imposition of conditions on the business license, under terms and conditions that he/she deems appropriate.

        C.     Effect.

        1.     Upon an order of revocation by the hearing officer becoming final, the FSE shall permanently lose all rights to discharge any wastewater containing FOG directly or indirectly to the city’s system and shall have no right to conduct business in the city. All costs for physical termination shall be paid by the FSE.

        2.     Any owner or responsible management employee of the FSE shall be bound by the order of revocation, and is responsible to ensure that all employees of the FSE comply with any such order.

        3.     Any future application for a business license at any location within the city by any person or entity which was previously subject to an order of revocation or suspension will be considered by the program manager after fully reviewing the records of the revoked or suspended business license, which records may be the basis for denial of a new business license application.

        4.     An order of business license revocation or other enforcement action issued by the hearing officers shall be final in all respects on the sixteenth day after it is mailed to the FSE unless an appeal is filed with the city clerk pursuant to this chapter regarding appeals to the city council, no later than 5:00 p.m. on the fifteenth day following such mailing. (Ord. 1647 § 2, 2004)

 

13.11.250 Damage to facilities or interruption of normal operation.
        A.    Any person who discharges any waste which causes or contributes to any sewer blockage, SSOs, obstruction, interference, damage, or any other impairment to the city’s sewer facilities or to the operation of those facilities shall be liable for all costs required to clean or repair the facilities together with expenses incurred by the city to resume normal operations. A service charge of twenty-five percent of city’s costs shall be added to the costs and charges to reimburse the city for miscellaneous overhead, including administrative personnel and record keeping. The total amount shall be payable within forty-five days of invoicing by the city.

        B.     Any person who discharges waste which causes or contributes to the city violating its discharge requirements established by any regulatory agency, incurring additional expenses or suffering losses or damage to the facilities, shall be liable for any costs or expenses incurred by the city, including regulatory fines, penalties, and assessments made by other agencies or a court. (Ord. 1647 § 2, 2004)

 

13.11.260 Public nuisance.
        Discharge of wastewater in any manner in violation of this chapter or of any order issued by the program manager, hearing officer or city manager, as authorized by this chapter, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the program manager or city manager. Any violation of this chapter is likewise declared a public nuisance. Any person creating a public nuisance is guilty of a misdemeanor. No prosecution of any public nuisance action shall preclude the city from pursuing any other remedy for a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1647 § 2, 2004)

 

13.11.270 Termination of service.
        A.    The city, by order of the director of public works, may physically terminate sewer service to any property as follows:

        1.     On a term of any order of suspension or revocation of a business license; or

        2.     Upon the failure of a person not holding a valid business license to immediately cease the discharge, whether direct or indirect, to the city’s sewer facilities after the notice and the completion of any process relating to permit suspension or revocation.

        B.     All costs for physical termination shall be paid by the owner or operator of the FSE as well as all costs for reinstating service. (Ord. 1647 § 2, 2004)

 

13.11.280 Emergency suspension order.
        A.    The city may, by order of the city manager, suspend sewer service when the city manager determines that such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or impending discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health and welfare of persons, or to the environment, or may cause SSOs, sewer blockages, interference to the city’s sewer facilities, or may cause the city to violate any state or federal law or regulation. Any discharger notified of and subject to an emergency suspension order shall immediately cease and desist the discharge of all wastewater containing FOG to the sewer system.

        B.     As soon as reasonably practicable following the issuance of an emergency suspension order, but in no event more than five business days following the issuance of such order, the city manager shall hold a hearing to provide the FSE the opportunity to present information in opposition to the emergency suspension order. Such a hearing shall not stay the effect of the emergency suspension order. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the city manager and approved by the city attorney. The city manager shall issue a written decision and order within two business days following the hearing, which decision shall be sent by certified mall to the FSE at that FSE’s business address and/or to its legal counsel/representative at the address provided by such representative to the city. The decision of the city manager following the hearing shall be final and not appealable, but may be subject to judicial review pursuant to Section 13.11.340. The city manager’s decision may approve, modify or rescind the emergency suspension order, including an order that sewer service be terminated all together, if necessary. All costs for physical termination shall be paid by the owner or operator of the FSE as well as costs for reinstating service. (Ord. 1647 § 2, 2004)

 

13.11.290 Civil penalties.
        A.    All users of the city’s system and facilities are subject to enforcement actions administratively or judicially brought by the city, U.S. EPA, state of California Regional Water Quality Control Board, the county of Orange, district attorney or city attorney. Said actions may be taken pursuant to the authority and provisions of several laws, including but not limited to: (1) Federal Water Pollution Control Act, commonly known as the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C.A. Section 1251 et seq.); (2) California Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act (California Water Code Section 13000 et seq.); (3) California Hazardous Waste Control Law (California Health & Safety Code Sections 25100 to 25250); (4) Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 U.S.C.A Section 6901 et seq.); (5) California Government Code, Sections 54739-54740; and this chapter.

        B.     In the event the city is subject to the payment of fines or penalties pursuant to the legal authority and actions of other regulatory or enforcement agencies based on a violation of law or regulation or its permits, and said violation can be established by the city, as caused by the discharge of any user of the city’s system which is in violation of any provision of this chapter, the city shall be entitled to recover from the user all costs and expenses, including, but not limited to, the full amount of said fines or penalties to which it has been subjected.

        C.     Pursuant to the authority of California Government Code Sections 54739-54740, any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be liable civilly for a sum not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars per violation for each day in which such violation occurs. Pursuant to the authority of the Civil Water Act, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq., any person who violates any provision of this chapter, prohibition, or effluent limit shall be liable civilly for a sum not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars per violation for each day in which such violation occurs. The city attorney of the city, upon request of the city manager, shall petition the Superior Court to impose, assess and recover such penalties, or such other penalties as the city may impose, assess, and recover pursuant to federal and/or state legislative authorization or this chapter.

        D.    Administrative Civil Penalties.

        1.     Pursuant to the authority of California Government Code Sections 54740.5 and 54740.6, the city may issue an administrative complaint to any person who violates any provision of this chapter, prohibition, or effluent limit.

        2.     The administrative complaint shall be served by personal delivery or certified mail on the person and shall inform the person that a hearing will be conducted, and shall specify a hearing date within sixty days following service. The administrative complaint will allege the act or failure to act that constitutes the violation of the city’s regulations, the provisions of law authorizing civil liability to be imposed, and the proposed civil penalty. The matter shall be heard by the city manager. The person to whom an administrative complaint has been issued may waive the right to a hearing, in which case a hearing will not be conducted.

        3.     At the hearing, the person shall have an opportunity to respond to the allegations set forth in the administrative complaint by presenting written or oral evidence. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures established by the city manager and approved by the city attorney.

        4.     If the city manager designated a hearing officer, after the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall submit a written report to the city manager setting forth a brief statement of the facts found to be true, a determination of the issues presented, conclusions, and a recommendation.

    5.     Upon receipt of the written report by the hearing officer, or conclusion of the hearing if the city manager conducted the hearing, the city manager shall make his/her determination and should he/she find that grounds exist for assessment of a civil penalty against the person, he/she shall issue his/her decision and order in writing within thirty calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing.

        6.     If, after the hearing or appeal, if any, it is found that the person has violated reporting or discharge requirements, the city manager or city council may assess a civil penalty against that person. In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the city manager or city council may take into consideration all relevant circumstances, including but not limited to the extent of harm caused by the violation, the economic benefit derived through any non-compliance, the nature and persistence of the violation, the length of time over which the violation occurs, and corrective action, if any, attempted or taken by the person involved.

        7.     Civil penalties may be assessed as follows:

        a.     In an amount which shall not exceed two thousand dollars for each day for failing or refusing to furnish required reports;

        b.     In an amount which shall not exceed three thousand dollars for each day for failing or refusing to timely comply with any compliance schedules established by the city;

        c.     In an amount which shall not exceed five thousand dollars per violation for each day of discharge in violation of any waste discharge limit, or requirement issued, reissued, or adopted by the city;

        d.     In any amount which does not exceed ten dollars per gallon for discharges in violation of any suspension, revocation, cease and desist order or other orders, or prohibition issued, reissued, or adopted by the city;

        8.     An order assessing administrative civil penalties issued by the city manager shall be final in all respects on the thirty-first day after it is served on the person unless an appeal and request for hearing is filed with the city clerk, pursuant to this chapter regarding appeals to the city council, no later than 5:00 p.m. on the thirtieth day following such mailing. An order assessing administrative chill penalties issued by the city council shall be final upon issuance.

        9.     Copies of the administrative order shall be served on the party served with the administrative complaint, either by personal service or by registered mail to the person at his/her/its business or residence address, and upon other persons who appeared at the hearing and requested a copy of the order.

        10.   Any person aggrieved by a final order issued by the city council, after granting review of the order of the city manager, may obtain review of the order of the city council in the superior court, pursuant to Government Code Section 54740.6, by filing in the court a petition for writ of mandate within thirty days following the service of a copy of the decision or order issued by the city council.

        11.   Payment of any order setting administrative civil penalties shall be made within thirty days of the date the order becomes final. The amount of any administrative civil penalties imposed shall constitute a debt to the city.

        12.   No administrative civil penalties shall be recoverable for any violation for which the city has recovered civil penalties through a judicial proceeding filed pursuant to Government Code Section 54740. (Ord. 1647 § 2, 2004)

 

13.11.300 Criminal penalties.
        Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, which upon conviction is punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. Each violation and each day in which a violation occurs may constitute a new and separate violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties contained herein. (Ord. 1647 § 2, 2004)

 

13.11.310 Hearing on administrative deci-sion, action or determination.
        A.    Any FSE affected by any administrative decision, action or determination made by the program manager or notice of violation issued by any city inspector may file with the director of public works a written request for a hearing on the decision, action or determination. The request must be received by the city within fifteen days of mailing or posting of notice of the decision, action, or determination of the program manager to the person requesting the hearing. The request for hearing shall set forth in detail all facts in support of the request.

        B.     A hearing officer shall, within fifteen days of receiving the request for hearing, provide written notice to the person requesting the hearing of the hearing date, time and place. The hearing date shall not be more than thirty days from the mailing of such notice by certified mail to the appellant unless a later date is agreed to by the person requesting the hearing. If the hearing is not held within said time due to actions or inactions of the person requesting the hearing, then the staff decision shall be deemed final.

        C.     At the hearing, the person requesting the hearing shall have the opportunity to present information supporting its position concerning the challenged decision, action or determination. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by director of public works and approved by the city attorney.

        D.    After the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall prepare a written report setting forth a brief statement of facts found to be true, a determination of the issues presented, conclusions, and a determination whether to uphold, modify or reverse the challenged decision, action or determination. The hearing officer shall issue his/her decision and order within thirty calendar days of the hearing. The written decision and order of the hearing officer shall be sent by certified mail to the person requesting the hearing or its legal counsel/representative at the address provided to the city in the request.

        E.     The fee for a hearing pursuant to this section shall be set by resolution of the city council.

        F.     The order of the hearing officer shall be final in all respects on the sixteenth day after it is mailed to the person requesting the hearing unless an appeal is filed with the city clerk pursuant to this chapter regarding appeals to the city council no later than 5:00 p.m. on the fifteenth day following such mailing. (Ord. 1647 § 2, 2004)

 

13.11.320 Appeals to city council.
        A.    Any FSE adversely affected by a decision, action, or determination made by any hearing officer or the city manager, except as an appeal may be specifically restricted in this chapter, may, prior to the date that the hearing officer’s order becomes final, file a written appeal with the city clerk for hearing before the city council accompanied by an appeal fee in the amount established by resolution or ordinance of the city council. The request for hearing shall set forth in detail all the issues in dispute for which the appellant seeks determination and all facts supporting appellant’s request.

        No later than sixty days after receipt of the request for hearing, the city council shall either set the matter for a hearing, or deny the request for a hearing.

        A hearing shall be held by the city council within sixty-five days from the date of determination granting a hearing, unless a later date is agreed to by the appellant and the city council. If the matter is not heard within the required time, due to actions or inactions of the appellant, the hearing officer’s order shall be deemed final.

        B.     The city council shall grant all requests for a hearing on appeals concerning the suspension, revocation, or denial of a business license due to application of the provisions of this chapter. Whether to grant or deny the request for a hearing on appeals of other decisions of the hearing officer shall be within the sole discretion of the city council.

        C.     The appeal fee shall be refunded if the city council denies a hearing or reverses or modifies, in favor of the appellant, the order of the hearing officer. The fee shall not be refunded if the city council denies the appeal.

        D.    After any appeal hearing, the city council shall make a determination whether to uphold, modify, or reverse the decision, action or determination made by the hearing officer.

        E.     The decision of the city council shall be set forth in writing within sixty-five days after the dose of the hearing and shall contain a finding of the facts found to be true, the determination of Issues presented, and the conclusions. The written decision and order of the city council shall be sent by certified mail to the appellant at the appellant’s business address and/or to Its legal counsel/representative at the address provided to the city. The order of the city council shall be final upon its adoption. In the event the city council fails to reverse or modify the hearing officer’s order, it shall be deemed affirmed. (Ord. 1647 § 2, 2004)

 

13.11.330 Payment of charges.
        A.    Except as otherwise provided, all fees, charges and penalties required to be paid pursuant to this chapter, whether established In this chapter or by other ordinance or resolution, are due and payable upon receipt of notice thereof. All such amounts are delinquent if unpaid forty-five days after date of invoice.

        B.     Any charge that becomes delinquent shall have added to it a penalty in accordance with the following:

        1.     Forty-six days after date of invoice, a basic penalty of ten percent of the base invoice amount, not to exceed a maximum of one thousand dollars; and

        2.     A penalty of one and one-half percent per month of the base invoice amount and basic penalty shall accrue from and after the forty-sixth day after date of invoice.

        C.     Penalties charged under this section shall not accrue to those invoices successfully appealed, provided the city receives written notification of said appeal prior to the payment due date.

        D.    Payment of disputed charges is still required by the due date during city review of any submitted appeal.

        E.     Collection of delinquent accounts shall be in accordance with the city’s policy for collection of delinquent obligations owed to the city. Any such action for collection may include an application for an injunction to prevent repeated and recurring violations of this chapter. (Ord. 1647 § 2, 2004)

 

13.11.340 Judicial review.
        A.    Pursuant to Section 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil Procedure, the city hereby enacts this part to limit to ninety days following final decisions in adjudicatory administrative hearings the time within which an action can be brought to review such decisions by means of administrative mandamus. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the time limits set forth in California Government Code Section 54740, or any successor provisions thereto, shall apply to any challenges to any civil penalty imposed pursuant to Section 13.11.290.

        B.     Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms and words shall have the following meanings:

        1.     “Decision” means and include adjudicatory administrative decisions that are made after hearing.

        2.     “Complete record” means and includes the transcript, if any exists, of the proceedings, all pleadings, all notices and orders, any proposed decision by the city’s officers, agents, or employees, the final decision, all admitted exhibits, all rejected exhibits in the possession of the city or its officers, agents or employees, all written evidence, and any other papers in the case.

        C.     Time Limit for Judicial Review. Except as provided in Section 13.11.290, judicial review of any decision of the city or its officer or agent may be made pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure only if the petition for writ of mandate is filed not later than the ninetieth day following the date on which the decision becomes final. If there is no provision for reconsideration in the procedures governing the proceedings or if the date is not otherwise specified, the decision is final on the date it is made. If there is provision for reconsideration, the decision is final upon the expiration of the period during which such reconsideration can be sought; provided that if reconsideration is sought pursuant to such provision the decision is final for the purposes of this section on the date that reconsideration is rejected.

        D.    In making a final decision, the city shall provide notice to the party that Section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure governs the time within which judicial review must be sought. (Ord. 1647 § 2, 2004)

Chapter 13.12 SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
13.12.010 Purpose—Use of funds.
        A.    The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide for sewer service charges to be assessed, according to use, upon each and every parcel of land within the city connected to the sanitary sewer system for the privilege of the use of the system and which shall provide funds to be used principally to operate, maintain and improve the system.

        B.     The funds referred to in subsection A of this section may also be used to repay principal and interest on bonds issued for construction or reconstruction of the sanitary sewer system and to repay federal or state loans for system construction/reconstruction. In the case of required local matching funds necessary to obtain federal or state grants in aid, the moneys may also be utilized for this purpose. (Ord. 1052 § 1, 1978; Ord. 1051 § 1, 1978)

 

13.12.020 Operation and construction fees.
        Every person in possession or control of property from which sewage is discharged into or through the municipal sewer system, referred to in this section as “users,” shall pay the following fees for such service:

        A.    A sewer operation fee, as set by resolution of the city council and on file in the office of the city clerk, is established, effective January 1, 1979. The fee shall be collected and expended for sewer system operational purposes as determined by the city council.

        B.     A sewer construction fee, as set by resolution of the city council and on file in the office of the city clerk, is established, effective July 1, 1978. The fee shall be collected and expended for sewer system construction or reconstruction purposes as determined by the city council. (Ord. 1213 §§ 2, 3, 1983; Ord. 1052 § 1, 1978; Ord. 1051 § 1, 1978)

 

13.12.030 Premises without city water.
        On premises not served with city water, the billing for sewer charges shall be made insofar as practical in accordance with Chapter 4.50. The charge shall be determined and based upon the average residence water consumption and billing served with city water. Average residential water usage shall be defined as five thousand four hundred cubic feet per quarterly billing period. (Ord. 1628 § 15, 2003; Ord. 1052 § 1, 1978; Ord. 1051 § 1, 1978)

 

13.12.040 Payment—Delinquency.
        Payment of sewer service charges must be made in accordance with Chapter 4.50. Delinquent payments of sewer service charge shall be collected in accordance with Chapter 4.50. (Ord. 1628 § 16, 2003; Ord. 1052 § 1, 1978; Ord. 1051 § 1, 1978)

Chapter 13.16 PAYMENT FOR WATER AND SEWER LINES
13.16.010 Property benefited to pay.
        Where sewer or water lines or services not main lines are installed for the use of certain areas or parts of the city, such areas or property which will be benefited shall pay the costs of all lines and installation. (Ord. 355 § 1, 1958)

 

13.16.020 Determination by city.
        Where the costs of such installation are advanced by an individual owner of property or by the city, the city may determine the area to be benefited and the amount to be paid by the owners of the various properties included within the benefited area, and no benefited area shall be allowed to connect to the city services without paying its proportionate amount as a connection or service charge. This shall be in addition to any other charges made generally by the city. (Ord. 355 § 2, 1958)

 

13.16.030 Reimbursement of developers.
        Where an individual or company advances or pays the money for the installation of lines and services, which lines and services will benefit more than the individual’s property, an agreement may be entered into between the party so advancing the money and the city, whereby it is determined that certain described property will be benefited from the installation of such lines and services and the amount of the benefits for each portion or part of the property, and that as a condition of services to the various pieces of property who have not paid, a connection charge of a definite amount will be made and this connection charge or charges shall be made by the city and paid to the property advancing the money so that all owners of property within the benefited area shall within the sole discretion of the council pay on an equal basis for the construction cost of the lines and appurtenances. (Ord. 355 § 3, 1958)

 

13.16.040 Agreements authorized.
        The city shall have the authority to enter into a written agreement with the party advancing the costs, which agreement may provide among other things the amount of the connection charges against the various parcels of property, whether interest shall be paid or not, how long a period the party advancing the money shall be entitled to a rebate thereof, and shall further provide that the city shall not be liable for any payback except from funds actually collected by it, and such other matters as may be convenient or necessary between the parties. (Ord. 355 § 4, 1958)

 

13.16.050 Reimbursement of city.
        Where the city has advanced funds it may by minute order or resolution describe the property to be affected or benefited and the amount of payback to which the city shall be entitled as a connection charge from the various pieces of property. Thereafter such connection charge shall be made in addition to all other usual charges for connecting with the public utility. (Ord. 355 § 5, 1958)

Chapter 13.20 TEMPORARY SANITARY FACILITIES
13.20.010 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter certain words and terms are defined as follows:

        A.    “Building official” means the director of building and safety or the regularly authorized building inspectors of the city.

        B.     “Health department” means the county health department.

        C.     “Person” means any person, firm, corporation or any county, municipal corporation or public district of the state.

        D.    “Sanitary facility” means a water-flush toilet approved by the health department connected to an approved sewage disposal system, or a chemical-type toilet approved by the health department.

        E.     “Work” means the erection, construction, alteration, repair, razing, adding to, removal or demolition of any building or buildings; the construction or repair of any street, road, highway or railroad; installation of sewers or water lines; or the improvement of any grounds for parks, playgrounds, airports or for any similar purpose. (Ord. 739 § 1, 1968; Ord. 200 § 1, 1954)

 

13.20.020 Required.
        It is unlawful for any person to commence or proceed with any work unless before commencing or proceeding with the work adequate and suitable sanitary facilities are provided for the use of persons employed on the work. The sanitary facilities provided shall be located upon the site upon which such work is being done or, in case it is impractical to locate the facilities upon the site, such sanitary facilities must be located not more than two hundred fifty feet from the site of the work. One sanitary facility shall be provided for each twenty-five persons or fraction employed upon the work. (Ord. 200 § 2, 1954)

 

13.20.030 Design.
        All sanitary facilities shall be completely enclosed on all sides and top and shall be equipped with a self-closing door. The floor of the enclosure shall be six inches above ground level and shall be smooth, and screened ventilation shall be provided for sanitary facility compartments. All sanitary facility enclosures shall have an inside area of at least fifteen square feet for each sanitary facility enclosed. Each sanitary facility enclosure shall contain at least one sanitary facility with seat and cover and one separate urinal. The ceiling height of the sanitary facility enclosure shall be a minimum of six feet six inches. (Ord. 200 § 3, 1954)

 

13.20.040 Maintenance.
        All sanitary facility enclosures provided for by this chapter shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times and shall be kept supplied with toilet paper. Chemical-type sanitary facilities shall be completely pumped out at sufficiently frequent intervals to prevent odors and overflowing and shall be recharged with a fresh, non-skin-burning chemical. (Ord. 200 § 5, 1954)

 

13.20.050 Enforcement.
        It shall be the duty of the building official, the health department and all peace officers charged with the enforcement of law to enforce this chapter and all the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 739 § 1, 1968; Ord. 200 § 6, 1954)

Chapter 13.24 WATER QUALITY ORDINANCE
13.24.010 Definitions.
        For the purpose of the provisions of this chapter concerning water quality hereinafter set forth, the following words and phrases shall be construed to have the meanings herein set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:

        “Appeals board” means the planning commission, which shall hear appeals arising from the enforcement of this chapter.

        “Authorized inspector” means any safety officer or any other person designated by the city manager, who is/are assigned to investigate compliance with, detect violations of, and/or take actions pursuant to this chapter.

        “City” means the city of La Habra, Orange County, California.

        “City manager” means the city manager of the city or his/her designee.

        “Co-permittee” means the county of Orange, the Orange County Flood Control District, and/or any one of the thirty-one municipalities, including the city, which are responsible for compliance with the terms of the NPDES permit.

        “Community development group” means the building department, planning department, and/or engineering department of the city.

        “DAMP” means the Orange County Drainage Area Management Plan, as the same may be amended from time to time.

        “Development project guidance” means Chapter VII to the DAMP, and the Appendix thereto, entitled “Best Management Practices for New Development Including Non-Residential Construction Projects,” as the same may be amended from time to time.

        “Discharge” means any release, spill, leak, pump, flow, escape, leaching (including subsurface migration or deposition to groundwater), dumping or disposal of any liquid, semi-solid or solid substance.

        “Discharge exception” means the group of activities not restricted or prohibited by this chapter, including only:

        1.     Discharges composed entirely of storm water; discharges subject to regulation under current EPA or Regional Water Quality Control Board issued NPDES permits, state general permits, or other waivers, permits or approvals granted by an appropriate government agency; discharges from property for which best management practices set forth in the development project guidance are being implemented and followed; discharges to the storm water drainage system from potable water line flushing, fire fighting activities, landscape irrigation systems, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, and de minimis groundwater infiltration to the storm water drainage system (from leaks in joints or connections or cracks in water drainage pipes or conveyance systems); discharges from potable water sources, passive foundation drains, air conditioning condensation and other building roof runoff, agricultural irrigation water runoff, water from crawl space pumps, passive footing drains, lawn watering, non-commercial vehicle washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; discharges of reclaimed water generated by a lawfully permitted water treatment facility; public street wash waters when related to cleaning and maintenance by, or on behalf of, the city; discharges authorized pursuant to a permit issued under Section 13.24.040 hereof; discharges allowable under the domestic sewage exception; discharges for which the discharger has reduced to the extent feasible the amounts of pollutants in such discharge; and discharges authorized pursuant to federal or state laws or regulations.

        2.     In any action taken to enforce this chapter, the burden shall be on the person who is the subject of such action to establish that a discharge was within the scope of this discharge exception.

        “Domestic sewage exception” means discharges which are exceptions to this chapter and excluded from the definition of prohibited discharge, as defined herein, including only:

        1.     Discharges composed entirely of accidental spills of untreated sanitary wastes (commonly called domestic sewage) and other wastes, but limited solely to wastes that are controlled by and are within publicly owned wastewater treatment system collection facilities immediately prior to the accidental spill.

        “Effective date” means September 6, 1997.

        “Enforcing attorney” means the city attorney or district attorney acting as counsel to the city and his/her designee, which counsel is authorized to take enforcement action as described herein. For purposes of criminal prosecution, only the district attorney or his/her designee shall act as the enforcing attorney.

        “EPA” means the Environmental Protection Agency of the United States.

        “Hearing officer” means the city manager or his/her designee, who shall preside at the administrative hearings authorized by this chapter.

        “Illicit connection” means any man-made conveyance or drainage system, pipeline, conduit, inlet or outlet through which the discharge of any pollutant to the storm water drainage system occurs or may occur. The term illicit connection shall not include legal nonconforming connections or connections to the storm water drainage system that are hereinafter authorized by the agency with jurisdiction over the system at the location at which the connection is made.

        “Invoice for costs” means the actual costs and expenses of the city, incurred during any inspection conducted pursuant to Section 13.24.050 of this chapter, where a notice of noncompliance or other enforcement option under Section 13.24.060 of this chapter is utilized to obtain compliance with this chapter.

        “Legal nonconforming connection” means connections to the storm water drainage system existing as of the enactment of this chapter that were in compliance with all federal, state and local rules, regulations, statutes and administrative requirements in effect at the time the connection was established, including but not limited to any discharge permitted pursuant to the terms and conditions of an individual discharge permit issued pursuant to the industrial waste permits, Ordinance No. 964.

        “New development” means all public and private residential (whether single-family, multi-unit or planned unit development), industrial, commercial, retail, and other nonresidential construction projects, or grading for future construction, for which either a discretionary land use approval, grading permit, building permit or nonresidential plumbing permit is required.

        “Nonresidential plumbing permit” means a plumbing permit authorizing the construction and/or installation of facilities for the conveyance of liquids other than storm water, potable water, reclaimed water or domestic sewage.

        “NPDES permit” means the currently applicable municipal discharge permit issued by the Regional Water Quality Control Board, Santa Ana Region, which permit establishes waste discharge requirements applicable to storm water runoff in the city.

        “Person” means any natural person as well as any corporation, partnership, government entity or subdivision, trust, estate, cooperative association, joint venture, business entity, or other similar entity, or the agent, employee or representative of any of the above.

        “Pollutant” means any liquid, solid or semi-solid substances, or combination thereof, including but not limited to:

        1.     Artificial materials, (such as floatable plastics, wood products or metal shavings);

        2.     Household waste (such as trash, paper, and plastics; cleaning chemicals; yard wastes; animal fecal materials; used oil and fluids from vehicles, lawn mowers and other common household equipment);

        3.     Metals and non-metals, including compounds of metals and non-metals, (such as cadmium, lead, zinc, copper, silver, nickel, chromium, cyanide, phosphorus and arsenic), with characteristics which cause an adverse effect on living organisms;

        4.     Petroleum and related hydrocarbons (such as fuels, lubricants, surfactants, waste oils, solvents, coolants and grease);

        5.     Animal wastes (such as discharge from confinement facilities, kennels, pens and recreational facilities, including, stables, show facilities, or polo fields);

        6.     Substances having a pH less than 6.5 or greater than 8.6, or unusual coloration, turbidity or odor;

        7.     Waste materials and wastewater generated on construction sites and by construction activities (such as painting and staining; use of sealants and glues; use of lime; use of wood preservatives and solvents; disturbance of asbestos fibers, paint flakes or stucco fragments; application of oils, lubricants, hydraulic, radiator or battery fluids; construction equipment washing; concrete pouring and cleanup; use of concrete detergents; steam cleaning or sand blasting; use of chemical degreasing or diluting agents; and use of super chlorinated water for potable water line flushing);

        8.     Materials causing an increase in biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand or total organic carbon;

        9.     Materials which contain base/neutral or acid extractible organic compounds;

        10.   Those pollutants defined in Section 1362(6) of the Federal Clean Water Act; and

        11.   Any other constituent or material, including but not limited to pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, fecal coliform, fecal streptococcus or enterococcus, or eroded soils, sediment and particulate materials, in quantities that will interfere with or adversely affect the beneficial uses of the receiving waters, flora or fauna of the state.

        “Prohibited discharge” means any discharge which contains any pollutant, from public or private property to (1) the storm water drainage system; (2) any upstream flow, which is tributary to the storm water drainage system; (3) any groundwater, river, stream, creek, wash or dry weather arroyo, wetlands area, marsh, coastal slough, or (4) any coastal harbor, bay, or the Pacific Ocean. The term prohibited discharge shall not include discharges allowable under the discharge exception.

        “Significant redevelopment” means the rehabilitation or reconstruction of public or private residential (whether single-family, multi-unit or planned unit development), industrial, commercial, retail, or other nonresidential structures, for which either a discretionary land use approval, grading permit, building permit or nonresidential plumbing permit is required.

        “State general permit” means either the state general industrial storm water permit or the state general construction permit and the terms and requirements of either or both. In the event the EPA revokes the in-lieu permitting authority of the State Water Resources Control Board, then the term state general permit shall also refer to any EPA administered storm water control program for industrial and construction activities.

        “Storm water drainage system” means street gutter, channel, storm drain, constructed drain, lined diversion structure, wash area, inlet, outlet or other facility, which is a part of or tributary to the county-wide storm water runoff system and owned, operated, maintained or controlled by the county of Orange, the Orange County Flood Control District or any co-permittee city, and used for the purpose of collecting, storing, transporting, or disposing of storm water. (Ord. 1514 § 1, 1997)

 

13.24.020 Prohibition on illicit connections and prohibited discharges.
        A.    No person shall:

        1.     Construct, maintain, operate and/or utilize any illicit connection;

        2.     Cause, allow or facilitate any prohibited discharge;

        3.     Act, cause, permit or suffer any agent, employee, or independent contractor, to construct, maintain, operate and/or utilize any illicit connection, or cause, allow or facilitate any prohibited discharge.

        B.     The prohibition against illicit connections shall apply irrespective of whether the illicit connection was established prior to the effective date of this chapter; however, legal nonconforming connections shall not become illicit connections until the earlier of one of the following:

        1.     For all structural improvements to property installed for the purpose of discharge to the storm water conveyance system, the expiration of five years from the effective date.

        2.     For all nonstructural improvements to property existing for the purpose of discharge to the storm water conveyance system, the expiration of six months following delivery of a notice to the owner or occupant of the property, which states a legal nonconforming connection has been identified. The notice of a legal nonconforming connection shall state the date of expiration of use under this chapter.

        C.     A civil or administrative violation of Section 13.24.020(A) shall occur irrespective of the negligence or intent of the violator to construct, maintain, operate and/or utilize an illicit connection or to cause, allow or facilitate any prohibited discharge.

        D.    If an authorized inspector reasonably determines that a discharge, which is otherwise within the discharge exception, may adversely affect the beneficial uses of receiving waters, then the authorized inspector may give written notice to the owner of the property or facility that the discharge exception shall not apply to the subject discharge following expiration of the thirty-day period commencing upon delivery of the notice. Upon expiration of the thirty-day period any such discharge shall constitute a violation of subsection A. The notice of a legal nonconforming connection shall state the date of expiration of use under this chapter.

        E.     The owner or occupant of property on which a legal nonconforming connection exists may request an administrative hearing, pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 13.24.060(A)(5) through (A)(10) for an extension of the period allowed for continued use of the connection. A reasonable extension of use may be authorized by an authorized inspector upon consideration of the following factors:

        1.     The potential adverse effects of the continued use of the connection upon the beneficial uses of receiving waters;

        2.     The economic investment of the discharger in the legal nonconforming connection; and

        3.     The financial effect upon the discharger of a termination of the legal nonconforming connection. (Ord. 1514 § 1, 1997)

 

13.24.030 Control of urban runoff.
        A.    New Development and Significant Redevelopment.

        1.     Beginning September 6, 1997 and continuing thereafter, all new development and significant redevelopment within the city shall be undertaken in accordance with:

        a.     The DAMP, including, but not limited to, the development project guidance; and

        b.     Any conditions and requirements established by the city which are reasonably related to the reduction or elimination of pollutants in stormwater runoff from the project site.

        2.     Prior to the issuance by the city of a grading permit, building permit or nonresidential plumbing permit for any new development or significant redevelopment, the community development group shall review the water quality management plan (WQMP) and impose terms, conditions and requirements on the project in accordance with subsection (A)(1). If the new development or significant redevelopment will be approved without application for a grading permit, building permit or nonresidential plumbing permit, the community development group shall review the WQMP and impose terms, conditions, and requirements on the project in accordance with subsection (A)(1) prior to the issuance of a discretionary land use approval or, at the city’s discretion, prior to recordation of a subdivision map.

        3.     Notwithstanding subsections (A)(1) and (A)(2), compliance with the development project guidance shall not be required for construction of:

        a.     A new or redeveloped (one) single-family detached residence of three thousand nine hundred square feet footprint or less; and

        b.     Any project that requires the disturbance of soil of one thousand square feet or less unless the city’s community development director determines that the construction may result in the discharge of significant levels of a pollutant into a tributary to the stormwater drainage system.

        4.     Compliance with the conditions and requirements of the DAMP shall not exempt any person from the requirement to independently comply with each provision of this chapter.

        5.     If the city’s community development group determines that the project will have a de minimis impact on the quality of stormwater runoff, then it may issue a written waiver of the requirement for compliance with the provisions of the development project guidance.

        6.     The owner of a new development or significant redevelopment project, or upon transfer of the property, its successors and assigns, shall implement and adhere to the terms, conditions and requirements imposed pursuant to subsection (A)(1) on a new development or significant redevelopment project.

 

        Each failure by the owner of the property or its successors or assigns to implement and adhere to the terms, conditions and requirements imposed pursuant to subsection (A)(1) on a new development or significant redevelopment project shall constitute a violation of this chapter.

        B.     Cost Recovery. The city shall be reimbursed by the project applicant for all costs and expenses including but not limited to WQMP plan check and inspection fees incurred by the community development group in the review of new development or significant redevelopment projects for compliance with DAMP. The city may elect to require a deposit of estimated costs and expenses, and the actual costs and expenses shall be deducted from the deposit, and the balance, if any, refunded to the project applicant. (Ord. 1732 § 1, 2012; Ord. 1682 §§ 1, 2, 2007; Ord. 1514 § 1, 1997)

 

13.24.040 Permits.
        A.    Discharge Permit Procedure.

        1.     Permit. On application of the owner of property or the operator of any facility, which property or facility is not otherwise subject to the requirements of a state general permit or a national pollution discharge elimination system permit regulating stormwater discharges, city manager or designee may issue a permit authorizing the release of nonstormwater discharges to the stormwater drainage system if:

        a.     The discharge of material or substance is reasonably necessary for the conduct of otherwise legal activities on the property; and

        b.     The discharge will not cause a nuisance, impair the beneficial uses of receiving waters, or cause any reduction in established water quality standards.

        2.     Application. The applicant shall provide all information requested by the city manager or designee, for review and consideration of the application, including, but not limited to, specific detail as to the activities to be conducted on the property, plans and specifications for facilities located on the property, identification of equipment or processes to be used on-site and other information as may be requested in order to determine the substances, and quantities thereof, which may be discharged if permission is granted. Such application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in such amount as set forth by resolution of the city council.

        3.     Permit Issuance. The permit shall be granted or denied by the city manager or designee, or designated representative, no later than sixty business days following the completion and filing of the application. The applicant shall be notified of the action taken by personal service or by first-class mail, postage prepaid.

        4.     Permit Conditions. The permit may include terms, conditions and requirements to ensure compliance with the objectives of this chapter and as necessary to protect the receiving waters, including, but not limited to:

        a.     Identification of the discharge location on the property and the location at which the discharge will enter the stormwater drainage system;

        b.     Identification of the substances and quantities thereof to be discharged into the stormwater drainage system;

        c.     Specification of pollution prevention techniques and structural or nonstructural control requirements as reasonably necessary to prevent the occurrence of potential discharges in violation of this chapter;

        d.     Requirements for self-monitoring of any discharge;

        e.     Requirements for submission of documents or data, such as technical reports, production data, discharge reports, self-monitoring reports and waste manifests; and

        f.      Consent by the applicant to a general inspection of the facility upon twenty-four hours notice;

        g.     Other terms and conditions appropriate to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the protection of receiving waters, including requirements for compliance with best management practices guidance documents approved by any federal, state or regional agency.

        5.     General Permit. In the discretion of the city manager or designee, the permit may, in accordance with the conditions identified in subsection (A)(4), be prepared as a general permit applicable to a specific category of activities. If a general permit is issued, the applicant shall provide any and all information which may be required by the city manager or designee, for each and every person intended to discharge within the scope of the authorization provided by the general permit.

        B.     Permit Suspension, Revocation or Modification.

        1.     The city manager or his/her designee may suspend or revoke any permit when it is determined that:

        a.     The permittee has violated any term, condition or requirement of the permit or any applicable provision of this chapter; or

        b.     The permittee’s discharge or the circumstances under which the discharge occurs have changed so that it is no longer appropriate to except the discharge from the prohibitions on prohibited discharge contained within this chapter; or

        c.     The permittee fails to comply with any schedule for compliance issued pursuant to this chapter; or

        d.     Any regulatory agency, including but not limited to, the EPA or a regional water quality control board having jurisdiction over the discharge, notifies the city or permittee that the discharge should be terminated.

        2.     The city manager or his/her designee, may modify or amend the terms of any permit when it is determined that:

        a.     Federal or state law requirements have changed in a manner that necessitates a modification in the permit; or

        b.     The permittee’s discharge or the circumstances under which the discharge occurs have changed so that it is appropriate to modify the permit’s terms, conditions or requirements; or

        c.     A modification of the permit is necessary to ensure compliance with the objectives of this chapter or to protect the quality of receiving waters.

        The permittee shall be informed of any modification in the permit terms and conditions at least forty-five business days prior to the effective date of the modified permit.

        3.     The determination that a permit shall be denied, suspended, revoked or modified may be appealed by a permittee pursuant to the same procedures applicable to appeal of a notice hereunder. In the absence of a judicial order to the contrary, the permittee may continue to discharge pending issuance of the final administrative decision by the hearing officer.

        C.     Limited Permittee Rights. Permits issued under this chapter are for the person or entity identified therein as the “permittee” only, and authorize the specific operation at the specific location identified in the permit. The issuance of a permit does not vest the permittee with a continuing right to discharge.

        D.    Transfer of Permits. No permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferred or assigned to or used by a person not named on the permit, unless prior written approval is obtained from the city manager or his/her designee, which approval shall not be unreasonable withheld. (Ord. 1514 § 1, 1997)

 

13.24.050 Inspections.
        A.    Scope of Inspections.

        1.     Right to Inspect. Prior to commencing any inspection as herein below authorized, the authorized inspector shall obtain either the consent of the owner or occupant of the property or shall obtain an administrative inspection warrant or criminal search warrant.

        2.     Entry to Inspect. The authorized inspector may enter property to investigate the source of any discharge to any public street, inlet, gutter, storm drain or the storm water drainage system located within the jurisdiction of the city.

        3.     Compliance Assessments. The authorized inspector may inspect property for the purpose of verifying compliance with this chapter, including but not limited to (a) identifying products produced, processes conducted, chemicals used and materials stored on or contained within the property, (b) identifying point(s) of discharge of all wastewater, process water systems and pollutants, (c) investigating the natural slope at the property, including drainage patterns and man-made conveyance systems, (d) establishing the location of all points of discharge from the property, whether by surface runoff or through a storm drain system, (e) locating any illicit connection or the source of prohibited discharge, (f) evaluating compliance with any permit issued pursuant to Section 13.24.040, and (g) investigating the condition of any legal nonconforming connection.

        4.     Portable Equipment. For purposes of verifying compliance with this chapter, the authorized inspector may inspect any vehicle, truck, trailer, tank truck or other mobile equipment in compliance with 13.24.050(A)(1).

        5.     Records Review. The authorized inspector may inspect all records of the owner or occupant of property relating to chemicals or processes presently or previously occurring on-site including material and/or chemical inventories, facilities maps or schematics and diagrams, material safety data sheets, hazardous waste manifests, business plans, pollution prevention plans, state general permits, storm water pollution prevention plans, monitoring program plans and any other record(s) relating to illicit connections, prohibited discharges, a legal nonconforming connection or any other source of contribution or potential contribution of pollutants to the storm water drainage system.

        6.     Sampling and Testing. The authorized inspector may inspect, sample and test any area runoff, soils area (including groundwater testing), process discharge, materials within any waste storage area (including any container contents), and/or treatment system discharge for the purpose of determining the potential for contribution of pollutants to the storm water drainage system. The authorized inspector may investigate the integrity of all storm drain and sanitary sewer systems, any legal nonconforming connection or other pipelines on the property using appropriate tests, including but not limited to smoke and dye tests or video surveys. The authorized inspector may take photographs or video tape, make measurements or drawings, and create any other record reasonably necessary to document conditions on the property.

        7.     Monitoring. The authorized inspector may erect and maintain monitoring devices on the property for the purpose of measuring any discharge or potential source of discharge to the storm water drainage system.

        8.     Test Results. The owner or occupant of property subject to inspection shall, on submission of a written request, receive copies of all monitoring and test results conducted by the authorized inspector. (Ord. 1514 § 1, 1997)

 

13.24.060 Enforcement.
        A.    Administrative Remedies. The authorized inspector may, in his/her discretion, issue either a notice of noncompliance, or a cease and desist order as hereinafter described. In determining which remedy option to pursue, the authorized inspector may consider the severity of the discharge or violation of the applicable permit, the potential for irreparable harm which may be caused by the discharge or permit violation, whether the owner, occupant or responsible person is a repeat offender of the same or similar violations.

        1.     Notice of Noncompliance. The authorized inspector may deliver to a permittee, the owner or occupant of any property, or to any person responsible for an illicit connection or prohibited discharge a notice of noncompliance. The notice of noncompliance shall be delivered in accordance with Section 13.24.060(A)(4).

        a.     The notice of noncompliance shall identify the provision(s) of this chapter and/or the applicable permit which has been violated. The notice of noncompliance shall state that continued noncompliance may result in additional enforcement actions against the owner, occupant and/or person.

        b.     The notice of noncompliance shall state a compliance date that must be met by the owner, occupant and/or person; provided, however, that the compliance date may not exceed ninety days unless the authorized inspector extends the compliance deadline an additional ninety days where good cause exists for an extension.

        The notice of noncompliance may include the following terms and requirements:

        i.      Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as reasonably necessary to prevent the imminent threat of a prohibited discharge, including but not limited to a prohibited discharge from any pond, pit, well, surface impoundment, holding or storage area; 13.24.060

        ii.     Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as reasonably necessary to discontinue any illicit connection;

        iii.    Specific requirements for containment, cleanup, removal, storage, installation of overhead covering, or proper disposal of any pollutant having the potential to contact storm water runoff;

        iv.    Any other terms or requirements reasonably calculated to prevent the imminent threat of, or continuing violations of this chapter, including, but not limited to requirements for compliance with best management practices guidance documents promulgated by any federal, state, regional or local agency;

        v.     Any other terms or requirements reasonably calculated to achieve full compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of any permit issued pursuant hereto.

        2.     Cease and Desist Orders. The authorized inspector may issue a cease and desist order. A cease and desist order shall be delivered in accordance with Section 13.24.060(A)(4) of this chapter. A cease and desist order may direct a permittee, the owner or occupant of any property and/or other person responsible for a violation of this chapter to:

        a.     Immediately discontinue any illicit connection or prohibited discharge to the storm water drainage system;

        b.     Immediately contain or divert any flow of water off the property where the flow is occurring in violation of any provision of this chapter;

        c.     Immediately discontinue any other violation of this chapter;

        d.     Clean up or remediate the area affected by the violation;

        e.     Immediately cease any activity not in compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of a permit issued pursuant to Section 13.24.040.

        3.     Recovery of Costs. Business inspection fees shall be collected on an annual basis for those businesses requiring regular compliance inspections pursuant to the Santa Ana Regional Quality Control Board’s municipal discharge permit. Further, the authorized inspector may deliver to the owner or occupant of any property, a permittee or any other person who has failed to comply with either a notice of noncompliance or a cease and desist order, an invoice for costs (“invoice of cost”) for reimbursement for the city’s actual costs incurred in issuing and enforcement of any provision of this chapter. Actual costs shall include, but are not limited to, the cost to the city for inspections or reinspections of the property, preparation, issuance and enforcement of any subsequent notice or order. The costs charged herein are intended to compensate for administration costs and not for enforcement of the law. The invoice for costs shall be due to the city immediately, if personally served or within thirty days from the date of service, if served by mail. If any owner, occupant, permittee or person fails to pay the invoice for costs or file a timely appeal pursuant to Sections 13.24.060(A)(5) through (A)(9), then the enforcing attorney may institute collection proceedings. The director may elect to institute collection proceedings in small claims court, in which case, the matter will be handled by the director of public works, city engineer or his or her designee.

        4.     Delivery of Notice. Any notice of noncompliance, cease and desist order, notice of legal nonconforming connection or invoice of costs (hereinafter, collectively referred to as the “notice”) shall be delivered pursuant to the following requirements:

        a.     The notice shall state that the recipient has a right to appeal the matter as set forth in Sections 13.24.060(A)(5) through 13.24.060(A)(10) of this chapter.

        b.     Delivery shall be deemed complete upon (i) personal service to the recipient; (ii) deposit in the U.S. mail, postage pre-paid for first class delivery; or (iii) facsimile service with confirmation of receipt.

        c.     Where the recipient is the property owner, the address for delivery of notice by mail shall be the address from the most recently issued equalized assessment roll for the property or as it otherwise appears in the current records of the city.

        d.     Where the recipient is a permittee, the address for delivery of notice by mail shall be the address set forth on the application for a permit.

        e.     Where the owner or occupant of any property cannot be located after the reasonable efforts of the authorized inspector, a notice shall be deemed delivered after posting such notice on the property for a period of ten business days.

        5.     Administrative Hearing. Except as set forth in Section 13.24.060(A)(7), any person receiving a notice or any person who is subject to any adverse determination made pursuant to this chapter, may appeal the matter by requesting a hearing before the hearing officer as set forth in subsection (A)(5) of this section. Notwithstanding the foregoing, these appeal procedures shall not apply to criminal proceedings initiated to enforce this chapter.

        6.     Request for Hearing. Any person appealing a notice or an adverse determination shall, within thirty days of receipt thereof, file a written request for a hearing with the office of the city clerk accompanied by a hearing fee as established by separate resolution. A copy of the request for hearing shall also be mailed on the date of filing to the hearing officer. Thereafter, a hearing on the matter shall be held before the hearing officer within forty-five business days of the date of filing of the written request unless, in the reasonable discretion of the hearing officer and pursuant to a written request by the appealing party, a continuance of the hearing is granted.

        7.     Hearing for Cease and Desist Orders and Emergency Abatement Actions. A hearing on the issuance of a cease and desist order or following an emergency abatement action shall be held within five business days following the issuance of the order or the action of abatement, unless the hearing (or the time requirement for the hearing) is waived in writing by the party subject to the cease and desist order or the emergency abatement. A request for a hearing shall not be required from the person subject to the cease and desist order or the emergency abatement action.

        8.     Hearing Proceedings. The authorized inspector shall appear in support of the notice, determination, or emergency abatement action, and the appealing party shall appear in opposition to the notice, determination, or emergency abatement action. Each party shall have the right to present testimony and other documentary evidence as necessary for explanation of the case. The decision of the hearing officer shall be issued within ten business days of the conclusion of the hearing and shall be delivered by first-class, postage prepaid, to the appealing party. Notwithstanding the above, the decision of the hearing officer in any preceding determining the validity of a cease and desist order or following an emergency abatement action shall be mailed within five business days following the conclusion of the hearing. However, all other provisions in this chapter regarding appeal procedures shall apply to cease and desist orders.

        9.     Final Decision and Appeal to the Appeals Board. A person may appeal the decision of the hearing officer to the appeals board by filing a written notice of appeal with the planning department within ten business days from the date of mailing of the hearing officer’s decision. The notice of appeal shall state in detail the factual basis for the appeal. The appeals board shall consider the appeal at a public meeting not less than ten, nor more than forty-five days following the filing of the appeal. The appeals board may continue the hearing date where necessary. At the time and place set for such appeal hearing, the appeals board shall hold a de novo hearing. If the appeals board finds from the relevant evidence at the hearing that the action taken was in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, it shall require compliance with the hearing officer’s decision. A copy of the appeals board’s decision shall be mailed to the appellant within five business days after adoption thereof. The decision of the appeals board shall be final. The decision must include notice that any legal challenge to the final decision shall be made pursuant to the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 and shall be commenced within ninety days following issuance of the final decision. The administrative hearing fee paid by a prevailing party in an appeal shall be refunded.

        10.   City Abatement. In the event the owner or occupant of property, the operator of a facility, a permittee or any other person fails to comply with any provision of a compliance schedule issued to such owner, occupant, operator, permittee or person pursuant to this chapter, the authorized inspector may request the enforcing attorney to obtain an abatement warrant or other appropriate judicial authorization to enter the property, abate the condition and restore the property area. Any costs incurred by the city in obtaining and carrying out an abatement warrant or other judicial authorization may be recovered pursuant to Section 13.24.060(B)(4).

        B.     Nuisance. Any condition in violation of this chapter, including but not limited to the maintenance or use of any illicit connection or the occurrence of any prohibited discharge, shall constitute a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance pursuant to Government Code Section # 38771.

        1.     Court Order to Enjoin or Abatement. At the request of the city manager or his/her designee, the enforcing attorney may seek a court order to enjoin and/or abate the nuisance.

        2.     Notice to Owner and Occupant. Prior to seeking any court order to enjoin or abate a nuisance or threatened nuisance, the city manager or his/her designee shall provide notice of the proposed injunction or abatement to the owner and occupant, if any, of the property where the nuisance or threatened nuisance is occurring.

        3.     Emergency Abatement. In the event the nuisance constitutes an imminent danger to public health and/or safety or the environment, the city manager or his/her designee, may enter the property from which the nuisance emanates, abate the nuisance and restore any property affected by the nuisance. To the extent reasonably practicable, informal notice shall be provided to the owner or occupant prior to abatement. If necessary to protect the public health and/or safety or the environment, abatement may proceed without prior notice to or consent from the owner or occupant thereof and without judicial warrant. An imminent danger shall include, but is not limited to, exigent circumstances created by the dispersal of pollutants, where the same presents a significant and immediate threat to the public health and/or safety or the environment. Notwithstanding the authority of the city to conduct an emergency abatement action, an administrative hearing pursuant to Section 13.24.060(A)(5) shall follow the abatement action.

        4.     Reimbursement of Costs. All costs incurred by the city in responding to any nuisance, all administrative expenses and all legal expenses, including costs and attorney fees shall be recoverable from the person(s) creating, causing, committing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance.

        5.     Nuisance Lien. All costs shall become a lien against the property from which the nuisance emanated and a personal obligation against the owner thereof in accordance with Government Code Section 38773.1 and Section 38773.5. The owner of record of the property subject to any lien shall be given notice of the lien prior to recording as required by Government Code Section 38773.1. At the direction of the city manager or his/her designee the enforcing attorney may be authorized to collect nuisance abatement costs or enforce a nuisance lien in an action brought for a money judgment or by delivery to the county assessor of a special assessment against the property in accord with the conditions and requirements of Government Code Section 38773.5.

        C.     Criminal Sanctions.

        1.     Prosecutor. The enforcing attorney may act on the request of the city manager or his/her designee to pursue enforcement actions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

        2.     Penalty for Violations. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, undertakes to conceal any violation of this chapter, continues any violation of this chapter after notice thereof, or violates the terms, conditions and requirements of any water quality management plan or permit, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, notwithstanding the fact that at the discretion of the enforcing attorney, the violation of any section of this chapter may be filed as an infraction.

        D.    Consecutive Violations. Each day in which a violation occurs and each separate failure to comply with either a separate provision of this chapter, notice of noncompliance, a cease and desist order or a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter punishable by fines or sentences issued in accordance herewith.

        E.     Nonexclusive Remedies. Each and every remedy available for the enforcement of this chapter shall be nonexclusive and it is within the discretion of the authorized inspector or enforcing attorney to seek cumulative remedies, except that multiple monetary fines or penalties shall not be available for any single violation of this chapter.

        F.     Violations of Other Laws. Any person acting in violation of this chapter also may be acting in violation of the Federal Clean Water Act or the State Porter-Cologne Act and other laws and also may be subject to sanctions including civil liability. Accordingly, the enforcing attorney is authorized to file a citizen suit pursuant to Federal Clean Water Act Section 505(a) (Title 33 U.S.C. Section 1365(a)), seeking penalties, damages, and orders compelling compliance, and other appropriate relief. The enforcing attorney may notify EPA, the Santa Ana Regional Water Quality Control Board or any other appropriate state or local agency, of any alleged violation of this chapter.

        G.    Injunctions. At the request of the city manager or his/her designee, the enforcing attorney may file in a court of competent jurisdiction a civil action seeking an injunction against any threatened or continuing noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter. Any temporary, preliminary or permanent injunction issued pursuant hereto may include an order for reimbursement to the city of all costs incurred in enforcing this chapter, including costs of inspection, investigation and monitoring, the costs of abatement undertaken at the expense of the city, costs relating to restoration of the environment and all other expenses as authorized by law.

        H.    Other Civil Remedies.

        1.     The city manager or his/her designee may cause the enforcing attorney to file an action for civil damages in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking recovery of (a) all costs incurred in enforcement of the chapter, including but not limited to costs relating to investigation, sampling, monitoring, inspection, administrative expenses, all other expenses as authorized by law, and consequential damages, (b) all costs incurred in mitigating harm to the environment or reducing the threat to human health, and (c) damages for irreparable harm to the environment.

        2.     The enforcing attorney is authorized to file actions for civil damages resulting from any trespass or nuisance occurring on public land or to the storm water drainage system from any violation of this chapter where the same has caused damage, contamination or harm to the environment, public property or the storm water drainage system. (Ord. 1682 §§ 3—6, 2007; Ord. 1514 § 1, 1997)

 

13.24.070 Authority to contract.
        The city may, to the extent authorized by law, elect to contract for the services of any public agency or private enterprise to carry out the planning approvals, inspections, permits and enforcement authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 1514 § 1, 1997)

 

13.24.080 Compliance with chapter is not compliance with other laws.
        Compliance by any person or entity with the provisions of this chapter shall not relieve any such person or entity from complying with other applicable local, state or federal statutory or regulatory requirements. (Ord. 1514 § 1, 1997)

 

13.24.090 Severability.
        If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the ordinance codified in this chapter. The city council of the city of La Habra declares that it would have adopted the ordinance codified in this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 1682 § 7, 2007)

Chapter 13.28 WELLS
13.28.010 County provisions adopted.
        Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, that certain document entitled “Ordinance 2607 of the County of Orange,” relating to construction and abandonment of wells as compiled and adopted by the county, three copies of which have been filed with the city clerk for use and examination by the public, is adopted and enacted as the “Well Construction and Abandonment Ordinance” of the city as fully as though the same were set forth in this chapter, and for the purpose stated therein. (Ord. 869 § 1, 1973)

 

13.28.020 Designations amended.
        A.    Whenever the phrase “Board of Supervisors” appears in the text of Orange County Ordinance 2607 incorporated in this chapter by reference, it means the “city council.”

        B.     Any reference to “Unincorporated Territory” in Orange County Ordinance 2607 shall be designated “Territory within the boundaries of the City.”

        C.     Reference to Government Code Section 28545 in Orange County Ordinance 2607 means Section 38773.5 of the Government Code (the appropriate section applicable to cities). (Ord. 869 § 1, 1973)

 

13.28.030 Advisory board.
        The Orange County well standards advisory board, established by Orange County Ordinance 2607, dated July 18, 1972, is designated as the well standards advisory board of the city. (Ord. 869 § 1, 1973)

 

13.28.040 Compliance required for city permits.
        The requirements of this chapter shall be in addition to any other requirements of the city, and before a permit is issued by the city, satisfactory proof of compliance with all provisions relating thereto must be presented to the building official. (Ord. 869 § 1, 1973)

 

13.28.050 Permit fees.
        By resolution the city council shall adopt an appropriate permit fee schedule for construction, reconstruction and abatement of abandoned wells. (Ord. 869 § 1, 1973)

Chapter 13.30 WELLS STANDARDS
13.30.010 Purpose and intent.
        It is the purpose of this chapter to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city by ensuring that the groundwaters will not be polluted or contaminated. To this end, minimum requirements were contained in this chapter for construction, reconstruction, repair and destruction of water wells, cathodic protection wells and monitoring wells. (Ord. 1389 § 1, 1990)

 

13.30.020 Definitions and interpretations.
        A.    As defined in other documents, except as otherwise required by the context of this chapter, the terms used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as in Chapter 10 of Division 7 of the California Water Code and the Department of Water Resources Bulletin 74-81 and subsequent supplements or revisions.

        B.     “City council” means the city council of the city of La Habra.

        C.     “Enforcement agency” means that agency or department designated by the city, to administer and enforce this chapter.

        D.    “Person” means any person, firm, corporation or governmental agency, to the extent authorized by law.

        E.     Tense or Gender. Words used in the present tense include the future as well as the present. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter.

        F.     The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.

        G.    Section Headings. Section headings, when contained in this chapter, shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any section. (Ord. 1389 § 1, 1990)

13.30.030 Permits.
        A.    Permit Applications:

        1.     When required. No person shall dig, bore, drill, deepen, refurbish or destroy a water well, cathodic protection well, observation well, monitoring well or any other excavation that may intersect groundwater without first applying for and receiving a permit as provided in this chapter.

        2.     Penalty for failure to obtain permit. Any person who shall commence any work for which a permit is required by this chapter without having obtained a permit shall be required, if subsequently granted a permit for this work, to pay double the standard permit fee.

        3.     Emergency work. The above provisions shall not apply to emergency work required on short notice to maintain drinking water or agricultural supply systems. In such cases, the person responsible for the emergency work shall:

        a.     Time limit. Apply for a permit within three working days after commencement of emergency work;

        b.     Urgency. Satisfy the enforcement agency that such work was urgently necessary;

        c.     Conformance with standards. Demonstrate that all work performed was in conformance with the technical standards as designated in Article 3.

        B.     Application Procedure. Applications for permits shall be made to the enforcement agency on forms approved by the agency and shall contain all such information the enforcement agency requires to accomplish the purposes of this chapter. The application shall be accompanied by the required filing fee. If the enforcement agency finds the application contains all necessary information, it shall issue to the applicant a comprehensive permit containing such conditions as are necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter.

        C.     Filing Fees. Filing fees may be set by the city council from time to time by ordinance. No fee shall be required for a permit application to destroy a well.

        D.    Permit Conditions.

        1.     Limitations. When the enforcement agency issues a permit pursuant to this chapter, it may condition the permit in any manner necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. Conditions may include, but are not limited to, such quantity and quality testing methods as the enforcement agency finds necessary.

        2.     Performance bond. The enforcement agency may require a performance bond as a condition to the permit.

        3.     Persons permitted to work on wells. All construction, reconstruction or destruction work on wells (except driven wells) shall be by a person who possesses an active C-57 contractor’s license in accordance with the provisions of the Business and Professions Code, section 7000, et seq.

        4.     Proper disposal of drilling fluids. The permit shall contain a clause requiring the safe and appropriate handling and disposal of drilling fluids and other drilling materials used in connection with the permitted work.

        5.     Abandoned wells. As a condition of a construction or reconstruction permit, any abandoned wells on the property shall be destroyed in accordance with standards provided in this chapter.

        6.     Posting of permit. It shall be the responsibility of the well driller to maintain a copy of the permit on the drilling site during all stages of construction or destruction.

        E.     Permit Denial. The enforcement agency shall deny an application for a permit if, in its judgment, issuance of a permit is not in the public interest.

        F.     Permit Expiration. The permittee shall complete the work authorized by the permit within the time and before the date set out in the permit. If there have been exceptional circumstances, the enforcement agency may grant the applicant a sixty-day extension. Upon the expiration of the permit, no further work shall be done unless and until the applicant has received an extension or a new permit.

        G.    Permit Suspension and Revocation.

        1.     Circumstances for such action. The enforcement agency may suspend or revoke any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, whenever it finds that the permittee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, or has misrepresented any material fact in his application, or any supporting documents, for such a permit. Prior to ordering any such suspension or revocation, the enforcement agency shall give the permittee an opportunity for a hearing thereon, after reasonable notice. The hearing shall be before the enforcement agency head or his designated representative. An appeal may be made as set forth below.

        2.     Consequences. No person whose permit has been suspended or revoked shall continue to perform the work for which the permit was granted until, in the case of the suspension, such permit has been reinstated by the enforcement agency.

        3.     Ordered additional work. Upon suspending or revoking any permit, the enforcement agency may order the permittee to perform any work reasonably necessary to protect the underground waters from pollution or contamination, if any work already done by the permittee has left a well in such condition as to constitute a hazard to the quality of the underground waters. No permittee or person who has held any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall fail to comply with any such order. (Ord. 1389 § 1, 1990)

 

13.30.040 Well standards.
        Except as otherwise specified, the standards for the construction, repair, reconstruction or abandonment of wells shall be as set forth in:

        A.    Department of Water Resources Bulletin 74-81. The California Department of Water Resource Bulletin 74-81 “Water Well Standards, State of California” except as modified by subsequent revisions.

        B.     All Subsequent Supplements and Revisions. The California Department of Water Resources Bulletin 74-81 “Water Well Standards, State of California” except as modified by subsequent revisions. (Ord. 1389 § 1, 1990)

13.30.050 Variances.
        The city council shall have the power under the following specified conditions to grant a variance from any provision of the standards referenced above and to prescribe alternative requirements in their place. There is no appeal from denial of a variance request.

        A.    Special Circumstances. There must be, in a specific case, a special circumstance where practical difficulties or necessary hardship would result from the strict interpretation and enforcement of any standard.

        B.     Intent of Chapter Not Compromised. The granting of such a variance is consistent with the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 1389 § 1, 1990)

 

13.30.060 Special groundwater protection.
        The enforcement agency may designate areas where groundwater quality problems are known to exist and where a well will penetrate more than one aquifer. The enforcement agency may require in these designated areas special well seal(s) to prevent mixing of water from several aquifers. Where an applicant proposes well construction, reconstruction or destruction work in such an area, the enforcement agency may require the applicant to provide a report prepared by a registered geologist or registered civil engineer (California Business and Professions Code Sections 7850 and 6762 respectively) that identifies all strata containing poor quality water and recommends the location and specification of the seal or seals needed to prevent the entrance of poor quality water or its migration into other aquifers. (Ord. 1389 § 1, 1990)

 

13.30.070 Inspections.
        The enforcement agency shall make an initial inspection of each proposed drilling site and an inspection of the annular seal construction work. It may make an inspection at the completion of the work and at such other times as it deems appropriate.

        A.    Initial Inspection. Upon receipt of an application, the enforcement agency shall make an inspection of the drilling site prior to the issuance of a well permit. The purpose of this inspection is to determine whether there are any site conditions such that the enforcement agency shall do the following:

        1.     Relocation of drilling site. Require relocation of the drilling site should the location shown on the permit application be too close to potential sources of pollution;

        2.     Additional conditions. Set additional conditions if needed to remediate any previously unknown groundwater quality protection problems.

        B.     Inspection of Well Seal. The enforcement agency shall make an inspection of the drilling job while the annular seal is being constructed.

        1.     Required notice. The enforcement agency shall be notified by the well driller a minimum of twelve hours but not more than forty-eight hours prior to sealing the annular space. Drillers who anticipate completing a well in less than one day shall notify the enforcement agency twenty-four hours prior to commencement of drilling and provide the anticipated time to commence the sealing of the annular space.

        2.     Should enforcement agency fail to be present. If the enforcement agency fails to appear at the well site at the time designated for sealing, the well may be sealed without the presence of the enforcement agency. However, the driller shall seal the well in accordance with the standards of this chapter and the permit in the absence of any inspection.

        C.     Final Inspection. The driller shall notify the enforcement agency within seven days of the completion of their work at each drilling site. The enforcement agency may make a final inspection after completion of the work to determine whether the well was completed in accordance with this chapter.

        D.    Waiver of Inspections. The enforcement agency may waive inspections should any of the following conditions exist:

        1.     Drilling site inspected by other agencies. Inspections may be waived where the work will be inspected by the staff of the California Regional Water Quality Resources Control Board or the California Department of Health Services if these designated agencies will inspect and report on all drilling features required by the standards;

        2.     Monitoring wells under specified conditions. Inspections may be waived for monitoring wells that will penetrate only aquifers containing degraded waters or will penetrate only formations that normally contain no water;

        3.     Drilling sites known to have no threats to groundwater quality. Initial inspections may be waived when the drilling site is well known to the enforcement agency staff and it is known that no significant threats to groundwater quality exist in the area. (Ord. 1389 § 1, 1990)

 

13.30.080 Completion reports.
        The driller shall provide the enforcement agency a completion report within thirty days of the completion of any well construction, reconstruction or destruction job.

        A.    Submittal of State “Report of Completion”.

        1.     A copy of the “Report of Completion” (driller’s well log) required by the California Water Code Section 13751 shall be submitted by the well driller to the enforcement agency within thirty days of construction or destruction of any well (except driven wells). This report shall document that the work was completed in accordance with the standards and all additional permit conditions.

        2.     This section shall not be deemed to release any person from the requirement to file said report with the State Department of Water Resources.

        B.     Confidentiality of Report. With the exception of the well driller’s name, the date the well was drilled and the well yield, all information contained in this report shall remain confidential.

        C.     Other Agency’s Requirements. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to excuse any person from compliance with the provisions of California Water Code Section 13752 relating to notices and reports of completion or any other federal, state or local reporting regulations. (Ord. 1389 § 1, 1990)

 

13.30.090 Appeals.
        A.    Right of Hearing. Any person whose application for a permit has been denied, or granted conditionally, or whose permit has been suspended or revoked, may appeal to the city council, in writing, within ten days after any such denial, conditional granting, suspension or revocation. Such appeal shall specify the ground upon which it is taken, and shall be accompanied by a filing fee as set forth herein. The clerk of the city council shall set such appeal for hearing at the earliest practicable time, and shall notify the appellant and the enforcement agency, in writing, of the time so set at least five days prior to the hearing.

        B.     Action by the Board. After such hearing, the city council may reverse, wholly or partly, or may modify the order or determination appealed from. (Ord. 1389 § 1, 1990)

 

13.30.100 Right of entry and inspection.
        Representatives of the enforcement agency shall have the right to enter upon any premises at all reasonable times to make inspections and tests for the purpose of such enforcement and administration. If any such premises are occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and demand entry. If the same is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of same and demand entry. If such entry is refused, he shall have recourse to such remedies as are provided by law to secure entry. (Ord. 1389 § 1, 1990)

 

 

13.30.110 Abatement of abandoned wells.
        All persons owning an abandoned well as defined in the well standards shall destroy it before December 31, 1990. (Ord. 1389 § 1, 1990)

 

13.30.120 Criminal and civil enforcement.
        A.    Violation a Misdemeanor. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof is punishable by such penalties as the city council shall from time to time set by ordinance.

        B.     Civil Enforcement—Notice of Violation.

        1.     Notice of Violation Recordation. Whenever the enforcement agency determines that a well: (a) has not been completed in accordance with a well permit or the plans and specification relating thereto; (b) has been constructed without the required permit; or (c) an abandoned well has not been destroyed in accordance with the standards, the enforcement agency may record a notice of violation with the office of the county recorder. The owner(s) of the property, revealed by the assessment roll, on which the violation is situated and any other person responsible for the violation shall be notified of the recordation, if their address is available. If the property owner(s) or authorized agent disagree with the determination, he may submit evidence to the enforcement agency indicating that there is no violation and then shall have a right to appeal an adverse decision of the enforcement agency to the city council in accordance with the provisions of the following section.

        2.     Appeal Action by the City Council.

        a.     Date of Hearing. Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the city council shall, within thirty days following the filing of the appeal, set a date for public hearing thereon.

        b.     Evidence. The evidence before the city council shall consist of the records in the enforcement agency’s files and any other relevant evidence which, in the judgment of the city council, should be considered to effectuate and implement the policies of this chapter.

        c.     Decision by City Council. The city council may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the decision or the notice of violation and may make such order as should be made. Such action shall be final.

        3.     Removal of Violation Notice. The enforcement agency shall submit a removal of notice of violation to the county recorder when: (a) it is determined by the enforcement agency or the city council, after review, that no violation of this chapter exists; or (b) all required and corrective work has been completed and approved by the enforcement agency.

        C.     Civil Enforcement—Nuisance. Violations of this chapter may also be redressed in the manner hereinafter set forth by civil action. In addition to being subject to prosecution, any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter may be made the subject of a civil action. Appropriate civil action includes, but is not limited to, injunctive relief and cost recovery.

        D.    Remedies Cumulative. The remedies available to the board to enforce this chapter are in addition of any other remedies available under ordinance or statute, and do not replace or supplement any other remedy but are cumulative thereto. (Ord. 1389 § 1, 1990)

 

13.30.130 Reports to regional board.
        The enforcement agency shall submit a quarterly report to the California Regional Water Quality Control Board(s) having jurisdiction in their area. This report shall contain the following data:

        A.    Wells Constructed or Destroyed. The number of wells constructed or destroyed;

        B.     Abatement Actions. Descriptions of all abatement actions taken in accordance with this chapter;

        C.     Variances Granted. A description of each specific case where variances were granted and the circumstances that made a variance necessary;

        D.    Inspection Waivers Granted. A description of each specific case where an inspection was waived and the circumstances that made the waiver necessary. (Ord. 1389 § 1, 1990)

Chapter 13.31 GROUNDWATER EXTRACTION AND EXPORTATION
13.31.010 Definitions.
        The following words and phrases shall have the following meanings when used in this chapter:

        “Brea” means the city of Brea.

        “City” means the city of La Habra.

        “Extract” means to pump groundwater from the La Habra Basin through any well within the boundaries of the city of La Habra.

        “Export” means to convey or transmit extracted groundwater for use directly or indirectly on parcels which are outside of the city boundaries. Export of extracted groundwater includes activities by which extracted groundwater may, through one or more exchanges or transactions, be directly or indirectly conveyed or transferred for use out of the city.

        “Groundwater” means water beneath the surface of the earth within the zone below the water table in which the soil is completely saturated with water, but does not include water that flows in known and definite channels.

        “La Habra Basin” shall mean that portion of groundwater Basin 8-1, the Orange County Coastal Basin, as depicted in California Department of Water Resources Bulletin 118, which underlays the city and Brea and which is hydrogeologically and jurisdictionally separate and distinct from the balance of Basin 8-1.

        “Person” means and includes natural persons, corporations, firms, partnerships, joint stock companies, associations and other organizations of persons, and public entities. (Ord. 1767 § 2, 2016)

 

13.31.020 Prohibition.
        No person may extract and export groundwater from the portion of the La Habra Basin that underlies the city for use outside of the city boundaries. Violations of this section shall constitute a public nuisance. (Ord. 1767 § 2, 2016)

 

13.31.030 Implementation.
        A.    No permit shall be issued to drill a water well according to Municipal Code Chapter 13.28 or 13.30 for purpose of extraction or exportation of groundwater.

        B.     No excavation permit shall be issued according to Municipal Code Section 12.12.020 for purposes of conveying or transmitting extraction or exportation of groundwater.

        C.     City code enforcement authorities are authorized to enforce compliance with chapter according to Municipal Code Chapter 18.74. (Ord. 1767 § 2, 2016)

 

13.31.040 Authority.
        This chapter is enacted in order to protect the health, welfare and safety of present and future residents of the city as authorized by Article XI, Section 7 of the California Constitution and to protect the water resources of the city for present and future beneficial uses within the city as authorized by Article X, Section 2 of the California Constitution. (Ord. 1767 § 2, 2016)

 

13.31.050 Severability and validity.
        The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, word, or phrase of this chapter is held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this chapter. The city council hereby declares that they would have passed the ordinance codified in this chapter, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, word or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, words, or phrases be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 1767 § 2, 2016)

Chapter 13.32 USE OF CITY WATER—DOMESTIC WATER FACILITY CONSTRUCTION
13.32.010 Permit required.
        It is unlawful for any person to construct or cause to be constructed any domestic water facility or use water from any city water line without first having secured a permit therefor and having paid an application fee as prescribed by the city. A permit to use water or construct water facilities shall be granted upon application made upon a form furnished by the city. The director of public works shall thereupon issue a permit authorizing the use of water or construction of such improvements subject to the same being constructed in conformity with all city ordinances, rules, regulations and specifications, and upon there having been paid the required fees as may be established from time to time. (Ord. 1188, 1983)

Chapter 13.36 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION
13.36.010 Adopted.
        The Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, 1991 Edition, is adopted as the standard specifications for public works construction in the city. All subsequent amendments and or editions to the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction shall be adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1421 § 1, 1992; Ord. 1241, 1985)

Chapter 13.40 WATER CONSERVATION AND WATER SUPPLY SHORTAGE PROGRAM
13.40.010 Title.
        This chapter will be known as the Water Conservation and Water Supply Shortage Program. (Ord. 1703 § 2, 2009)

 

13.40.020 Findings.
        A.    A reliable minimum supply of potable water is essential to the public health, safety and welfare of the people and economy of the southern California region.

        B.     Southern California is a semi-arid region and is largely dependent upon imported water supplies. A growing population, climate, environmental concerns, and other factors in other parts of the state and western United States, make the re-

gion highly susceptible to water supply reliability issues.

 

        C.     Careful water management that includes active water conservation measures not only in times of drought, but at all times, is essential to ensure a reliable minimum supply of water to meet current and future water supply needs.

        D.    Article XI, Section 7 of the California Constitution declares that a city or county may make and enforce within its limits all local, police, sanitary, and other ordinances and regulations not in conflict with general laws.

        E.     Article X, Section 2 of the California Constitution declares that the general welfare requires that water resources be put to beneficial use, waste or unreasonable use or unreasonable method of use of water be prevented, and conservation of water be fully exercised with a view to the reasonable and beneficial use thereof.

        F.     California Water Code Section 375 authorizes water suppliers to adopt and enforce a comprehensive water conservation program to reduce water consumption and conserve supplies.

        G.    The adoption and enforcement of a water conservation and supply shortage program is necessary to manage the city’s potable water supply in the short and long-term and to avoid or minimize the effects of drought and shortage within the city. Such program is essential to ensure a reliable and sustainable minimum supply of water for the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 1703 § 3, 2009)

13.40.030—13.40.050

13.40.030 Declaration of purpose and intent.
        A.    The purpose of this chapter is to establish a water conservation and supply shortage program that will reduce water consumption within the city through conservation, enable effective water supply planning, assure reasonable and beneficial use of water, prevent waste of water, and maximize the efficient use of water within the city to avoid and minimize the effect and hardship of water shortage to the greatest extent possible.

        B.     This chapter establishes permanent water conservation standards intended to alter behavior related to water use efficiency for nonshortage conditions and further establishes four stages of water supply shortage response actions to be implemented during times of declared water shortage or declared water shortage emergency, with increasing restrictions on water use in response to worsening drought or emergency conditions and decreasing supplies. (Ord. 1703 § 4, 2009)

 

13.40.040 Definitions.
        The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter have the meaning defined in this section:

        “Billing unit” means the unit of water used to apply water rates for purposes of calculating water charges for a person’s water usage and equals seven hundred forty-eight gallons of water.

        “City” means the city of La Habra.

        “Landscape irrigation system” means an irrigation system with pipes, hoses, spray heads, or sprinkling devices that are operated by hand or through an automated system.

        “Large landscape areas” means a lawn, landscape, or other vegetated area, or combination thereof, equal to more than one acre of irrigable land.

        “Person” means any natural person or persons, corporation, public or private entity, governmental agency or institution, or any other user of water provided by the city.

        “Potable water” means water which is suitable for drinking.

        “Recycled water” means the reclamation and reuse of nonpotable water for beneficial use.

        “Single pass cooling systems” means equipment where water is circulated only once to cool equipment before being disposed. (Ord. 1703 § 5, 2009)

 

13.40.050 Application.
        A.    The provisions of this chapter apply to any person in the use of any potable water provided by the city.

        B.     The provisions of this chapter do not apply to uses of water necessary to protect public health and safety or for essential government services, such as police, fire and other similar emergency services.

        C.     The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the use of recycled water, with the exception of Section 13.40.070(A).

        D.    The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the use of water by commercial nurseries and commercial growers to sustain plants, trees, shrubs, crops or other vegetation intended for commercial sale.

        E.     This chapter is intended solely to further the conservation of water. It is not intended to implement any provision of federal, state, or local statutes, ordinances, or regulations relating to protection of water quality or control of drainage or runoff. Refer to the local jurisdiction or Regional Water Quality Control Board for information on any stormwater ordinances and stormwater management plans. (Ord. 1703 § 6, 2009)

 

13.40.060 Permanent water conservation requirements—Prohibition against waste.
        The following water conservation requirements are effective at all times and are permanent. Violations of this section will be considered waste and an unreasonable use of water.

        A.    Limits on Watering Hours. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is prohibited between the hours of ten a.m. and four p.m. Pacific Standard Time on any day, except by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, or for very short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system.

        B.     Limit on Watering Duration. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water using a landscape irrigation system or a watering device that is not continuously attended is limited to no more than fifteen minutes watering per day per station. This subsection does not apply to landscape irrigation systems that exclusively use very low-flow drip type irrigation systems when no emitter produces more than two gallons of water per hour and weather based controllers or stream rotor sprinklers that meet a seventy percent efficiency standard.

        C.     No Excessive Water Flow or Runoff. Watering or irrigating of any lawn, landscape or other vegetated area in a manner that causes or allows excessive water flow or runoff onto an adjoining sidewalk, driveway, street, alley, gutter or ditch is prohibited.

        D.    No Washing Down Hard or Paved Surfaces. Washing down hard or paved surfaces, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios or alleys, is prohibited except when necessary to alleviate safety or sanitary hazards, and then only by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off device or a low-volume, high-pressure cleaning machine equipped to recycle any water used.

        E.     Obligation to Fix Leaks, Breaks or Malfunctions. Excessive use, loss or escape of water through breaks, leaks or other malfunctions in the water user’s plumbing or distribution system for any period of time after such escape of water should have reasonably been discovered and corrected and in no event more than five days of receiving notice from the city, is prohibited.

        F.     Recirculating Water Required for Water Fountains and Decorative Water Features. Operating a water fountain or other decorative water feature that does not use recirculated water is prohibited unless a waiver has been obtained.

        G.    Limits on Washing Vehicles. Using water to wash or clean a vehicle, including, but not limited to, any automobile, truck, van, bus, motorcycle, boat or trailer, whether motorized or not is prohibited, except by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container or a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device. This subsection does not apply to any commercial car washing facility.

        H.    Drinking Water Served Upon Request Only. Eating or drinking establishments, including, but not limited to, a restaurant, hotel, cafe, cafeteria, bar, club or other public place where food or drinks are sold, served, or offered for sale, are prohibited from providing drinking water to any person unless expressly requested.

        I.      Commercial Lodging Establishments Must Provide Option to Not Launder Linen Daily. Hotels, motels and other commercial lodging establishments must provide customers the option of not having towels and linen laundered daily. Commercial lodging establishments must prominently display notice of this option in each bathroom using clear and easily understood language.

        J.      No Installation of Single Pass Cooling Systems. Installation of single pass cooling systems is prohibited in buildings requesting new water service.

        K.    Recirculating Water Systems Required in Commercial Car Wash and Laundry Systems. Installation of nonrecirculating water systems is prohibited in new commercial conveyor car wash and new commercial laundry systems.

        L.     Restaurants Required to Use Water Conserving Dish Wash Spray Valves. Food preparation establishments, such as restaurants or cafés, are prohibited from using nonwater conserving dish wash spray valves. (Ord. 1703 § 7, 2009)

13.40.070—13.40.080

13.40.070 Stage 1 water supply shortage.
        A.    A Stage 1 water supply shortage condition exists when the city notifies its water users that due to drought or other supply reductions, a consumer demand reduction of up to ten percent is necessary to make more efficient use of water and respond to existing water conditions. Upon the declaration of a Stage 1 water supply shortage condition, the city shall implement the mandatory Stage 1 conservation measures identified in this chapter. The type of event that may prompt the city to declare a Stage 1 water supply shortage may include, among other factors, a finding that its wholesale water provider calls for extraordinary water conservation.

        B.     Additional Water Conservation Measures. In addition to the prohibited uses of water identified in Section 13.40.060, the following water conservation requirements apply during a declared Stage 1 water supply shortage:

        1.     Limits on Watering Days. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to three days per week on a schedule established and posted by the city. During the months of November through March, watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to no more than one day per week on a schedule established and posted by the city. This provision does not apply to landscape irrigation zones that exclusively use very low flow drip type irrigation systems when no emitter produces more than two gallons of water per hour. This provision also does not apply to watering or irrigating by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, or for very short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system.

        2.     Obligation to Fix Leaks, Breaks or Malfunctions. All leaks, breaks, or other malfunctions in the water user’s plumbing or distribution system must be repaired promptly upon discovery by the owner or within seventy-two hours of notification by the city unless other arrangements are made with the city.

        3.     Other Prohibited Uses. The city may implement other prohibited water uses as determined by the city, after notice to customers as set forth in Section 13.40.110. (Ord. 1703 § 8, 2009)

 

13.40.080 Stage 2 water supply shortage.
        A.    A Stage 2 water supply shortage condition exists when the city notifies its water users that due to drought or other supply reductions, a consumer demand reduction of up to twenty percent is necessary to make more efficient use of water and respond to existing water conditions. Upon declaration of a Stage 2 water supply shortage condition, the city shall implement the mandatory Stage 2 conservation measures identified in this chapter.

        B.     Additional Conservation Measures. In addition to the prohibited uses of water identified in Sections 13.40.060 and 13.40.070, the following additional water conservation requirements apply during a declared Stage 2 water supply shortage:

        1.     Water Allocations. The city will establish a water allocation for property served by the city using a method that does not penalize persons for the implementation of conservation methods or the installation of water saving devices. The city must provide notice of the allocation by including it in the regular billing statement for the fee or charge or by any other mailing to the address to which the city customarily mails the billing statement for fees or charges for on-going water service. A water allocation will be effective on the fifth day following the date of mailing or at such later date as specified in the notice.

        Following the effective date of the water allocation as established by the city, any person that uses water in excess of the allocation will be subject to a penalty in the amount of five dollars for each billing unit of water in excess of the allocation. The penalty for excess water usage will be cumulative to any other remedy or penalty that may be imposed for violation of this chapter.

        2.     Watering Days. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to two days per week on a schedule established and posted by the city. During the months of November through March, watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to no more than one day per week on a schedule established and posted by the city. This provision does not apply to landscape irrigation zones that exclusively use very low flow drip type irrigation systems when no emitter produces more than two gallons of water per hour. This provision also does not apply to watering or irrigating by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, or for very short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system.

        3.     Obligation to Fix Leaks, Breaks or Malfunctions. All leaks, breaks, or other malfunctions in the water user’s plumbing or distribution system must be repaired promptly upon discovery by the owner or within forty-eight hours of notification by the city unless other arrangements are made with the city.

        4.     Limits on Filling Ornamental Lakes or Ponds. Filling or refilling ornamental lakes or ponds is prohibited, except to the extent needed to sustain aquatic life, provided that such animals are of significant value and have been actively managed within the water feature prior to declaration of a supply shortage stage under this chapter.

        5.     Limits on Washing Vehicles. Using water to wash or clean a vehicle, including but not limited to, any automobile, truck, van, bus, motorcycle, boat or trailer, whether motorized or not, is prohibited except by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, by high pressure/low volume wash systems, or at a commercial car washing facility that utilizes a recirculating water system to capture or reuse water.

        6.     Limits on Filling Residential Swimming Pools and Spas. Refilling of more than one foot and initial filling of residential swimming pools or outdoor spas with potable water is prohibited.

        7.     Other Prohibited Uses. The city may implement other prohibitions on water uses as determined by the city, after notice to customers as set forth in Section 13.40.110. (Ord. 1703 § 9, 2009)

 

13.40.090 Stage 3 water supply shortage.
        A.    A Stage 3 water supply shortage emergency exists when the city declares a water shortage emergency condition pursuant to California Water Code Section 350 and notifies its residents and businesses that up to thirty percent consumer demand reduction is required to ensure sufficient supplies for human consumption, sanitation and fire protection. The city must declare a water supply shortage emergency in the manner and on the grounds provided in California Water Code Section 350.

        B.     Additional Conservation Measures. In addition to the prohibited uses of water identified in Sections 13.40.060 through 13.40.080, the following water conservation requirements apply during a declared Stage 3 water supply shortage emergency:

        1.     No Watering or Irrigating. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is prohibited, except as approved by the city.

        2.     Obligation to Fix Leaks, Breaks or Malfunctions. All leaks, breaks, or other malfunctions in the water user’s plumbing or distribution system must be repaired promptly upon discovery by the owner or within twenty-four hours of notification by the city unless other arrangements are made with the city.

        3.     No New Potable Water Service. Upon declaration of a Stage 3 water supply shortage emergency condition, no new potable water service will be provided, no new temporary meters or permanent meters will be provided, and no statements of immediate ability to serve or provide potable water service (such as, will serve letters, certificates, or letters of availability) will be issued, except under the following circumstances:

        a.     A valid, unexpired building permit has been issued for the project; or

        b.     The project is necessary to protect public health, safety, and welfare; or

        c.     The applicant provides substantial evidence of an enforceable commitment that water demands for the project will be offset prior to the provision of a new water meter(s) to the satisfaction of the city.

        This provision does not preclude the resetting or turn-on of meters to provide continuation of water service or the restoration of service that has been interrupted for a period of one year or less.

        4.     Discontinue Service. The city, in its sole discretion, may discontinue service to consumers who willfully violate provisions of this section.

        5.     Other Prohibited Uses. The city may implement other prohibited water uses as determined by the city, after notice to customers as set forth in Section 13.40.110. (Ord. 1703 § 10, 2009)

13.40.100—13.40.110

13.40.100 Stage 4 water supply shortage—Emergency condition.
        A.    A Stage 4 water supply shortage emergency exists when the city declares a water shortage emergency condition pursuant to California Water Code Section 350 and notifies its residents and businesses that up to forty percent or more consumer demand reduction is required to ensure sufficient supplies for human consumption, sanitation and fire protection. The city must declare a water supply shortage emergency in the manner and on the grounds provided in California Water Code Section 350.

        B.     Additional Conservation Measures. In addition to the prohibited uses of water identified in Sections 13.40.060 through 13.40.090, the following water conservation requirements apply during a declared Stage 4 water supply shortage emergency:

        1.     The city may reduce water allocations in all categories to meet the available water supply;

        2.     The city may shut off all nonessential water uses;

        3.     Other Prohibited Uses. The city may implement other prohibited water uses as determined by the city, after notice to customers as set forth in Section 13.40.110. (Ord. 1703 § 11, 2009)

 

13.40.110 Procedures for determination/notification of water supply shortage.
        A.    Declaration and Notification of Stage 1 and 2 Water Supply Shortage. The existence of Stage 1 and Stage 2 water supply shortage conditions may be declared by resolution of the city adopted at a regular or special public meeting held in accordance with state law. The mandatory conservation requirements applicable to Stage 1 or Stage 2 conditions will take effect on the tenth day after the date the shortage stage is declared. Within five days following the declaration of the shortage stage, the city must publish a copy of the resolution in a newspaper used for publication of official notices. If the city establishes a water allocation, it must provide notice of the allocation by including it in the regular billing statement or by any other mailing to the address to which the city customarily mails the billing statement for fees or charges for on-going water service. A water allocation will be effective on the fifth day following the date of mailing or at such later date as specified in the notice.

        B.     Declaration and Notification of Stage 3 Water Supply Shortage. The existence of a Stage 3 water supply shortage emergency condition may be declared in accordance with the procedures specified in Water Code Sections 351 and 352. The mandatory conservation requirements applicable to the Stage 3 conditions will take effect on the tenth day after the date the shortage stage is declared. Within five days following the declaration of the shortage stage, the city must publish a copy of the resolution in a newspaper used for the publication of official notices. If the city establishes a water allocation, it will provide notice of the allocation by including it in the regular billing statement or by any other mailing to the address to which the city customarily mails the billing statement for fees or charges for on-going water service. A water allocation will be effective on the fifth day following the date of mailing or at such later date as specified in the notice.

        C.     Declaration and Notification of Stage 4 Water Supply Shortage. The existence of a Stage 4 water supply shortage emergency condition may be declared in accordance with the procedures specified in Water Code Sections 351 and 352. The mandatory conservation requirements applicable to the Stage 4 conditions will take effect on the tenth day after the date the shortage stage is declared. Within five days following the declaration of the shortage stage, the city must publish a copy of the resolution in a newspaper used for the publication of official notices. If the city establishes a water allocation, it will provide notice of the allocation by including it in the regular billing statement or by any other mailing to the address to which the city customarily mails the billing statement for fees or charges for on-going water service. A water allocation will be effective on the fifth day following the date of mailing or at such later date as specified in the notice. (Ord. 1703 § 12, 2009)

13.40.120—13.40.130

13.40.120 Other provisions.
        A.    Limits on Building Permits. The city may limit or withhold the issuance of building permits which require new or expanded water service, except to protect the public health, safety and welfare, or in cases which meet the city’s adopted conservation offset requirements.

        B.     Customer Water Conservation Reports. The city may, by written request, require all commercial, residential and industrial customers using twenty-five thousand or more billing units per year to submit a water conservation plan and to submit quarterly progress reports on such plan. The conservation plan must include recommendations for increased water savings, separation of uses including increased water recycling based on feasibility, and the reports must include progress to date on implementation of such recommendations.

        C.     Reporting Mechanism—Hotline. The city may establish a water waste hotline for residents to report violations of this chapter. (Ord. 1703 § 13, 2009)

 

13.40.130 Hardship waiver.
        A.    Undue and Disproportionate Hardship. If, due to unique circumstances, a specific requirement of this chapter would result in undue hardship to a person using water or to property upon which water is used, that is disproportionate to the impacts to water users generally or to similar property of classes of water users, then the person may apply for a waiver to the requirements as provided in this section.

        B.     Written Finding. The waiver may be granted or conditionally granted only upon a written finding of the existence of facts demonstrating an undue hardship to a person using water or to property upon which water is used, that is disproportionate to the impacts to water users generally or to similar property or classes of water use due to specific and unique circumstances of the user or the user’s property.

        1.     Application. Application for a waiver must be on a form prescribed by the city and accompanied by a non-refundable processing fee in an amount set by city council resolution.

        2.     Supporting Documentation. The waiver application must be accompanied by photographs, maps, drawings, and other information, including a written statement of the applicant.

        3.     Required Findings for Waiver. An application for a waiver will be denied unless the city manager finds, based on the information provided in the application supporting documents, or such additional information as may be requested by the city, and on water use information for the property as shown by the records of the city or its agent, all of the following:

        a.     That the waiver does not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other residents and businesses;

        b.     That because of special circumstances applicable to the property or its use, the strict application of this chapter would have a disproportionate impact on the property of use that exceeds the impacts to residents and businesses generally;

        c.     That the grant of such waiver will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent properties, and will not materially affect the ability of the city to effectuate the purpose of this chapter and will not be detrimental to the public interest; and

        d.     That the condition or situation of the subject property of the intended use of the property for which the waiver is sought is not common, recurrent or general in nature.

        4.     Approval Authority. The city manager or designee must act upon any completed application no later than ten days after submittal and may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the waiver. The applicant requesting the waiver must be promptly notified in writing of any action taken. Unless specified otherwise at the time a waiver is approved, the waiver will apply to the subject property during the period of the mandatory water supply shortage condition. The decision of the city manager will be final. (Ord. 1703 § 14, 2009)

 

13.40.140 Penalties and violations.
        A.    Misdemeanor. Any violation of this chapter may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than thirty days, or by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, or by both.

        B.     Civil Penalties. Civil penalties for failure to comply with any provisions of this chapter are as follows:

        1.     First Violation. The city will issue a written warning and deliver a copy of this chapter by mail.

        2.     Second Violation. A second violation within the preceding twelve calendar months is punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars.

        3.     Third Violation. A third violation within the preceding twelve calendar months is punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred and fifty dollars.

        4.     Fourth and Subsequent Violations. A fourth and any subsequent violation is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars.

        a.     Water Flow Restrictor Device. In addition to any fines, the city may require the installation of a water flow restrictor device of approximately one gallon per minute.

        b.     Termination of Service. In addition to any fines, the city may disconnect and/or terminate a customer’s water service.

        C.     Cost of Installing Flow Restrictor or Disconnecting Service. A person or entity that violates this chapter is responsible for payment of the city’s charges for disconnecting and/or reconnecting service per the city’s schedule of charges then in effect. Nonpayment will be subject to the same remedies as nonpayment of basic water rates.

        D.    Separate Offenses. Each day that a violation of this chapter occurs is a separate offense.

        E.     Notice and Hearing.

        1.     The city will issue notice of violations pursuant to Chapter 1.20. A customer may appeal the notice of violation by complying with the requirements set forth in Chapter 1.20.

        2.     Pending receipt of a written appeal or pending a hearing pursuant to an appeal, the city may take appropriate steps to prevent the unauthorized use of water as appropriate to the nature and extent of the violations and the current declared water stage condition. (Ord. 1703 § 15, 2009)

Title 14 RESERVED

Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 15.04 BUILDING CODE
Chapter 15.05 RESIDENTIAL CODE
Chapter 15.06 GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
Chapter 15.07 EXISTING BUILDING CODE
Chapter 15.08 MECHANICAL CODE
Chapter 15.12 PLUMBING CODE
Chapter 15.16 ELECTRICAL CODE
Chapter 15.20 HOUSING CODE, 1997
Chapter 15.28 UNIFORM CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS, 1997
Chapter 15.32 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Chapter 15.36 RELOCATING BUILDINGS
Chapter 15.40 OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGNS AND STRUCTURES
Chapter 15.44 EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING
Chapter 15.46 FIRE CODE
Chapter 15.48 RESIDENTIAL BUILDING FEES
Chapter 15.52 DEVELOPMENT FEE
Chapter 15.56 BUILDING NUMBERS
Chapter 15.60 SECURITY STANDARDS FOR BUILDINGS
Chapter 15.64 FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
Chapter 15.67 ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS
Chapter 15.68 ENERGY REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 15.69 SOLAR ENERGY PERMITS
Chapter 15.70 WATER SYSTEM BACKFLOW AND CROSS-CONNECTIONS
Chapter 15.74 OIL DRILLING AND PRODUCTION REGULATIONS
Chapter 15.78 WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN FOR CERTAIN CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION PROJECTS WITHIN THE CITY OF LA HABRA

Chapter 15.04 BUILDING CODE
15.04.010 Adoption of the 2019 California Building Code.
        Except as provided in this chapter, those certain building codes known and designated as the California Building Code 2019 Edition including Chapter 1, Division II, shall become the building code of the city of La Habra for regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings and/or structures in the city of La Habra. (Ord. 1812 § 1, 2019)

 

15.04.020 Amendments to the 2019 California Building Code.
        The 2019 California Building Code (CBC) is hereby amended as follows:

        Administrative Provisions. Division II of Chapter 1, entitled “Scope and Administration”, is applicable in the city.

        CBC Section 101.1 is amended, by inserting City of La Habra into the text as the name of the jurisdiction.

        A.    CBC Section 101.4 is amended by deletion of its entirety (including Sections 101.4.1, 101.4.2, 101.4.3, 101.4.4, 101.4.5, 101.4.6 and 101.4.7), and replaced with the following:

 

101.4. Referenced Codes. The California Codes listed below shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the extent of each such reference:

 

        1.     California Building Code, 2019 Edition, based on the 2018 International Building Code

        2.     California Residential Code, 2019 Edition, based on the 2018 International Residential Code

        3.     California Green Building Standards Code, 2019 Edition

        4.     California Existing Building Code, 2019 Edition, based on the 2018 International Existing Building Code

        5.     California Mechanical Code, 2019 Edition, based on the 2018 Uniform Mechanical Code

        6.     California Plumbing Code, 2019 Edition, based on the 2018 Uniform Plumbing Code

        7.     California Electrical Code, 2019 Edition, based on the 2017 National Electrical Code

        8.     Uniform Code For The Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition

        9.     International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition

        10.   Orange County Grading and Excavation Code

 

The provisions of these Construction Codes as amended by this chapter shall constitute the Building Regulations of the city of La Habra. Where the California Code of Regulations and State Building Standards Code of Regulations differ from any sections of the Construction Codes, State regulations shall prevail over the Construction Codes.

 

One (1) copy of all the above codes and standards therefore are on file in the office of the building official pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 18942 (d) (1) and are made available for public inspection.

 

        B.     CBC Section 105.2 is revised by amending exception 1, 2 and 9, and adding 14 as follows:

 

        1.     One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, patio and pool supply sheds, BBQ or stand-alone fireplaces not exceeding 6 feet above grade (gas lines require permits), playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet, with no air conditioning, no electrical, and no plumbing fixtures, and conforming to the Zoning Code.

        2.     Wood, steel, vinyl, iron, or other similar such fences not over 6 feet high. Masonry walls or fences not over 3 feet high.

        9.     Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy that are less than 18 inches (457.2 mm) deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons (18,927.059L) and are installed entirely above ground.

        14.   Decks not exceeding 200 square feet (18.58 m2) in area, that are not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at any point, are not attached to a dwelling and do not serve the exit door required by Section R311.2.

 

        C.     CBC Section 105.5 is amended as follows:

 

105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 12 months after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.

 

Time limitation for permit expiration as the result of code enforcement shall be as per notice of violation or as otherwise determined by the Building Official.

 

        D.    CBC Section 107.3 is amended to add a paragraph as follows:

 

        An expedited review and permit issuance process shall be provided for EV Charging Stations and simplified forms for submittal will be made available on the city’s website.

 

        E.     CBC Section 113.3 is amended to provide as follows:

 

Board of Appeals when used in the Building Standards Codes shall mean the city Planning Commission. The Board of Appeals is hereby established for each of the Building Standards Codes. Depending on the subject of the appeal, specialized expertise may be solicited for the purpose of providing input to the Appeals Board.

 

        F.     CBC Table 1505.1 is amended, by the deletion of Table 1505.1 and the addition of a new Table 1505.1 thereto, to read as follows:

 

TABLE 1505.1a

MINIMUM ROOF COVERING CLASSIFICATIONS

TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION

IA

IB

IIA

IIB

IIIA

IIIB

IV

VA

VB

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.

a.      Unless otherwise required in accordance with Chapter 7A.

 

        G.    CBC Section 1505.1.3 is amended, by the deletion of the entire section and the addition of a new section thereto, to read as follows:

 

1505.1.3 Roof coverings within all other areas. The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than 50 percent of the total roof area is replaced within any one-year period, the entire roof covering of every new structure, and any roof covering applied in the alteration, repair or replacement of the roof of every existing structure, shall be a fire-retardant roof covering that is at least Class B.

 

        H.    CBC Section 1807.1.6 is amended to read as follows:

       

1807.1.6 Prescriptive design of concrete and masonry foundation walls. Concrete and masonry foundation walls that are laterally supported at the top and bottom shall be permitted to be designed and constructed in accordance with this section. Prescriptive design of foundation walls shall not be used for structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F.

 

        I.      CBC Section 3109.2 is amended as follows:

 

3109.2 Construction permit; safety features required. New or remodel pools or spas, at a private single-family home, shall have an enclosure complying with the amended California Residential Code Appendix V.

(Ord. 1812 § 1, 2019)

Chapter 15.05 RESIDENTIAL CODE
15.05.010 Adoption of the 2019 California Residential Code.
        Except as provided in this chapter, those certain building codes known and designated as the California Residential Code (CRC) 2019 Edition, including Appendices H and V, shall become the residential code of the city for regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all residential structures within the scope of the CRC in the city of La Habra. (Ord. 1812 § 1, 2019)

 

15.05.020 Amendments to the 2019 California Residential Code.
        The 2019 California Residential Code (CRC) is hereby amended as follows:

        CRC Division II, Administration, Sections 101 through 116 is deleted in their entirety. Refer to this code Section 15.04.020, Administrative Provisions, for the administration of the CRC.

        A.    CRC Table R301.2 (1) is revised to read as follows:

 

 

 

 

Table R301.2(1)

CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA

GROUND

SNOW LOAD
o

WIND DESIGN

SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY
f

SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM

WINTER

DESIGN TEMP
e

ICE BARRIER UNDERLAYMENT REQUIRED
h

FLOOD HAZARDS g

AIR FREEZING INDEX
i

MEAN ANNUAL TEMP
j

Speed (mph)
d

Topo-graphic Effects
k

Special Wind Region
l

Wind-borne Debris Zone
m

Weathering
a

Frost Line Depth
b

Termite
c

ZERO

110

No

No

No

D2 or E

Negligible

12″

Very Heavy

43°F

No

Yes

0

60°F

 

 

 

MANUAL J DESIGN CRITERIA n

Elevation

Latitude

Winter heating

Summer Cooling

Altitude correction factor

Indoor design temperature

Design temperature cooling

Heating temperature difference

305

N34

37

91

 

70

75

 

Cooling temperature difference

Wind velocity heating

Wind velocity cooling

Coincident wet bulb

Daily range

Winter humidity

Summer humidity

 

7

-

-

69

27

 

7 (50% RH)

 

 

For SI: 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.

 

a.      Weathering may require a higher strength concrete or grade of masonry than necessary to satisfy the structural requirements of this code. The weathering column shall be filled in with the weathering index (i.e., “negligible,” “moderate” or “severe”) for concrete as determined from the Weathering Probability Map [Figure R301.2(3)]. The grade of masonry units shall be determined from ASTM C 34, C 55, C 62, C 73, C 90, C 129, C 145, C 216 or C 652.

b.      The frost line depth may require deeper footings than indicated in Figure R403.1(1). The jurisdiction shall fill in the frost line depth column with the minimum depth of footing below finish grade.

c.      The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table to indicate the need for protection depending on whether there has been a history of local subterranean termite damage.

d.      The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the wind speed from the basic wind speed map [Figure R30l.2( 4)].Wind exposure category shall be determined on a site-specific basis in accordance with Section R301.2.1.4.

e.      The outdoor design dry-bulb temperature shall be selected from the columns of 971/2-percent values for winter from Appendix D of the California Plumbing Code. Deviations from the Appendix D temperatures shall be permitted to reflect local climates or local weather experience as determined by the building official.

f.      The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the seismic design category determined from Section R301.2.2.1.

g.      The city of La Habra does not have any Flood Hazards Zones. (OR, if yes) See City’s FIRM maps for Flood Hazard Locations.

h.      In accordance with Sections R905.2.7.1, R905.4.3.1, R905.5.3.1, R905.6.3.1, R905.7.3.1 and R905.8.3.1, where there has been a history of local damage from the effects of ice damming, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with “YES.” Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with “NO.”

i.       The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the 100-year return period air freezing index (BF-days) from Figure R403.3(2) or from the l00-year (99%) value on the National Climatic Data Center data table “Air Freezing Index-USA Method (Base 32°)” at www.ncdc.noaa.gov/fpsf.html.

j.       The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the mean annual temperature from the National Climatic Data Center data table “Air Freezing Index-USA Method (Base 32°F)” at www.ncdc.noaa.gov/fpsf.html.

k.      In accordance with Section R301.2.1.5, where there is local historical data documenting structural damage to buildings due to topographic wind speed-up effects, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with “YES.” Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate “NO” in this part of the table.

l.       In accordance with Figure R301.2(4)A, where there is local historical data documenting unusual wind conditions, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with “YES” and identify any specific requirements. Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate “NO” in this part of the table.

m.    In accordance with Section R301.2.1.2.1, the jurisdiction shall indicate the wind-borne debris wind zone(s). Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate “NO” in this part of the table.

n.      The jurisdiction shall fill in these sections of the table to establish the design criteria using Table 1a or 1b from ACCA Manual J or established criteria determined by the jurisdiction.

o.      The jurisdiction shall fill in this section of the table using the Ground Snow Loads in Figure R301.2 (6).

 

 

        B.     CRC Section R902.1 is amended by revising it to allow only class A or B roofs as follows:

 

R902.1 Roofing covering materials. Roofs shall be covered with materials as set forth in Sections R904 and R905. A minimum Class A or B roofing shall be installed in areas designated by this section. Classes A or B roofing required by this section to be listed shall be tested in accordance with UL 790 or ASTM E 108.

 

Exceptions:

        1.     Class A roof assemblies include those with coverings of brick, masonry and exposed concrete roof deck.

        2.     Class A roof assemblies also include ferrous or copper shingles or sheets, metal sheets and shingles, clay or concrete roof tile, or slate installed on noncombustible decks.

 

        C.     CRC Section R902.1.3 is amended by revising it to require a minimum Class B roof as follows:

 

R902.1.3 Roof coverings within all other areas. The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than 50 percent of the total roof area is replaced within any one-year period, the entire roof covering of every new structure, and any roof covering applied in the alteration, repair or replacement of the roof of every existing structure, shall be a fire-retardant roof covering that is at least Class B.

 

        D.    CRC Section R902.2, first paragraph is amended by revising it to allow only Class A or B treated wood roofs as follows:

 

R902.2 Fire-retardant-treated shingles and shakes. Fire-retardant-treated wood shakes and shingles are wood shakes and shingles complying with UBC Standard 15-3 or 15-4 which are impregnated by the full-cell vacuum-pressure process with fire-retardant chemicals, and which have been qualified by UBC Standard 15-2 for use on Class A or B roofs.

 

        E.     CRC Appendix V, amend section AV100.2(a) as follows:

 

Except as provided in Section AV100.5, when a building permit is issued for the construction of a new swimming pool or spa or the remodeling of an existing swimming pool or spa at a private single-family home, the respective swimming pool or spa shall be equipped with item #1 below AND at least one additional following seven drowning prevention features:

        F.     CRC Appendix V, amend section AV100.2(a) #1 as follows:

 

        1.     An enclosure that meets the requirements of AV100.3 and isolates the swimming pool and spa from the private single-family home. Any walls of the residential structure or accessory structures used to complete the isolation enclosure must have door openings equipped with protection as required in AV100.2 (a) #4 or #5. Any such door protection device provided for this purpose may not be used to comply with the second drowning prevention feature requirement.

(Ord. 1812 § 1, 2019)

Chapter 15.06 GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
15.06.010 Adoption of the 2019 Edition of the California Green Building Standards Code.
        Except as provided in this chapter, those certain building codes known and designated as the California Green Building Standards Code 2019 Edition, shall become the Green Building Code of the city for reducing the negative impact and encouraging sustainable construction practices in the planning and design, energy efficiency, water efficiency and conservation, and environmental quality of all newly constructed buildings or structures in the city of La Habra. (Ord. 1812 § 1, 2019)

 

 

 

15.06.020 Amendments to the 2019 California Green Building Standards Code.
        The 2019 California Green Building Standards Code is hereby amended as follows:

        Section 202 is amended to add a definition as follows:

 

Sustainability. Consideration of present development and construction impacts on the community, the economy, and the environment without compromising the needs of the future.

(Ord. 1812 § 1, 2019)

Chapter 15.07 EXISTING BUILDING CODE
15.07.010 Adoption of the 2019 Edition of the California Existing Building Code.
        Except as provided in this chapter, the California Existing Building Code, 2019 Edition shall become the Existing Building Code of the city, regulating the alteration, repair, addition and change of occupancy of existing structures in the city of La Habra. (Ord. 1812 § 1, 2019)

 

15.07.020 Amendments to the 2019 California Existing Building Code.
        The 2019 California Existing Building Code is hereby amended as follows:

        Division II, Scope and Administration, Section 101 through 117 are deleted in their entirety. Refer to this code, Section 15.04.020, Administrative Provisions, for the administration of the California Existing Building Code. (Ord. 1812 § 1, 2019)

Chapter 15.08 MECHANICAL CODE
15.08.010 Adoption of the 2019 Edition of the California Mechanical Code.
        Except as provided in this chapter, the California Mechanical Code, 2019 Edition, shall be and become the mechanical code of the city, regulating and controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of materials, location, operation and maintenance of heating, ventilating, cooling, refrigeration systems, Incinerators and other miscellaneous heat producing appliances in the city of La Habra. (Ord. 1812 § 1, 2019)

 

15.08.020 Amendments to the 2019 California Mechanical Code.
        The 2019 California Mechanical Code is hereby amended as follows:

        CMC Division II, Scope and Administration, Section 101.0 through 107.0, inclusive of Table 104.5, are deleted in their entirety. Refer to this code, Section 15.04.020, Administrative Provisions, for the administration of the CMC. (Ord. 1812 § 1, 2019)

Chapter 15.12 PLUMBING CODE
15.12.010 Adoption of the 2019 Edition of the California Plumbing Code.
        Except as provided in this chapter, the California Plumbing Code, 2019 Edition, shall be and become the plumbing code of the city, regulating erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, maintenance or use of plumbing systems within the city of La Habra. (Ord. 1812 § 1, 2019)

 

15.12.020 Amendments to the 2019 California Plumbing Code.
        The 2019 California Plumbing Code (CPC) is hereby amended as follows:

        CPC Division II, Scope and Administration, Section 101.0 through 107.0, inclusive of Table 104.5, are deleted in their entirety. Refer to this code, Section 15.04.020, Administrative Provisions, for the administration of the CPC. (Ord. 1812 § 1, 2019)

Chapter 15.16 ELECTRICAL CODE
15.16.010 Adoption of the 2019 Edition of the California Electrical Code
        Except as provided in this chapter, the California Electrical Code, 2019 Edition, based on the 2017 National Electrical Code as published by the National Fire Protection Association, shall be and become the electrical code of the city, regulating all installation, arrangement, alteration, repair, use and other operation of electrical wiring, connections, fixtures and other electrical appliances on premises within the city of La Habra. (Ord. 1812 § 1, 2019)

 

15.16.020 Amendments to the 2019 California Electrical Code
        The 2019 California Electrical Code (CEC) is hereby amended as follows:

        Refer to this code, Section 15.04.020, Administrative Provisions, for the administration of the CEC.

        A.    Article 310.106(B) Conductor Material, is amended by the addition of a second paragraph to read as follows:

 

Copper wire shall be used for wiring No. 6 and smaller in all installations. Consideration for use of aluminum wiring can be made by the Building Official for feeder lines only on an individual basis where adequate safety measures can be ensured.

 

        B.     Article 310 Conductors for General Wiring, is amended by the addition of Article 310.121 to read as follows:

 

310.121 Continuous inspection of aluminum wiring. Aluminum conductors of No. six (6) or smaller used for branch circuits shall require continuous inspection by an independent testing agency approved by the Building Official for proper torque of connections at their termination point.

(Ord. 1812 § 1, 2019)

Chapter 15.20 HOUSING CODE, 1997
15.20.010 Uniform Housing Code—Adopted.
        The Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition, hereby is adopted in its entirety as the housing code of the city of La Habra. (Ord. 1615 § 7, 2002; Ord. 1556 § 7, 1999)

Chapter 15.28 UNIFORM CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS, 1997
15.28.010 Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997—Adopted.
        The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, hereby is adopted in its entirety as the uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings of the city of La Habra. (Ord. 1615 § 9, 2002; Ord. 1556 § 9, 1999)

Chapter 15.32 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
15.32.010 Adoption of the 2018 Edition of the International Property Maintenance Code.
        Except as provided in this chapter, the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, shall be and become the property maintenance code of the city of La Habra, regulating the maintenance of buildings and structures within the city. (Ord. 1812 § 1, 2019)

 

15.32.020 Amendments to the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code
        A.    The International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, hereby is adopted with the following amendments.

        1.     Where the term International Building Code Is used it shall be replaced with the term California Building Code.

        2.     Where the term International Residential Code is used it shall be replaced with the term California Residential Code.

        3.     Where the term International Plumbing Code is used it shall be replaced with the term California Plumbing Code.

        4.     Where the term International Energy Conservation Code is used it shall be replaced with the term California Energy Code.

        5.     Where the term International Fire Code is used it shall be replaced with the term California Fire Code.

        6.     Where the term International Fuel Gas Code Is used it shall be replaced with the term California Plumbing Code.

        7.     Where the term International Mechanical Code is used it shall be replaced with the term California Mechanical Code.

        8.     Where the term NFPA 70 is used it shall be replaced with the term California Electrical Code.

        9.     Where the term International Code is used it shall be replaced with the term La Habra Zoning Code.

        B.     Section 101.1 is hereby amended as follows:

 

101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of the city of La Habra, hereinafter referred to as “this code.”

 

        C.     Section 303 is hereby deleted.

        D.    Section 304.14 is hereby amended as follows:

 

304.14 Insect screens. During the period from March 1 of each year to November 15 of each year, every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm) and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device In good working condition.

 

Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed.

 

        E.     Section 602.3 is hereby amended as follows:

 

602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from October 1 of each year to May 1 of the following year to maintain a temperature of not less than 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.

 

(Exceptions are not modified)

(Ord. 1812 § 1, 2019)


Chapter 15.36 RELOCATING BUILDINGS
15.36.010 House moving permit—Required.
        No person shall move any building or structure, or any portion thereof, over, upon, along or across any street or alley in the city without first obtaining a written permit therefor, issued by the city engineer. Such permit shall be referred to as a “house moving permit.” (Ord. 1209, 1983; Ord. 533 § 1, 1962)

 

15.36.020 House moving permit—Insurance required.
        No application for a house moving permit shall be granted or issued for any building or structure or portion thereof to be moved over, upon, along or across any public street or alley until the applicant owner and/or contractor has filed a public liability insurance copy with the engineering department in the amount of one million dollars, de-

termined by the city engineer to cover any possible cost of damage to public streets, etc. (Ord. 1158, 1981; Ord. 533 § 1, 1962)

 

15.36.030 Restoration of damage—Cost assessment.
        In the event of any damage to any public street, alley, curb, gutter, sidewalk, public place, culvert, bridge, fence or other appurtenance by reason of the moving of any building or section thereof, the city engineer shall cause the same to be repaired as may be necessary to restore such damaged portion to as good a condition as the same was prior to the damage caused by the moving of such building or structure, and shall charge the cost thereof to the person, firm or corporation to whom the permit was issued for the moving of such building or structure. (Ord. 1209, 1983; Ord. 533 § 1, 1962)

 

15.36.040 Relocation permit—Required.
        No house moving permit shall be issued where a building or structure is proposed to be relocated within the city limits until the building official has first issued to the owner of the premises to which the building is to be moved a permit to relocate the particular building or structure or a portion thereof upon such premises. Such permit shall be referred to and be known as a “relocation permit.” (Ord. 1209, 1983; Ord. 533 § 1, 1962)

 

15.36.050 Relocation permit—Application.
        Application for a relocation permit shall be made by letter to the city council. The letter shall be accompanied by a plot plan showing the proposed location of the building to be moved in and giving a complete description of the lot on which the building is to be located. The application shall also be accompanied by photographs of the building to be moved. In order to determine any of the matters presented by the application, the city council may cause to be made any investigations it deems necessary, or may require any exhibits that may be necessary to ascertain the correctness or fitness or the architectural design of the building. (Ord. 533 § 1, 1962)

 

15.36.060 Inspection—Charge.
        Before any application for a relocation permit is accepted, the applicant owner and/or contractor shall pay an inspection fee charge as set by resolution to the building department for each building proposed to be relocated. This fee shall be in addition to any other fees required by any other section of this code regulating the relocation or construction of the building or structure. Mileage charge: If the building is over ten miles from Civic Center there will be a mileage fee charge. (Ord. 1213 §§ 2, 3, 1983; Ord. 1158, 1982; Ord. 533 § 1, 1962)

 

15.36.070 Inspection—Report.
        The building official shall then inspect or cause to be inspected the building or structure desired to be moved into the city and shall file a report of his or her inspection and findings as follows: one copy to the applicant, one copy for reference of the city council and one copy in the files of the department of building and safety. (Ord. 533 § 1, 1962)

 

15.36.080 Public hearing—Planning commission action.
        A.    Prior to the issuance of a relocation permit to move a building into or within the city, the planning commission shall hold a fully noticed and advertised public hearing on the proposed relocation.

        B.     The planning commission shall approve, conditionally approve or deny any such permit after a hearing. Any approval shall be subject to reasonable conditions and architectural control, changes, alterations, additions or repairs upon the building or structure to be moved to the end that the relocation thereof will not be materially detrimental or injurious to public safety or to public welfare or to property improvements in the district to which such building is to be moved.

        C.     The decision of the planning commission may be appealed for decision by the city council in the same manner as other appeals from the decisions of the planning commission. (Ord. 1133, 1981; Ord. 533 § 1, 1962)

 

15.36.090 Bond.
        A.    No relocation permit shall be issued until the applicant therefor first posts a bond with the city clerk, executed by the owner of the premises where the building is to be located, as principal, and a surety company licensed in the state, as surety. The bond shall be joint and several and shall name the city as obligee, and shall be in an amount equal to the cost, plus ten percent, of the work required to be done in order to comply with the conditions of the relocation permit as determined by the director of building and safety. A cash bond may be posted in lieu of the surety bond but upon the same terms and conditions.

        B.     The bond shall be conditioned as follows:

        1.     That all the terms and conditions of the relocation permit shall be complied with to the satisfaction of the city;

        2.     That all of the work required to be done pursuant to the conditions of the relocation permit shall be performed within six months from the date of the relocation permit, unless the city council shall extend such time and enter the extension in its minutes.

        C.     In the event of any default in the conditions of the bond, the city shall proceed to forfeit the bond and recover any amounts due thereunder for the city. Moneys received by virtue of any such forfeiture shall inure to the general fund of the city. (Ord. 533 § 1, 1962)

 

15.36.100 Right of entry of officials and surety.
        A.    The city, the surety and the duly authorized representatives of either shall have access to the premises described in the relocation permit for the purpose of inspecting the progress of the work.

        B.     In the event of any default in the performance of any term or condition of the relocation permit, the surety, or any person employed or engaged on its behalf, shall have the right to go upon the premises to complete the required work or to remove or demolish the building or structure.

        C.     No owner, his/her representatives, successors or assigns, or any other person, shall interfere with or obstruct the ingress or egress to or from any such premises of any authorized representative or agent of any surety or of the city engaged in the work of completing, demolishing or removing any building or structure for which a relocation permit has been issued, after a default has occurred in the performance of the terms or conditions thereof. (Ord. 533 § 1, 1962)

 

15.36.110 Warning lights.
        No person, firm or corporation shall move or cause to be moved any building, structure or portion thereof over, upon, along or across any public street or alley without keeping a red light burning at all times between sunset and sunrise at each corner of such building or structure, or at the end of any projection thereof, in order to warn all traffic meeting the building or structure of its size and location on the public street or alley. (Ord. 533 § 1, 1962)

 

15.36.120 Consent of public utilities.
        No person, firm or corporation shall move or cause to be moved any building, structure or portion thereof on, over, along or across any public street or alley so as to interfere in any manner with any real or personal property of any public utility without the permission and consent of the public utility being first had and obtained. “Public utility,” as used in this section, means any person or corporation owning or operating any wires, poles, signals, pipelines, tracks or necessary appurtenances or structures thereto, used for general public service. (Ord. 533 § 1, 1962)

 

15.36.130 Damage to trees or shrubs.
        No person or corporation shall move or cause to be moved any building or structure over, upon, along or across any public street or alley so as to damage, break, cut or trim any trees or shrubs on or along the street or alley except under the direction of the city manager or such other city official as may be selected from time to time by the city council. (Ord. 533 § 1, 1962)

 

15.36.140 Building classification and conformance.
        Regardless of the age or condition of any building, structure or portion thereof proposed to be relocated, all such buildings shall be classified as new construction and shall comply with all applicable provisions for new building construction within the city. The building official may approve any existing nonconforming or noncomplying building materials which have been built into or form an integral part of any proposed relocated building, provided he/she finds that the nonconforming or noncomplying building material is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. (Ord. 533 § 1, 1962)

 

15.36.150 Other applicable requirements.
        Compliance with the requirements of this chapter shall not relieve any person from other applicable requirements of this code, including all requirements regarding building construction, zoning and setbacks. (Ord. 533 § 1, 1962)

Chapter 15.40 OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGNS AND STRUCTURES
15.40.010 Billboards.
        A.    Definition. “Billboard” means any sign not advertising the business, industry or pursuit conducted on the premises on which the sign is erected or maintained.

        B.     No permanent billboard shall be erected, constructed or maintained in the city on or after June 3, 1960.

 

        C.     When practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships occur by reason of a strict interpretation of subsection B of this section, the city council upon its own motion may, or upon the request of any interested person may, in specific cases grant a variance from the provisions of subsection B of this section under such conditions as may be deemed necessary to assure that the spirit and purposes of this section will be observed, public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done.

        D.    A temporary billboard advertising civic or charitable events or functions may be erected and maintained under the same conditions as set forth in this chapter for the erection and maintenance of directional signs.

        E.     Any billboard which is lawfully existing and maintained on June 3, 1960 may be continued; provided, that such nonconforming billboard and its supporting members shall be completely removed from the premises not later than one year from June 3, 1960. (Ord. 765, 1970; Ord. 438 § 4, 1960)

 

15.40.020 Purpose and intent.
        Recognizing the right and need of each individual, business, firm or corporation to identify his or her place of residence, business or service, and realizing that the indiscriminate erection, location, illumination, coloring and sizing, and lack of proper maintenance of signs constitutes a significant contributing factor detrimental to the well-being and continuing activity of a city’s people, it is the purpose and intent of this chapter to:

        A.    Assure that all signs are designed, erected and maintained in a manner to enhance, rather than detract from, the ultimate design and appearance of the affected locality;

        B.     Prohibit the installation and maintenance of signs which unduly distract motorists’ attention from driving, and which detract from the attention that should be devoted to traffic movement and to signs and signals promoting traffic safety;

        C.     Prevent installation and maintenance of signs which singly or conjunctionally have an injurious effect on the morale of the people and well-being of the city;

        D.    Assure that size and location does not constitute an obstacle to effective fire protection and firefighting techniques; nor constitute a direct or potential danger to vehicular or pedestrian traffic, especially in the event of structural failure during periods of inclement weather and earthquakes, or in the event of impaired vision due to improper size and/or location;

        E.     Otherwise protect the public health, safety, morals and promote the public welfare. (Ord. 765, 1970)

 

15.40.030 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, certain abbreviations, terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as set forth in this section:

        “Advertising area” means the total area in square feet of all sign facings (except double-face signs which shall be computed as one face), and includes only that portion of the supporting structure or trim which carries any wording, symbols or pictures (see sign facing).

        “Animated sign” means any sign with action or motion, flashing or color changes requiring electrical energy. (This definition does not include public service signs such as time and temperature units.)

        “Approved plastic materials” means those specified in the La Habra Building Code Standards and which have a flame-spread rating of two hundred twenty-five or less and a smoke density not greater than that obtained from the burning of untreated wood under similar conditions when tested in accordance with the La Habra Building Code Standards in the way intended for use. The products of combustion shall be no more toxic than the burning of untreated wood under similar conditions.

        “Background area of sign” means the entire background area of a sign upon which copy may be placed. This includes the surface of any solid face sign assembly or a portion of the building facing as permitted by this chapter.

        “Banner” means any temporary sign of lightweight fabric, plastic or similar material that is attached by one or more edges or corners to a building, structure or pole.

        “Billboard” means any sign not advertising the business, industry or pursuit conducted on the premises on which the sign is located, erected or maintained.

        “Building facing” means the exterior surfacing which forms the front face of a building on any business frontage.

        “Building official” means the manager of building and safety of the city of La Habra and the officer or person charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter or his or her duly authorized deputy.

        “Business face” means the area of the front face of a building or store unit occupied by an individual business, fronting onto a public street or the primary public entrance to such establishment, computed by multiplying the width of a business frontage by the height. The height shall be measured from finished grade to the top of the plate line, ledger, ribbon, pilasters, or other member where the main roof structure is supported.

        Exception. Where a roof parapet exists, the height may be measured to the top of the parapet or to a point upon such parapet not more than four feet above the roof-supporting element, whichever is the lesser.

        “Business frontage” means the property lines or lease lines at the front of the building in which a business is located and on which the primary entrance, accessible to the general public, is located.

        “Directional sign for land development project” means a sign not used for general advertising purposes, but which informs the viewer as to route or direction of travel in order to arrive at a land development project.

        “Display frontage” means the lineal footage of display frontage for those businesses where the principal display of merchandise is located outside of a main building.

        “Double-face sign” means a single sign structure with two parallel sign faces back to back.

        “Electric sign” means any sign containing electrical wiring for the purpose of illumination or for producing motion or movement, but not including signs illuminated by an exterior light source.

        “Freestanding sign” means any sign wholly supported by one or more uprights or columns anchored in the ground and not attached to any building.

        “Freeway” means a highway with respect to which the owners of abutting lands have no right of easement or access to or from their abutting lands, or in respect to which such owners have only limited or restricted easement or access and which is declared to be such in compliance with the Streets and Highways Code of the state.

        “Future development sign” means any temporary sign that advertises a new business or development project prior to or during the construction phase of that project.

        “Height” means the greatest vertical distance measured from the finished grade of the site at the sign location to the top of a sign, a sign structure, or advertising display. The height of signs placed at a location that slopes downward from the public right-of-way will be measured from the finish grade of the sidewalk.

        “Human advertisement” means any person who is located anywhere within the city, and whose intent is to advertise, and whose actions do advertise, a business or service, by way of his or her actions, including, but not limited to, by holding a temporary sign, wearing a costume, or wearing body paint.

        “Illuminated sign” means a sign which uses an internal or external source of light in order to make readable its copy.

        “Incombustible material” means any material which will not ignite at, or below, a temperature of one thousand two hundred degrees Fahrenheit during an exposure of five minutes, and which will not continue to burn or glow at that temperature. Tests shall be made as specified in the Uniform Building Code Standards.

        “Inflatable advertising device” means any device constructed of vinyl, fabric, rubber or plastic or other air-tight material, which relies for its shape and support on inflation by a compressed gas or by an air blower or fan conducting air into it, and which uses any color, form, graphic, symbol or writing to identify or communicate a commercial or noncommercial message, announce the purpose of or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to communicate information of any kind to the public.

        “Inflatable character” means an inflatable, balloon-like character, character representation, logo, or other design, generally tethered to the ground or to the roof of a structure.

        “Integrated development” means a development consisting of two or more interrelated business establishments designed around common driveways and common on-site parking facilities.

        “Land development project” means any residential tract or subdivision, or industrial or commercial development within the city. Subject development may include parcel improvements only, and the developer need not construct buildings thereupon.

        “Marquee” means a permanent, roofed structure attached to and supported by the building and projecting over public property or over a walkway located on private property, but used by the public.

        “Neon lighting” or “neon sign” means any electric gas tube lighting or any sign containing argon, neon, krypton, helium, or xenon.

        “Nonadvertising sign” means any sign posted on private property containing thereon a regulatory or warning notice and upon which no advertising matter is displayed.

        “Nonstructural trim” means the molding, battens, caps, nailing strips, latticing, cutouts or letters which are attached to the sign structure.

        “Off-premises signs” mean signs that direct attention to a business, commodity, industry, or other commercial activity sold, offered, or conducted elsewhere than on the premises upon which such sign is located.

        “Pennant” means any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind.

        “Permanent reader panel” means a permanently-constructed changeable-copy bulletin board, lighted or unlighted, with detachable precut letters and figures. Copy area shall not exceed forty percent of the background to which applied.

        “Plastic materials” means those materials made wholly or principally from standardized plastics listed and described in the La Habra Building Code Standards.

        “Portable sign” means any moveable outdoor sign that is not permanently secured or attached to an approved sign structure or building.

        “Preexisting nonconforming sign” means a sign which existed prior to the adoption of this chapter, but which does not comply with or is in conflict with the provisions of this chapter.

        “Projecting sign” means any sign which is affixed or attached to, and is supported solely by, a building wall or structure, and extends beyond the building structure or any part thereof more than twelve inches. No projecting sign shall have a clearance less than eight feet above finished grade or the walkway below.

        “Roof line” means a horizontal line projected from the top of the ridge, or in the case of flat or single-slope roofs, from the highest point of the rafter, roof beam or roof joist.

        “Roof sign” means any sign erected, constructed and maintained wholly upon or over the roof of any building and which is principally supported from or upon the roof structure.

        “Sign” means any medium, including its structure and component parts, which is used or intended to be used to attract attention to the subject matter for advertising purposes and includes every announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration, insignia, surface or space when erected, painted or maintained in view of the general public for identification, advertisement or promotion of the interest of any person.

        “Sign structure” means any structure which supports or is capable of supporting any sign as defined in this section. A sign structure may be a single pole and may or may not be an integral part of the building.

        “Structure” means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts jointed together in some definite manner.

        “Temporary sign” means any sign, including, but not limited to, a banner, that is not permanently attached to a building or structure or to the ground.

        “Temporary sign for land development project” means a sign used for general advertising purposes and located on the land development project.

        “Under-marquee sign” means a lighted or unlighted minor identification sign attached to the underside of a marquee, protruding over public or private sidewalks or rights-of-way.

        “Wall sign” means any sign attached to or erected against the wall of a building or structure with the exposed surface of the sign in a plane parallel with the plane of the wall and extending not more than eighteen inches from the face of the building, having the advertisement either of solid face construction or individual letters. Wall signs shall extend no higher than the roofline or the top of the front parapet, whichever is higher. (Ord. 1747 § 1, 2013; Ord. 1721, 2010; Ord. 1714 § 1, 2010; Ord. 1664 § 1, 2006; Ord. 786 § 1, 1970; Ord. 765, 1970)

 

15.40.040 Permit—Required.
        A.    It is unlawful for any person to erect, reerect, construct, alter or paint upon the exterior of a building any sign without first having obtained a permit therefor issued by the building official. A separate permit shall be required for each sign installed; provided, however, the building official may allow one permit to cover a group of similar type signs for a single business entity, a group of signs on a single supporting structure, or a group of independently-mounted letters, words, or symbols intended to convey a single message; provided, that such group of signs or letters can be normally inspected at the same time and in the same manner as normally required for a single sign.

        B.     For permits, fees and bonds covering temporary and directional signs for land development projects see Sections 15.40.220, 15.40.230 and 15.40.240. (Ord. 765, 1970)

 

15.40.050 Permit—Application—Contents.
        Application for a sign permit shall be made in writing upon forms furnished by the building official. Such application shall contain the location by street and number of the proposed sign structure, as well as the name and address of the owner and the sign contractor or erector. (Ord. 765, 1970)

 

15.40.060 Permit—Submittal of plans and specifications with application required.
        A.    Two sets of plans and specifications shall be submitted with each application for a sign permit. Plans and specifications shall be drawn to scale upon substantial paper or cloth and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this chapter and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.

        B.     Computations, stress diagrams and plans prepared and designed by an engineer or architect licensed by the state and other data sufficient to show the correctness of the plans shall be submitted when required by the building official. (Ord. 765, 1970)

 

15.40.070 Permit—Exemptions.
        The following signs shall not require a sign permit. These exceptions shall not be construed as relieving the owner of the sign from the responsibility of its erection and maintenance, and its compliance with the provisions of this chapter or any other law or ordinance regulating the same.

        A.    The changing of the advertising copy or message on theater marquees and similar signs specifically designed for the use of replaceable copy;

        B.     Real estate signs not more than six square feet in area per face, not exceeding a total height of six feet six inches, exclusive of support structures, for residential-zoned properties, of not more than twenty-four square feet in area per face for commercial and industrial zoned properties, when such signs pertain to the sale or rental of the properties on which they are displayed, but not more than one sign for each street frontage;

        C.     Professional name plates and occupational signs denoting only the name and occupation of an occupant in a commercial building, public institutional building, and not exceeding two square feet in area;

        D.    Identification nameplates or signs on apartment houses, boardinghouses or roominghouses, or similar uses, not exceeding three square feet in area;

        E.     One nameplate, denoting only the name of the occupants of a dwelling, and not exceeding two square feet in area, nor located closer than two feet to the property line;

        F.     Bulletin boards not over twenty square feet in area for public, charitable and religious institutions when the same are located on the premises of the institutions in such a manner as not to constitute a hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic;

        G.    Signs identifying the development and denoting the architect, engineer or contractor when placed upon work under construction; provided, however, that no such sign shall exceed twenty-four square feet in area;

        H.    Memorial and dedication plaques constructed of bronze or other incombustible materials or tablets cut into any masonry surface;

        I.      Traffic or other municipal signs, legal notices, railroad crossing signs, or danger signs;

        J.      Nonadvertising warning signs or trespassing signs on private property posted no closer than one hundred feet apart, nor exceeding two square feet in area;

        K.    Nonadvertising signs of public utility companies indicating location of danger only;

        L.     On-site directional signs for public and private developments, denoting the entrance, exit and direction of traffic flow and not exceeding two square feet in area;

        M.    Temporary advertising or signs of any type on store windows may be displayed at any business establishment for not more than thirty days at any one time, except that temporary seasonal signs painted on store windows for purposes of holiday display shall be removed not later than two weeks after the date of the holiday. The copy area for such temporary advertising or signs, including seasonal signs, shall not cover more than thirty-three percent of the square footage of the windows and clear doors. All advertising and signage shall be securely installed and neatly displayed and maintained in a manner that ensures that law enforcement personnel have a clear and unobstructed view of the interior of the premises, including the area in which the cash registers are maintained, from the exterior public sidewalk or entrance to the premises, unless the existing windows are located at a height that precludes a view of the interior of the premises to a person standing outside the premises. Sandwich board signs and similar portable signs are not permitted for temporary promotional advertising. (Ord. 1561 § 1, 1999; Ord. 818 § 1, 1971; Ord. 797 § 1, 1971; Ord. 786 § 1, 1970; Ord. 765, 1970)

 

15.40.080 Permit—Fee.
        A sign permit fee shall be paid in accordance with the building permit fee schedule as set forth in the Uniform Building Code, Volume I. In addition, a plan checking fee, equal to one-half the permit fee, shall be paid; provided, however, that when structural computations are required, the minimum plan checking fee shall be as established by resolution. (Ord. 1213 §§ 2, 3, 1983; Ord. 765, 1970)

15.40.090 Maintenance.
        All signs, together with all of their supports, braces, guys and anchors, shall be kept in good repair and in a proper state of preservation. The display surface of all signs shall be kept neatly painted or posted at all times. Such repair and maintenance shall include replacement of defective parts, painting, cleaning, and other procedures normally required to maintain a sign. The building official shall require the correction or removal of any sign not maintained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 765, 1970)

 

15.40.100 Inspection.
        In order to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this chapter, all signs for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official. Footing inspections shall be required by the building official for all sign structures supported by footings. (Ord. 765, 1970)

 

15.40.110 Authority to issue stop orders.
        The issuance of a sign permit shall not constitute a waiver of this chapter or any ordinance of the city, and the building official is authorized to stop the installation of any sign or advertising structure which is being carried on in violation of this chapter or of any ordinance of the city. (Ord. 765, 1970)

 

15.40.120 Design standards.
        A.    General. Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist wind and seismic forces as specified in this section. All bracing systems shall be designed and constructed to transfer lateral forces to the foundations. For signs on buildings the dead and lateral loads shall be transmitted through the structural frame of the building to the ground in such manner as not to overstress any of the elements thereof. The overturning moment produced from lateral forces shall in no case exceed two-thirds of the dead-load resisting moment. Uplift due to overturning shall be adequately resisted by proper anchorage to the ground or to the structural frame of the building. The weight of earth superimposed over footings may be used in determining the dead load resisting moment. Such earth shall be carefully placed and thoroughly compacted.

        B.     Wind Loads. Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist wind forces as specified in the La Habra building code.

        C.     Seismic Loads. Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist seismic forces as specified in the La Habra building code.

        D.    Combined Loads.

        1.     Wind and seismic loads need not be combined in the design of signs or sign structures; only that loading producing the larger stresses need be used.

        2.     Vertical design loads, except roof live loads, shall be assumed to be acting simultaneously with the wind or seismic loads.

        E.     Design Criteria.

        1.     The design of wood, concrete or steel members shall conform to the requirements of the La Habra building code.

        2.     The working stresses of wire rope and its fastenings shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the ultimate strength of the rope or fasteners.

        3.     Wind or seismic loads combined with dead loads may be increased as specified in the La Habra building code. (Ord. 1721, 2010)

 

15.40.130 Construction standards.
        A.    General. The supports of all signs or sign structures shall be placed in or upon private property and shall be securely built, constructed and erected in conformance with the requirements of this chapter.

        B.     Materials. Materials of construction for signs and sign structures shall be of the quality and grade as specified for buildings in the La Habra building code.

        C.     Restrictions on Combustible Materials.

        1.     All signs and sign structures erected in very high hazard fire zones non-combustible materials.

        2.     Freestanding signs may be constructed of any material meeting the requirements of this chapter, except as provided in subdivision 1 of this subsection.

        3.     All signs shall be constructed of non-combustible materials, except as provided in subsection D of this section.

        D.    Nonstructural Trim. Nonstructural trim and portable display surfaces may be of wood, metal, approved plastics, or any combination thereof.

        E.     Anchorage.

        1.     Members supporting un-braced signs shall be so proportioned that the bearing loads imposed on the soil in either direction, horizontal or vertical, shall not exceed the safe values. Braced ground signs shall be anchored to resist the specified wind or seismic load acting in any direction. Anchors and supports shall be designed for safe bearing loads on the soil and for an effective resistance to pull-out amounting to a force twenty-five percent greater than the required resistance to overturning. Anchors and supports shall penetrate to a depth below ground greater than that of the frost line.

        2.     Signs attached to masonry, concrete or steel shall be safely and securely fastened thereto by means of metal anchors, bolts or approved expansion screws of sufficient size and anchorage to support safely the loads applied.

        3.     No wooden blocks or plugs or anchors with wood used in connection with screws or nails shall be considered proper anchorage, except in the case of signs attached to wood framing.

        4.     No anchor or support of any sign shall be connected to, or supported by, an unbraced parapet wall, unless such wall is designed in accordance with the requirements for parapet walls specified in the La Habra building code.

        F.     Display Surfaces. Display surfaces in all types of signs may be made of metal, glass or approved plastics.

 

        1.     Glass thickness and area limitations shall be as set forth in Table 18-8A.

        Exception: Glass in any sign subject to human impact as defined by the La Habra building code shall be of a type permitted by the La Habra building code.

 

Table No. 18-8A
Size, Thickness and Type of
Glass Panels in Signs

 

Maximum Size of Exposed Glass Panel

Minimum Thickness  of Glass (in inches)

Type of Glass

Any Dimension (in inches)

Area (in square inches)

30

500

1/8

Plain, plate or wired

45

700

3/16

Plain, plate or wired

144

3,600

1/4

Plain, plate or wired

Over 144

Over 3,600

1/4

Wired glass

 

        2.     Sections of approved plastics on wall signs shall not exceed one hundred fifty square feet in area.

        Exception: Sections of approved plastics on signs other than wall signs may be of unlimited area if approved by the building official.

        3.     Sections of approved plastics on wall signs shall be separated three feet laterally and six feet vertically by solid portion of the required exterior wall construction.

        Exception: Sections of approved plastics on signs other than wall signs may not be required to be separated if approved by the building official.

        G.    Approved Plastics. Plastic material used in signs shall be approved. The building official may require that sufficient technical data be submitted to substantiate the proposed use of any plastic material. (Ord. 1721, 2010)

 

15.40.140 Projection and clearance standards.
        A.    General. All types of signs shall conform to the clearance and projection requirements of this section.

        B.     Over Public Property. No sign of any type as defined by this chapter or any portion thereof shall extend or project over any public sidewalk, street, alley or other public property.

        C.     Clearance from High Voltage Power Lines. Signs shall be located not less than six feet horizontally or twelve feet vertically from overhead electrical conductors which are energized in excess of seven hundred fifty volts. The term “overhead conductors” as used in this section means any electrical conductor, either bare or insulated, installed above the ground except such conductors as are enclosed in iron pipe or other material covering of equal strength.

        D.    Clearance From Fire Exits or Standpipes. No sign or sign structure shall be erected in such a manner that any portion of its surface or supports will interfere in any way with the free use of any fire exit or standpipe.

        E.     Obstruction of Openings. No sign shall obstruct any openings to such an extent that light or ventilation is reduced to a point below that required by this code. Signs erected within five feet of an exterior wall in which there are openings within the area of the sign shall be constructed of non-combustible material or approved plastics. No projecting sign shall have a clearance of less than eight feet above finished grade or the walkway below. (Ord. 1721, 2010)

 

15.40.150 Electric signs—Construction and design.
        A.    Construction. No combustible materials other than approved plastics shall be used in the construction of electric signs. The outer shell of electric signs shall be watertight, excepting that service holes fitted with covers shall be provided to serve each compartment within the shell. All electric signs and electric wiring installed for the purpose of illumination from an exterior source shall be subject to the provisions of the La Habra electrical code and all electrical components used shall bear the label of an approved testing agency. For labeling requirements for a complete electric sign see Section 15.40.160.

        B.     Flashing Lights. Flashing lights and flashing arrows are considered to be a distraction to the flow of traffic and therefore constitute a hazard and shall not be attached to any sign or sign structure or to any building wall.

        C.     Glare. It is unlawful for any person to maintain any sign which is wholly or partially illuminated, which creates glare upon the public streets, sidewalks or adjacent residential property.

        D.    Illumination of Nonelectric Signs. Nonelectrical signs may be illuminated from an independent source providing such illumination is concentrated upon the area of the sign only and does not impinge a glare upon any street, alley, driveway, parking area or adjacent property, nor into the eyes of any motorist or pedestrian.

        E.     Revolving Signs. Revolving signs shall not exceed eight revolutions per minute. (Ord. 1721, 2010)

 

15.40.160 Electric signs—Inspection and labeling.
        Every electric sign shall be inspected by and shall bear the label of an approved and recognized testing agency, and shall have painted on the surface of the sign the name of the sign manufacturer and the date of erection. Such name and date, together with the label of the testing agency, shall be of sufficient size and contrast to be readable from a reasonable distance. Failure to provide such name, date and label shall be reason for disapproval of the sign installation by the building official. (Ord. 765, 1970)

 

15.40.170 Signs painted directly on buildings.
        Signs painted directly on buildings shall be subject to the same permit fees and regulations as set forth in this chapter for signs attached to or erected against the walls of buildings and shall be included as a part of the total allowable advertising area. The area of a sign painted directly on a building shall mean the total painted surface which displays or illustrates the message; excepting when the words, letters or symbols are independently painted upon the building facing or wall without a separate sign background, then the area of such painted sign shall mean the copy area. (Ord. 765, 1970)

 

15.40.180 Roof signs.
        Roof signs and combination roof signs are permitted to be erected above the roofline; provided, that:

        A.    A conditional use permit shall be obtained for all roof signs and may be granted only if it is determined that the sign is architecturally compatible with the building on which it is located.

        B.     Such signs may extend over the roof from the front face a distance not more than fifteen percent of that dimension of roof measured perpendicularly from the front face to the rear wall of the building.

        C.     Such signs shall be supported from the roof by round, square or shaped steel members. Supporting members shall appear to be free from extra bracing, angle iron, guy wires, cables, etc. Such extra bracing shall be entirely concealed from public view. All roof sign supports shall appear to be an architectural and integral part of the building. (Ord. 1063, 1978; Ord. 765, 1970)

 

15.40.190 Marquee signs.
        A.    General. A sign may be constructed within the face of a marquee or a wall sign may be attached to the face; provided, that no part of the sign projects below or above the marquee. Such sign shall, for the purpose of determining projection, clearance, height and materials of construction, be considered a part of and shall meet the requirements for a marquee as specified in Chapter 45 of the Uniform Building Code, Volume I.

        B.     Temporary Marquee Signs. No temporary signs, banners or ornamental pennants shall be suspended from the marquee or any part of its framing.

        C.     Under-marquee Signs. Under-marquee signs may be installed in a uniform display for integrated developments when approved by the planning commission. No such sign shall have a clearance of less than eight feet above finished grade or the walkway below. (Ord. 765, 1970)

 

15.40.200 Freestanding signs.
        A.    Allowable Advertising Area, Maximum Height, Maximum Number and Protection from Vehicular Traffic.

        1.     Freestanding signs shall be located and constructed in accordance with the allowance provided in this section.

        2.     All signs placed on a single pole shall be compatible in size, shape, placement and color as approved by the director of planning and community development.

        3.     No freestanding sign more than eight feet in height shall be located within two hundred fifty feet of any other freestanding sign. No freestanding sign less than eight feet in height may be located closer than two hundred fifty feet to any other freestanding sign on the same business property or integrated development.

        4.     No more than one freestanding sign shall be allowed for any property having less than two hundred fifty feet in frontage.

        5.     The maximum allowable advertising area for all freestanding signs shall equal one square foot for each lineal foot of street frontage, but not to exceed the maximum allowable advertising area as set forth in subsection D1 of Section 15.40.450. (Double-faced signs may be computed as one face.)

        6.     The maximum allowable height for any freestanding sign shall be eight feet; provided, that a freestanding sign exceeding eight feet in height may be permitted upon the granting of a conditional use permit by the planning commission.

        B.     Traffic Hazards.

        1.     No freestanding sign or any part thereof shall be located or constructed in any manner so as to constitute a hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic either on public or private property.

        2.     Signs having display panels or other advertising surface less than eight feet above grade shall be located not closer than forty feet to any street intersection at the property lines.

        3.     All freestanding signs shall be placed in a landscaped area and shall have a minimum horizontal clearance of three feet to any adjacent area used for vehicular traffic or parking. (Ord. 1002, 1977; Ord. 786 § 1, 1970; Ord. 765, 1970)

 

15.40.215 English language identification.
        Where the business operator wishes to identify his business in a language other than English, the largest sign of that business shall also identify the business name and/or function/use in English so as to assist emergency personnel in identifying the business. The lettering on the sign identifying the name or use of the business in English shall be of sufficient size as to be readable by a public safety officer from the nearest public sidewalk curb to the business or from the publicly accessible parking lot.

        A.    Any such sign already erected or placed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall be modified to comply with Section 15.40.215, within one hundred eighty days from the adoption of this section.

        B.     The business owner may seek additional time to bring the business’s sign into conformity with this section in cases of economic hardship by filing an application for extension of amortization period. The application shall include the applicant’s statement explaining the alleged economic hardship preventing compliance within the time period set forth in Section 15.40.215(A).

 

        C.     Applications for extension of amortization period shall be filed and considered pursuant to the following procedures:

        1.     Extensions by the Community Development Director. The community development director may extend the original amortization period, upon the filing of an application for extension of amortization period in accordance with this section and the payment of a time extension fee as established in the master schedule of fees. The application shall demonstrate reasonable need, in the following circumstances:

        a.     If a development review application is pending on the property which is the subject of the requirements of this section; and

        b.     The maximum total extension period which may be granted by the community development director shall be six months.

        2.     Extensions by Planning Commission. The planning commission may extend the original amortization period by approving an application for extension of amortization period, filed by the applicant in accordance with this section, where the applicant demonstrates reasonable need for such extension as set forth in this section.

        a.     To receive such extension consideration, the property owner shall request an extension in writing on forms prepared for that purpose, no later than thirty days prior to the expiration of the amortization period as set forth in this section, including a full explanation of the reason why the extension should be granted.

        b.     Applications for extension of amortization period shall be filed with the secretary of the planning commission. The secretary of the planning commission, upon receipt of a timely application, including the payment of a time extension fee as established in the master schedule of fees as adopted by resolution of the city council, shall set the matter for hearing before the planning commission and shall cause notice of the time and place of the hearing upon same to be given and shall cause a hearing on such application to be held as specified in this section. Any decision of the planning commission under this section may be appealed to the city council within ten days of issuance of the planning commission’s decision. In the absence of a timely filing of an appeal of the decision of the planning commission to the city council, the decision of the planning commission shall be final and conclusive as of the date of the adoption of the resolution granting or denying an extension. Any appeal to the city council shall be heard and decided as set forth in Section 18.78.100.

        c.     The following shall constitute the findings for granting an application for extension of amortization period. Except for extensions which may be granted by the community development director as set forth in Section 15.40.215(C)(l), the hearing body may grant the extension only upon making all of the required findings based upon the evidence presented at the hearing. The applicant shall have the burden of proof to show, by relevant evidence, the existence of facts supporting the conclusion that the findings as set forth below can be made:

        i.      The business owner or applicant or both will suffer severe economic hardship unless an extension of time to bring the business sign into conformity is granted; and

        ii.     The severe economic hardship is not the result of actions undertaken voluntarily by the business owner or applicant after the effective date of this ordinance; and

        iii.    The business owner and/or applicant has taken all reasonable and necessary steps to bring the business sign into conformity or mitigate the effects of its nonconformity within the amortization period permitted; and

        d.     No extension of amortization period may be granted by the hearing body if the maintenance of the nonconforming sign will unreasonably interfere with the use, possession, or enjoyment of surrounding and adjacent properties, or the harm caused by allowing extension of the amortization period outweighs any demonstrated hardship upon the business or property owner seeking an extension of the amortization period.

 

        e.     The granting of an application for extension of amortization period may be conditioned. The purpose of any such conditions shall be to insure that the continued use of the nonconforming sign will be in a manner consistent with the public peace, safety, general welfare and the provisions of this code.

        f.      An extension of amortization period shall be effective for the period specified in the resolution approving the application for extension of amortization period or, if no period is so specified, one year. No more than two extensions of amortization may be granted, and no abatement period may be extended by more than two years.

        g.     At the end of the extension period established in the resolution approving the application or as provided above, the approval shall expire and shall no longer be of any force and effect and the nonconforming sign immediately shall be brought into conformity with the provisions of this section.

        h.     To remain valid, any and all conditions of approval of a resolution granting an extension of amortization period shall be satisfied within two months of the date of approval. If the work required by any and all conditions of approval of an extension of amortization period is not commenced and completed within said two month period, said approval shall expire and shall no longer be of any force and effect and the nonconforming sign immediately shall be brought into conformity with the provisions of this section. (Ord. 1719 § 1 (Exh. B), 2010; Ord. 1637 § 1, 2004)

 

15.40.220 Temporary signage.
        A.    Commercial, Manufacturing and Industrial Zones.

        1.     Temporary signs on private property in commercial, manufacturing and industrial zones are allowed, but only upon issuance of a temporary sign permit, which is subject to the requirements of this section.

        2.     Permitted temporary signs in commercial, manufacturing and industrial zones include the following:

        a.     Banners and pennants;

        b.     Future development signs;

        c.     Inflatable advertising devices;

        d.     Illuminated signs.

        B.     Residential Zones.

        1.     Temporary signs in residential zones do not require a permit but are subject to the other requirements of this section.

        2.     No temporary sign can exceed eight square feet in area. The aggregate area of all temporary signs placed or maintained on any parcel in a residential zone must not exceed forty square feet.

        3.     The following types of temporary signs are not permitted in residential zones:

        a.     Inflatable advertising devices;

        b.     Human advertisements;

        c.     Roof signs;

        d.     Animated signs;

        e.     Neon lighting or neon signs.

        C.     Temporary Sign Permit.

        1.     Any person seeking a permit for a temporary sign as required by this section must submit a written application for a temporary sign permit to the director of community development (“director”), or designee.

        A sign permit application is complete only when it is accompanied by the appropriate application fee, in an amount set by resolution of the city council, and provides the following information:

        a.     Name, address and telephone number of the applicant and, if applicable, the name, address and telephone number and license number, if any, of the sign contractor;

        b.     Address, zoning district, and use of the property where the temporary sign is proposed to be displayed;

        c.     Accurate and scaled site plan showing the location of property lines, buildings, parking areas, driveways, landscaped areas, utility poles and wires, and existing and proposed signs on the site;

        d.     Accurate and scaled plans, details and samples showing the location, dimensions, materials and illumination of the proposed temporary sign;

        e.     The land owner’s written consent to the proposed sign, which may be shown by signature on the application;

        f.      A statement or graphical description as to whether the sign, or any part of it, is to be used for changeable or changing copy or moving images;

        g.     A statement or graphical description as to whether the proposed sign, or any part of it, is proposed to utilize any of the following physical methods of message presentation: sound or odor; smoke or fumes or steam; rotating or moving elements; activation by wind or forced air; neon or other fluorescing gases; flashing or strobe lighting; liquid crystal displays, digital images, LED images or other video-like methods; use of live animals or living persons as part of the display;

        h.     A statement as to whether the property or parcel on which the sign is proposed to be erected or displayed, or any currently existing sign thereon, is the subject of any outstanding notice of zoning violation or notice to correct;

        i.      Photographs of the existing property parcel and/or building on which the temporary sign is proposed to be erected or displayed, showing the location(s) of the existing and proposed sign(s).

        2.     All permits required by this section for banners, pennants, and future development signs may be issued by the director or designee. Any deviations from the standards must be approved by the planning commission, through a sign program review in accordance with the fee established in the master fee schedule.

        All permits for inflatable advertising devices must be approved by the planning commission, as a sign program review in accordance with the fee established in the master fee schedule.

        3.     An applicant may appeal a permit denial by using the process outlined in Sections 18.60.150 and 18.60.160 of this code, except that an appeal from the director’s decisions will be heard by the planning commission. The applicant must pay an appeal fee equivalent to the fee for a sign program review as established in the master fee schedule.

        4.     The director may, in writing, deny, suspend or revoke a temporary sign permit if it was issued in error or if the permit application contained material errors of fact or presented a false or misleading impression of the state and nature of the site, the sign or the proposed sign structure. Revocations under this section may be appealed in the same manner as any other sign-related decision.

        5.     A fee will be required for each temporary sign in accordance with the fees established in the city of La Habra master fee list.

        6.     A temporary sign permit will allow the use of a temporary sign subject to the following restrictions:

        a.     Banners, Pennants and Inflatable Advertising Devices.

        i.      Must not be erected for more than ninety days during any calendar year.

        ii.     A total of three permits will be issued per year for a period of thirty days each.

        iii.    There must be a minimum of thirty days between the issuance of each permit.

        iv.    Exception. Outdoor type businesses are not subject to this section but must comply with the requirements for outdoor type businesses as identified in Section 15.40.450(F), of this code.

        b.     Future Development Signs.

        i.      Must not be erected for more than one hundred eighty days during any calendar year.

        ii.     No permit for a future development sign will be issued until all preliminary development approvals have been received and plans have been submitted to the building department for plan check.

        iii.    Future development signs must be removed upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the development, regardless of the amount of time remaining on the permit. But future development signs may be approved for an additional ninety days, provided that a finding can be made that there is diligent progress on the development.

        D.    Temporary Sign Design and Placement Standards.

        1.     Banners and Pennants. All banners and pennants must be constructed of weather resistant materials and must be replaced or removed if they become worn or damaged during the approved time period for their display. The maximum size for a banner must not exceed forty-five square feet. Banners may only be attached to the building’s face.

        2.     Future Development Signs. A future development sign must not exceed an area of forty-five square feet per sign face or an overall height of eight feet. Future development signs may be constructed of wood and/or metal or any other durable material as approved by the director of community development. Not more than one such sign per five hundred feet of street frontage is permitted, set back at least twenty feet from the ultimate street right-of-way line. Future development signs must be nonilluminated. A “V”-shaped sign may be considered as one sign provided that the distance between the legs of the “V” as viewed from above the sign looking down does not exceed four feet and the property has a minimum frontage of two hundred fifty feet. Otherwise, a “V”-shaped sign will be considered as two signs.

        3.     Inflatable Advertising Devices. All such devices shall be anchored to the ground or structure in a manner approved by the chief building official.

        a.     Inflatable advertising device must not obstruct the line of sight of vehicles traveling along any public street.

        b.     Any mechanical equipment used to keep the inflatable advertising device inflated must not generate noise in excess of the city’s noise ordinance and must be turned off between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

        c.     The size and duration of display of said signs shall be reviewed on a case by case basis by the planning commission; however, all such devices shall be in scale with the structure/property in which that will be located.

        4.     Temporary signs must not be permanently affixed to the property, but may be anchored or weighed down to prevent them from falling or being blown into the street or sidewalk.

        5.     Temporary directional signs must not be placed in landscaped parkways, placed on sidewalks or in center street medians.

        6.     Temporary signs must not be placed on utility poles, light or traffic light poles, traffic signs or traffic sign poles, or on trees.

        7.     Temporary signs must not exceed five feet in height. Except that no sign in a required street-front setback area shall exceed three feet in height.

        8.     No temporary sign will be placed so as to obstruct pedestrians’ and motorists’ view of signs erected by a local, state, or federal governmental agency, including, but not limited to traffic signs, public directional signs, parking signs, and street address signs.

        9.     Temporary signs must not be placed so as to obstruct or hinder sidewalk or street access by pedestrians and vehicles.

        10.   Temporary signs must not be placed so as to obstruct ingress and egress to any public or private property.

        11.   Temporary signs must not be designed, constructed, or have the effect, to cause undue distraction to motorists. For example, temporary signs must not be illuminated, either internally or externally, must not have flashing lights, must not have any moving parts, and must not generate any source sounds (including radio waves), and must not release steam or smoke.

        12.   All temporary signs must be kept in good condition.

        E.     No private person, group, or entity may place any type of temporary sign, or any hu-

man advertisement, in the public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, parkways.

        F.     All banners, pennants, and future development signs defined in this section and that comply with the standards set forth herein may be approved by the director of community development or his/her designee. Any deviations from the standard must be approved by the planning commission, through the design review process as established in Chapter 18.68 of the Municipal Code.

        All inflatable advertising devices must be approved by the planning commission through the design review process as established in Chapter 18.68 of the Municipal Code. (Ord. 1719 § 1 (Exh. B), 2010; Ord. 1714 § 2, 2010)

 

15.40.400 Temporary political signs.
        Temporary political signs are permitted provided that:

        A.    “Temporary political signs” means those temporary signs utilized to promote for or against candidates or issues for which an election or general vote of the electorate is to be conducted within the city.

        B.     Political signs shall not be posted until thirty days prior to the date of the election to which the sign pertains. All such political signs shall be removed within ten days following the date of the election to which the sign pertains.

        C.     No political sign shall be posted without prior written approval of the property owner.

        D.    No political sign shall be posted upon any private or public utility property or utility pole without prior written approval from the utility company to which such poles belong.

        E.     The posting of political signs is prohibited upon any public property, including, but not limited to, streets, traffic signs and poles, sidewalks, parkways, medians, city parks and trees.

        F.     No sign shall be located as to constitute a hazard to auto and pedestrian traffic.

        G.    No political signs shall be located within one hundred feet of a polling place in accordance with the State Elections Code.

        H.    Any political sign exceeding twenty-four square feet in area shall require a conditional use permit as provided by the zoning code of the city.

        I.      The name and address of the sponsor or individual responsible for posting of the political sign shall be affixed to each sign with permanent waterproof material.

        J.      Any political sign posted in violation of this chapter, shall be removed by the city and the cost of such removal charged to the candidate, committee or the organization whose name appears on the sign as sponsor or responsible person or entity for such sign. All removed signs shall be held by the city until claimed, but no longer than fifteen days following the particular election. (Ord. 1571 § 1, 2000)

 

15.40.410 Advertising on public property.
        A.    No person, except a public officer or city employee in the performance of his duty, shall paste, post, paint or erect any flag, pennant, banner, notice or sign of any kind or cause the same to be done upon public property, street, street median, parkway, bridge or sidewalk within the city, except for the following:

        1.     Signs for special events to the benefit of the entire community and authorized by the city council;

        2.     Signs affixed to or painted on temporary construction fences located within the public right-of-way during construction, when associated with a public works project, to advertise the architect, construction company or future development; provided, that no sign shall exceed twenty-four square feet in area and shall be neatly painted;

        3.     Signs for advertisements on bus benches and bus shelters under a regulated program authorized by the city council.

        B.     No person shall attach any item to private utility company poles without prior written approval from the utility company to which such poles belong. (Ord. 1664 § 1, 2006; Ord. 1449 § 1, 1993; Ord. 765, 1970)

15.40.420 Freeway and interstate highway signs.
        A.    No sign or any copy visible therefrom shall be placed or maintained within six hundred sixty feet from the edge of the right-of-way of any freeway or interstate highway other than the following:

        1.     Directional or other official signs or notices that are required or authorized by law;

        2.     Signs advertising the sale or lease of the property upon which they are located, provided all such advertising displays within six hundred sixty feet of the edge of the right-of-way of a bonus segment shall comply with the regulations prescribed pursuant to Section 5288.4 of the Outdoor Advertising Act of the state;

        3.     Signs which advertise the business conducted or services rendered or the goods produced or sold upon the property upon which the advertising display is placed, if the display is upon the same side of the highway as the advertised activity; provided all such advertising displays within six hundred sixty feet of the right-of-way of a bonus segment shall comply with the regulations prescribed pursuant to Section 5288.4 of the Outdoor Advertising Act of the state;

        4.     Signs erected or maintained pursuant to regulations of the Director of Public Works of the state, and not inconsistent with the National Policy set forth in subdivision (f) of Section 131 of Title 23 of the United States Code and the standards promulgated thereunder by the Secretary of Transportation and designed to give information in the specific interest of the traveling public.

        B.     Billboards Not Permitted. The exceptions set forth in this section shall not be construed as permitting billboards.

        C.     Nonconforming Signs. All existing signs which do not conform to the provisions of this section, but which are construed in compliance with previous regulations, shall be regarded as nonconforming, as defined in subsection F of Section 15.40.490, and may be continued and maintained; provided, that such existing nonconforming signs shall be removed within one year from the date that a freeway or portion thereof is opened to public travel. (Ord. 765, 1970)

 

15.40.430 Signs in residential zones.
        A.    Unless otherwise permitted, only the following signs may be erected in any residential zone (see Section 15.40.070 for exemptions):

        1.     One entry sign for each housing development, not to exceed twenty square feet in area and containing no advertising matter except the name of the housing development;

        2.     One sign for each church not to exceed thirty square feet in area containing the name of the church and related information and information concerning activities and services;

        3.     Temporary signs and directional signs for land development projects as provided in Sections 15.40.210 through 15.40.400.

        B.     R-2, R-2a, R-3 and R-4 multiple-family zones shall be permitted advertising area in accordance with Table 18-19A, as follows:

 

Allowable Advertising Area (sq. ft.) in the R-2, R-2a, R-3 and R-4 Multiple-Family Zones

 

Land Area of Development:

R-2

R-2a

R-3

R-4

Under 10,000 sq. ft.*

6

6

9

9

10,001 through 40,000 sq. ft.*

12

12

12

12

40,001 sq. ft. and over*

16

**

***

***

 

*       May advertise the following:

         1)  Name, address and telephone number of building identified;

         2)  Number of bedrooms per unit;

         3)  Furnished or unfurnished apartments;

         4)  Vacancy status;

         5)  Allowable age, i.e. “Adults Only,” “Families Welcome,” etc.

**    Sixteen square feet for first one hundred lineal feet of street frontage, plus ten square feet for each additional one hundred lineal feet of frontage or fraction thereof. Maximum sign size may not exceed thirty square feet.

***  Twenty square feet for first one hundred lineal feet of street frontage, plus ten square feet for each additional 100 lineal feet of frontage or fraction thereof. Maximum sign size may not exceed forty square feet.

 

        C.     Allowable advertising area may be divided between one wall sign attached to the building and one freestanding sign. The maximum height of a freestanding sign on a parcel less than forty thousand square feet in area shall not exceed six feet six inches; the maximum height of a freestanding sign on a parcel greater than forty thousand square feet shall not exceed eight feet.

        1.     Two or more freestanding signs may be permitted for unusually wide frontages subject to approval of the planning commission.

        2.     Architecturally planned signing consisting of individualized letters and numbers mounted against a building facing stating only the name of the building or the address need not be considered as a part of the allowable advertising area subject to approval of the planning commission; provided, however, that only one such sign be allowed per street frontage.

        3.     All allowable advertising not placed on a freestanding sign shall be placed on business face as defined in Section 15.40.030. The placement of signs not on the business face is allowed only after review and approval through the zone variance process as set forth in Chapter 18.77 of this code.

        D.    A multiple-family development with frontage on more than one street shall be allowed additional advertising on the side street frontage computed in accordance with Table 18-19A as set out in subsection B of this section provided, that not more than one freestanding sign shall be permitted for each frontage.

        E.     No animated or rotary signs shall be erected or maintained in a residential zone.

        F.     Illumination of nonelectric signs shall be of subdued intensity and shall comply with subsection D of Section 15.40.150.

        G.    Electric signs are not generally permitted; provided, however, that electric signs architecturally planned as a part of a multiple-family development may be installed subject to the approval of the planning commission. (Ord. 1719 § 1 (Exh. B), 2010; Ord. 1664 § 1, 2006; Ord. 819 § 1, 1971; Ord. 786 § 1, 1970; Ord. 765, 1970)

 

15.40.440 Signs in CP, CR, C-1, M-1 or M-2 zones.
        A.    General. No sign or outdoor advertising structure shall be permitted that does not pertain directly to an approved business conducted on the premises. Signs in these zones may advertise only the name and address of the building they identify and the name and address of the services offered by the professions and businesses allowed.

        B.     Allowable Advertising Area. The total aggregate advertising area for each business shall include all business identification signs on the outside of the building and shall not exceed:

        1.     Ten percent of the area of the business face to which such signs pertain or thirty square feet, whichever is greater, excepting that businesses having retail sales buildings or retail sales yards directly related to an approved M-1 use shall be permitted advertising area based on the allowable advertising area for a C-2 zone; provided, that such advertising shall be approved by the planning commission as a part of a site plan review or an architectural design review;

        2.     A business fronting on more than one street with right-of-way widths of eighty feet or greater shall be allowed to accumulate additional advertising area based on the area of the business face along the second street frontage;

        3.     Each business shall be permitted not more than one wall sign for each frontage; each principal building shall be permitted not more than one freestanding sign not to exceed five feet in height. Such freestanding sign shall be located at least ten feet from the intersection of any driveway and the property line;

        4.     A business having a frontage upon an approved private drive may be permitted one freestanding sign at such frontage subject to the provisions of this section; and provided, that such sign does not occupy required parking space and does not interfere with the flow of traffic.

 

        5.     All allowable advertising not placed on a freestanding sign shall be placed on the business face as defined in Section 15.40.030. The placement of signs not on the business face is allowed only after review and approval through the zone variance process set forth in Chapter 18.76 of this code.

        C.     Planning Commission Approval. The number, size and types of signs in any integrated development in any CP or CR zone shall be included as part of the architectural plan approval by the planning commission.

        D.    Signs Attached to Building. Signs attached to a building shall be mounted parallel to the structure and shall project not more than eighteen inches from the main building or its attached canopy, nor shall such sign extend above the roofline of the building to which it is attached. (Ord. 1719 § 1 (Exh. B), 2010; Ord. 1664 § 1, 2006; Ord. 786 § 1, 1970; Ord. 765, 1970)

 

15.40.450 Signs in C-2 or C-3 zones.
        A.    General. No sign or outdoor advertising structure shall be permitted that does not pertain directly to an approved business conducted on the premises.

        B.     Height. The height of permitted signs, including any part thereof, shall not exceed either:

        1.     The roofline of the building to which such signs are attached, except as otherwise permitted for roof signs by Section 15.40.180; or

        2.     For freestanding signs, the height shall be determined in accordance with Section 15.40.200A.

        C.     Projection. Signs attached to a building wall or to any approved structural element thereof shall project not more than three feet from the face of the building or structural element to which it is attached. No sign may project over the public sidewalk or other public way.

        D.    Frontage On More Than One Street. A business with frontage on more than one street shall be allowed additional advertising on the side street frontage based on the area of the business face fronting on the side street computed in accordance with this section; provided, however, that no such additional signs shall be permitted when the side street frontage is on a local residential street. A local residential street is any street other than a major highway, primary highway or secondary highway as established by the city master plan of highways.

        E.     Businesses Conducted Primarily Within a Building.

        1.     Allowable Advertising Area. The total allowable advertising area for each business, including freestanding signs, shall not exceed thirty percent of the area of the business face; provided, that when applicable to specific types of signs such allowable advertising area shall be allotted as follows:

        a.     The advertising area of all right-angle signs* attached to a building shall not exceed one-third of the total allowable advertising area. (Double-faced signs may be computed as one face.)

        b.     The advertising area of all freestanding signs shall not exceed one square foot for each lineal foot of street frontage. This allowance must be included within the total allowable advertising area as set forth in subsection (E)(1) of this section and is not to be taken in addition thereto. (Double-faced signs may be computed as one face.)

        c.     All allowable advertising not placed on a freestanding sign shall be placed on the business face as defined in Section 15.40.030. The placement of signs not on the business face is allowed only after review and approval through the zone variance process set forth in Chapter 18.76 of this code.

        2.     For all signs consisting of individual letters, words or symbols independently mounted against a background which is a part of the normal building facing and which does not convey the idea of a separate sign background, the portion of the building facing forming such background shall not exceed thirty percent of the area of the business face.

 

        3.     Allotment of Advertising Space. Where more than one business shares a common sign the allotment of advertising space on such sign shall be the responsibility of the property owner or manager.

        F.     Outdoor Type Businesses.

        1.     Planning Commission Approval. All signs erected, painted or installed for businesses conducted primarily outside a building, including gasoline service stations, auto agency display lots, used car lots, and other outdoor type businesses, shall be approved by the planning commission prior to the issuance of any sign permit therefor. In considering the number, size and types of signs for outdoor type businesses, the planning commission shall be guided by the provisions of this section and by the provisions of this chapter as applied to a particular zone.

        2.     Allowable Advertising Area. The total aggregate advertising area for each business shall not exceed one square foot per lineal foot of display frontage up to one hundred square feet, plus one-half square foot for each additional lineal foot of frontage to which such signs pertain.

        3.     Pennants, banners and spinners may be installed for outdoor type businesses on a limited basis subject to design review and approval by the planning commission.

        G.    Billboards. Billboards and other outdoor advertising structures advertising goods or services not conducted on the premises are prohibited. (Ord. 1719 § 1 (Exh. B), 2010; Ord. 1664 § 1, 2006; Ord. 786 § 1, 1970)

 

*       Signs placed at forty-five degrees to ninety degrees to building face.

 

15.40.460 Signs in C-2S zone.
        Planning Commission Approval. All regulations which apply to advertising in a C-2 zone as set forth in Section 15.40.450 shall also apply to advertising in a C-2S zone; provided, however, that the number, size and types of signs shall be approved by the planning commission as a part of the original site plan review or shall be approved subsequently thereto if the signs are erected, painted or installed at a later time. In such consideration, the planning commission shall be guided by the provisions of this chapter as related to a particular zone, but shall in no case approve less than that which is provided in this chapter. (Ord. 765, 1970)

 

15.40.470 Signs in a “D” architectural design zone.
        Planning Commission Approval. All signs erected, painted or installed in a “D” architectural design zone shall be approved by the planning commission as a part of the original “D” plan approval, or shall be approved subsequently thereto if the signs are erected, painted or installed at a later time. In such considerations, the planning commission shall be guided by the provisions of this chapter as related to a particular zone, but shall in no case approve less than that which is provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 765, 1970)

 

15.40.480 Signs included as part of a site plan review.
        Planning Commission Approval. All signs erected, painted or installed in a zone requiring a site plan review shall be approved by the planning commission as a part of the original site plan review or shall be approved subsequently thereto if the signs are erected, painted or installed at a later time. In such considerations, the planning commission shall be guided by the provisions of this chapter as related to a particular zone, but shall in no case approve less than that which is provided in this chapter. (Ord. 765, 1970)

 

15.40.490 Preexisting nonconforming signs.
        A.    Moratorium.

        1.     Electrical signs which do not comply with the provisions of this chapter but which lawfully existed and were maintained on the effective date of this chapter shall, within ten years after the effective date of this chapter, be removed or made to conform.

 

        2.     Nonelectric signs, including signs painted on buildings, which do not comply with the provisions of this chapter but which lawfully existed and were maintained on the effective date of this chapter shall, within two years after the effective date of this chapter, be removed or made to conform.

        Exception: See subsection (A)(3) of this section.

        3.     Nonconforming portable and temporary signs shall be removed within sixty days from the effective date of this chapter.

        B.     Maintenance. Nonconforming signs and billboards required to be removed within a given period of time shall, during the interim period, be kept in good repair and maintained in an attractive manner and no structural alterations shall be made thereto.

        C.     Vacated Business. Nonconforming signs advertising a business which has been vacated for a period of thirty days or more shall be removed or made to conform.

        D.    Removal of Billboards. Billboards shall be removed as provided by subsection E of Section 15.40.010; provided, however, that billboards which existed upon land annexed to the city shall be completely removed not later than one year after the official date of annexation.

        E.     Continuation of Nonconforming Signs.

        1.     A nonconforming sign pertaining to a single business establishment may be maintained and continued as permitted by this section; provided, that there is no enlargement or physical change to such sign or to any other sign pertaining to the same business establishment, and that no additional signs are erected for that business.

        2.     A nonconforming freestanding sign pertaining to one or more business establishments within an integrated development may be maintained and continued as permitted by this section; provided, that there is no enlargement or physical change to such sign or to any other freestanding sign within the integrated development, and that no additional freestanding signs are erected within the development.

        3.     For the purposes of this subsection, “physical change” means any type of change to the structure or appearance of a sign, including painting, repainting or change of copy.

        Exception: Necessary maintenance and repair, repainting or change of copy for existing tenants, and change of copy on approved changeable copy signs shall not be construed as a physical change within the meaning of this subsection.

        F.     For the purposes of this chapter, a “nonconforming sign” is defined to be any sign which lawfully existed on the effective date of this chapter but which conflicts with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 786 § 1, 1970; Ord. 765, 1970)

 

15.40.500 Removal of obsolete signs.
        It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to remove or blank out any sign advertising a business which no longer exists. (Ord. 765, 1970)

 

15.40.510 Signs constituting traffic hazards prohibited.
        No signs, lights or other advertising structures shall be located in such a manner as to constitute a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear visions, at any location where, by reason of the position, shape, color or movement, may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device. Nor shall such sign or advertising structure make use of any word, phrase, symbol or character in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. (Ord. 765, 1970)

 

15.40.520 Certain signs prohibited.
        A.    Billboards. Billboards and other outdoor advertising structures advertising goods or services not conducted on the premises are prohibited.

        B.     Portable Signs. No portable signs, including freestanding signs supported by frames or posts rigidly attached to a portable base, sandwich board signs and advertising on bus stop benches or rest benches, shall be permitted. Signs having the appearance of portable signs or sandwich board signs, but which are fastened to the ground or supported from the ground shall comply with all provisions of this chapter for permanent freestanding signs, including the requirement that a permit be obtained for each installation.

        C.     Advertising from Vehicles. No vehicle containing any advertising matter, words, symbols or pictures shall be so parked either on public or private property, for the sole purpose of advertising or directing attention to a business.

        D.    Temporary signs as defined in Section 15.40.030 are prohibited unless otherwise permitted by this chapter.

        E.     No advertising copy shall be permitted on the side surface of any sign eighteen inches or less in thickness.

        F.     No handbill as defined and regulated under Chapter 5.12 of this code nor any sign as defined within this chapter shall be permitted to be posted on any public utility property. “Public utility property” means any property owned, leased or otherwise maintained for the benefit or use of a public utility company. (Ord. 1396 § 1, 1990; Ord. 786 § 1, 1970; Ord. 765, 1970)

 

15.40.530 Variances.
        When practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships or results inconsistent with the general purposes of this chapter occur by reason of a strict interpretation of the provisions of this chapter, the planning commission upon its own motion may, or upon the verified application of the owner of the property shall, in specific cases, initiate proceedings for the granting of a variance from the provisions of this chapter in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 18.77, Variances; provided that such a variance may not be granted from those provisions of this chapter covering structural requirements, construction materials, and electrical installation methods and materials. (Ord. 1719 § 1 (Exh. B), 2010; Ord. 765, 1970)

 

15.40.540 Zoning regulations and this chapter to be construed together.
        The zoning code of the city, now or which may hereafter be adopted by the city insofar as it may conflict with this chapter, is not repealed and the provisions of both this chapter and the zoning code, if possible, shall be construed together to give effect to both, including all provisions of a more restrictive nature. (Ord. 765, 1970)

 

15.40.550 Removal of prohibited signs.
        Any handbill or sign found posted or otherwise fixed upon any public utility property contrary to the provisions of this chapter may be removed by any company, utility or individual owning or responsible for maintaining that property, the police department or the department of public services. (Ord. 1396 § 2, 1990)

Chapter 15.44 EXCAVATIONS AND GRADING
15.44.010 Adoption of the Orange County Grading and Excavation Code.
        Except as provided in this chapter, the Orange County Grading and Excavation Code is hereby adopted in its entirety and shall be and become the grading and excavation code of the city of La Habra, regulating grading and excavation of sites, together with the amendments, additions, deletions and exceptions set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1812 § 1, 2019)

 

 

15.44.020 Amendments to the Orange County Grading and Excavation Code.
        The Orange County Grading and Excavation Code, hereby is adopted with the following amendments.

 

Subarticle 1 General Provisions, is hereby amended as follows:

 

7-1-800 Title Reference to Code.

This Article shall be known as and may be cited as the city of La Habra Grading and Excavation Code. “Code” as referred to in this Article, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, shall mean the city of La Habra Grading and Excavation Code.

 

7-1-801 Grading Manual.

        (a)    The Director shall formulate and modify as necessary such rules, procedures, and interpretations as may be necessary or convenient to administer this Article. Such rules, procedures, and interpretations shall be referred to as the “City of La Habra Grading Manual” or the “Grading Manual.”

        (b)    In the event of any conflict between said Grading Manual and this Code, the provisions of this Code shall govern. The provisions of the said Grading Manual shall, to the extent that they are made conditions of any permit by the Building Official, be binding on the permittee.

 

7-1-802 Purpose and Intent.

It is the intent of this code to safeguard life, limb, property, and the public welfare by regulating grading on private property in the County of Orange.

 

7-1-803 Scope.

This Code set forth rules and regulations to control excavation, grading, and earthwork construction, including fills and embankments, and establishes administrative requirements for issuance of permits and approval of plans and inspection of grading construction in accordance with the requirements for grading and excavation as contained in the California Building Code then in effect as adopted and modified by County ordinance.

(Ord. 1812 § 1, 2019)

Chapter 15.46 FIRE CODE
15.46.010 Adoption of 2017 County of Los Angeles Fire Code.
        County of Los Angeles Fire Code adopted by reference. Except as hereinafter provided, Title 32, of the Los Angeles County Code, which constitutes an amended version of the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition (Part 9 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations), Chapters 1 through 80, Appendix B, Appendix BB, Appendix C, Appendix CC, and Appendix K and excluding all other appendices of the 2016 Edition of the California Fire Code with errata, and adopting and incorporating herein by reference into Title 32 of the Los Angeles Fire County Code, the 2015 Edition of the International Fire Code, Chapters 1 through 7, Chapters 9 and 10, Chapters 20 through 36, Chapters 50 through 55, Chapters 57 through 67 and Chapter 80, for sections that were not adopted as part of the 2016 California Fire Code is adopted.

        In the event of any conflict between provisions of the California Fire Code, 2016 Edition, International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, Title 32 of the Los Angeles County Fire Code, or any amendment to the Fire Code contained in the city of La Habra Municipal Code, the provisions contained in the later listed document shall control. (Ord. 1788 § 1, 2017)

 

 

15.46.020 Amendment to the 2017 County of Los Angeles Fire Code.
        The 2017 County of Los Angeles Fire Code is hereby adopted with the following amendment.

        Wherever the county of Los Angeles Fire Code requires a fee(s) to be paid to the fire department, such fee(s) shall be paid to the city of La Habra. (Ord. 1788 § 1, 2017)

Chapter 15.48 RESIDENTIAL BUILDING FEES
15.48.010 Purpose.
        The city council declares that the fees collected under the ordinance codified in this chapter are solely for the purpose of producing revenue for the acquisition, development and maintenance of public parks, and it is determined that the need for such public parks acquisition, development and maintenance increases in proportion to the number of residential units constructed in the city. (Ord. 1209, 1983; Ord. 850 § 1, 1973)

 

 

15.48.020 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the words defined in this section shall have the meanings assigned to them:

        A.    “Mobile home park residential unit” means a pad in any area where one or more lots or spaces are rented or held out in rent to be occupied by a housetrailer, mobile home, camper or similar vehicle used for residential purposes.

        B.     “Multifamily residential unit” means a dwelling unit in a building designed for human occupancy by more than one family, and which provides a kitchen for independent living in each dwelling unit. The term “multifamily residential unit” specifically excludes any dwelling unit in a building or structure designed or intended to be occupied or used for business or commercial purposes, such as sleeping rooms in hotels and motels without kitchens or kitchen facilities.

        C.     “Single-family residential unit” means a building designed for human occupancy containing a kitchen, designed to house not more than one family, including all necessary employees of such family. (Ord. 1209, 1983; Ord. 850l(part), 1973)

 

15.48.030 Amount of fees.
        Any person adding a residential unit or units in the city shall pay to the city the fees as established by resolution for:

        A.    Each single-family residential unit;

        B.     Each multifamily residential unit;

        C.     Each mobile home park residential unit. (Ord. 1213 § 2, 3, 1983; Ord. 1209, 1983; Ord. 850 § 1, 1973)

 

15.48.040 Payment of fees required prior to building permit issuance.
        The fees prescribed in Section 15.48.030 shall be due and payable upon application to the city for a building permit for any construction which adds a residential unit or units in the city. No building permit shall be issued until such fees are paid. (Ord. 1209, 1983; Ord. 850 § 1, 1973)

15.48.050 Refunds.
        Any tax paid to the city under this chapter for any residential unit which is not constructed shall be refunded upon application of the tax-payer and a showing to the satisfaction of the controller that the residential unit has not been constructed and that there is no valid building permit issued to permit such construction at the time of the refund to the taxpayer. (Ord. 1209, 1983; Ord. 850 § 1, 1973)

 

15.48.060 Purpose.
        The city council finds that there is an existing shortage of adequate parklands in the city, and that future residential subdivision development will exacerbate this condition. In order to mitigate the impacts and cumulative impacts of residential subdivision development on the availability of parklands within the city, the declared purpose of this article is to provide a fair and equitable mechanism in accordance with the authority granted pursuant to Section 66477 of the Government Code of the state of California for the payment of fees or dedication of land, or combination thereof, for developing or rehabilitating existing neighborhood or community park or recreational facilities to serve the subdivision. (Ord. 1633 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1209, 1983; Ord. 850 § 1, 1973)

 

15.48.061 Definitions.
        A.    “Fee” shall mean the fees calculated in accordance with Section 15.48.063.

        B.     Unless otherwise defined herein, all other definitions set forth in the Subdivision and Zoning Ordinances of the city of La Habra shall apply unless in conflict with the Subdivision Map Act of the State of California, in which case, the latter shall prevail. (Ord. 1633 § 2, 2004)

 

15.48.062 Requirements.
        A.    Except as provided in the subsections 15.48.062(B) and (C), as a condition of approval of any tentative map or parcel map, each applicant shall pay the fee. The fee shall be payable at the time of the recording of the final map or parcel map or such later time as may be specified by the city.

        B.     Payment of the fee shall not be a condition of approval of any tentative map or parcel map under any of the following circumstances:

        1.     The subdivision is not used for residential purposes and contains less than five parcels; provided, however, that a condition may be imposed on the approval of such parcel map that if a building permit is requested for construction of a residential structure or structures on one or more of the parcels within four years, the fee may be required to be paid by the owner of each such parcel as a condition to the issuance of such permit.

        2.     The subdivision is a commercial or industrial subdivision.

        3.     The subdivision is a condominium project or stock cooperative, which consists of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment house, which is more than five years old when no new dwelling units are added.

        4.     The tentative map of the subdivision map or parcel map shall have been filed less than thirty days following the effective date of this article.

        C.     Payment of the fee shall not be required when a dedication of land shall be made pursuant to Section 15.48.064, unless such dedication of land shall not be entirely in-lieu of payment of the fee, in which case the amount of the fee shall be reduced in proportion to the number of acres dedicated multiplied by the fair market value of the subdivision per acre as set forth in Section 15.48.063, subsection (C). (Ord. 1633 § 3, 2004)

 

15.48.063 Calculation of the fee.
        A.    The fee shall be calculated by reference to the following formula:

A = (DF x DU) x 3

PF= A x (Average cost per acre)

1,000

 

 

        B.     The foregoing formula is defined and explained as follows:

        1.     “A” is the area in acres upon which the fee shall be based.

        2.     “3” is the existing neighborhood and community park ratio. Three acres for every one thousand people.

        3.     “PF” shall be the park fee.

        4.     “DF” is the density factor determined by the average number of persons per household as determined by the 2000 federal census. The density factor shall be as follows:

Units in Structure

Persons per Household

Total

3.08

Single Family Detached

3.41

Single Family Attached

2.77

2 units in structure

3.26

3 or 4 units in structure

3.32

5 to 9 units in structure

2.51

10—19 units in structure

2.89

20—49 units in structure

286

50 or more units in structure

2.33

Mobile Home

2.07

Boat, RV, van, etc.

7.63

        5.     “DU” shall be the number of dwelling units in the subdivision.

        C.     The fee shall be the fair market value of the subdivision per acre, multiplied by “A.”

        1.     The fair market value of the subdivision per acre shall be determined on the basis of an appraisal conducted by a qualified appraiser approved by the city and acceptable to the applicant, and shall to the extent practicable, reflect the fair market value as of the time immediately preceding the recording of the final map.

        2.     If either the city or the applicant objects in good faith to the appraisal, the applicant shall select a second qualified appraiser acceptable to the city. The fair market value shall be the average of the two appraisals. (Ord. 1633 § 4, 2004)

 

15.48.064 Choice of land or fee.
        A.    Procedure. The procedure for determining whether the subdivider is to dedicate land, pay a fee or both, shall be as follows:

        1.     Subdivider. At the time of filing a tentative map application, the owner of the property shall, as part of such filing, indicate whether they desire to dedicate property for park and recreational purposes, or whether they desire to pay a fee in lieu thereof. If they desire to dedicate land for this purpose, they shall designate the area thereof on the tentative map as submitted.

        2.     Action of City. Prior to approval of the tentative map, the community services commission and the planning commission shall review and recommend to city staff whether to require a dedication of land within the subdivision, payment of a fee in-lieu thereof, or a combination of both. (Ord. 1633 § 5, 2004)

 

15.48.065 Limitations on use.
        The fee or land obtained pursuant to this article shall be utilized for developing new or rehabilitating existing neighborhood or community park or recreational facilities in accordance with a schedule approved by the city council, which shall specify how, when and where the fee or land shall be used to serve the subdivision. (Ord. 1633 § 6, 2004)

 

15.48.066 Time limitations.
        The fee shall be committed to its permitted use under this article within five years after payment or the issuance of building permits on one-half of the lots created by the subdivision, whichever occurs later. If not so committed, the fee shall be distributed pro rata to the then record owners of the lots in the subdivision. That part of the fee, which has been appropriated, shall be deemed to have been committed. (Ord. 1633 § 7, 2004)

 

15.48.067 Credits.
        A credit against payment of the fee or dedication of land, as applicable, shall be afforded for the value of any park and recreational improvements, including any equipment located thereon, to the dedicated land made by the applicant. (Ord. 1633 § 8, 2004)

Chapter 15.52 DEVELOPMENT FEE
15.52.010 Imposed.
        A development fee is imposed on construction of all residential, commercial or industrial units, or mobile home parks in the city an amount as set by resolution per square foot of gross floor area for all classes of new construction, including any area in a building designed for the parking of vehicles. (Ord. 1213 §§ 2, 3, 1983; Ord. 1053 § 1, 1978)

 

15.52.020 Amount—Payment required when.
        The amount of the fee due under this chapter shall be determined at the time a building permit is sought for the construction of residential, commercial or industrial units, or for the construction or reconstruction of any mobile home park, and the full amount of the fee shall be due and payable concurrently with the application for such permit. If such fee is not paid on or prior to the issuance of the permit, the fee shall thereupon become delinquent. (Ord. 1053 § 1, 1978)

 

15.52.030 Imposition of delinquent fee and interest.
        There shall be added to any delinquent fee a penalty assessment as set by resolution which, together with the fee shall bear interest each month until paid. (Ord. 1213 §§ 2, 3, 1983; Ord. 1053 § 1, 1978)

Chapter 15.56 BUILDING NUMBERS
15.56.010 Allotment of numbers—Block defined—Assignment of numbers—Time limit for placement.
        A.    The numbering of buildings in the city shall commence with the number “one hundred,” beginning at the east and west street line of Euclid Street (formerly Hiatt Street) respectively, and at the north and south street line of La Habra Boulevard (formerly Central Avenue) respectively; to each block is allotted one hundred numbers, the consecutive even numbers of which are assigned to and shall be used on the east and south sides of the streets, and the consecutive odd numbers are assigned to and shall be used on the west and north sides of the streets.

        B.     A “block” for the purpose of such numbering, shall be the space between two open streets as determined by either side of the base streets.

        C.     One number shall be allowed to each twenty-five feet of frontage on any street or high-way, and whenever in the space allowed to a number, as aforesaid, there shall be a hallway or tenement fronting on such street, such hallway or tenement shall be given an additional half number. It shall be the duty of the building official to assign to the owner, agent or occupant of any building in the city, the proper number; and all buildings shall be numbered in accordance with the provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter, within ninety days from and after its passage. All buildings hereafter erected shall be numbered within thirty days from the time of their completion. (Ord. 1210, 1983; Ord. 18 §§ 2, 3, 1925)

 

15.56.020 Size, color and placement of numbers.
        The numbers so used shall be of a size, color, and placement consistent with the La Habra fire code as adopted in Chapter 15.46 of this code. (Ord. 1719 § 1 (Exh. B), 2010; Ord. 18 § 4, 1925)

Chapter 15.60 SECURITY STANDARDS FOR BUILDINGS
15.60.010 Applicability.
        A.    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all activities for which a building permit is required by the ordinances of the city. The requirements of this chapter shall apply to existing buildings to the same extent as the requirements of the La Habra Building Code apply to existing buildings.

        B.     Existing multifamily dwelling units which, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are rented or leased, but thereafter are converted to privately owned family units, including condominiums, shall comply with Sections 15.60.080 through 15.60.110.

        C.     Any existing structure which converts from the original occupancy group as designated in the La Habra building code shall comply with the provisions of this chapter.

        D.    Any building which required special type releasing, latching or locking devices under the provisions of the La Habra building code or Title 19 of the California Administrative Code shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter relating to locking devices of interior and/or exterior doors. (Ord. 1747 § 1, 2013; Ord. 1721, 2010; Ord. 1136 § 1, 1981)

 

15.60.020 Definitions.
        Except as otherwise defined in this chapter, all terms used herein, which are defined by applicable state law, together with any amendments thereto, are used in this chapter as so defined, unless from the context of this chapter it clearly appears that a different meaning is intended:

        1.     “Approved” means certified as meeting the requirements of this chapter by the enforcing authority or its authorized agents or by other officials designated by law to give approval on a particular matter dealt with by the provisions of this chapter with regard to a given material, mode of construction, piece of equipment or device.

        2.     “Auxiliary locking device” means a secondary locking system added to the primary locking system to provide additional security.

        3.     “Bolt” means a metal bar which, when actuated, is projected (or thrown) either horizontally or vertically into a retaining member, such as a strike plate, to prevent a door or window from moving or opening.

        4.     “Bolt projection” or “bolt throw” means the distance from the edge of the door, at the bolt centerline, to the farthest point on the bolt in the projection position.

        5.     “Burglary resistant glazing” means those materials as defined in U.L. Bulletin 972.

        6.     “Commercial building” means a building or portion thereof used for a purpose other than a residential dwelling.

        7.     “Component,” as distinguished from a “part,” means a subassembly which combines with other components to make up a total door or window assembly. For example, the primary components of a door assembly include: door, lock, hinges, jamb/wall, jamb/strike and wall.

        8.     “Cylinder” means the subassembly of a lock containing the cylinder core, tumbler mechanism and the keyway. A double-cylinder lock is one which has a key-actuated cylinder on both the exterior and interior of the door.

        9.     “Cylinder core” or “cylinder plug” means the central part of a cylinder containing the keyway, which is rotated by the key to operate the lock mechanism.

        10.   “Cylinder guard” means a tapered or flush metal ring or plate surrounding the otherwise exposed portion of a cylinder lock to resist cutting, drilling, prying, pulling or wrenching with common tools.

        11.   “Deadbolt” means a lock bolt which does not have a spring action as opposed to a latch bolt, which does. The bolt must be actuated by a key or a key and a knob or thumb turn and when projected becomes locked against return by end pressure.

        12.   “Dead latch” or “deadlocking latch bolt” means a spring-actuated latch bolt having a beveled end and incorporating a plunger which, when depressed, automatically locks the projected latch bolt against return by end pressure.

        13.   “Door assembly” means a unit composed of a group of parts or components which make up a closure for an opening to control passageway through a wall. For the purposes of this chapter, a “door assembly” consists of the following parts: door, hinges, locking device or devices, operation contacts (such as handles, knobs, push plates), miscellaneous hardware and closures, the frame, including the head, threshold and jambs plus the anchorage devices to the surrounding wall and a portion of the surrounding wall extending thirty-six inches from each side of the jambs and sixteen inches above the head.

        14.   “Door stop” means that projection along the top and sides of a door jamb which checks the door’s swinging action.

        15.   “Double-cylinder deadbolt” means a deadbolt lock which can be activated only by a key on both the interior and the exterior.

        16.   “Dwelling” means a building or portion thereof designed exclusively for residential occupancy, including single-family and multifamily dwellings.

        17.   “Enforcing authority” means the chief building inspector or his/her authorized representative.

        18.   “Flush bolt” means a manual, key-operated or turn-operated metal bolt normally used on inactive door(s) and attached to the top and bottom of the door, and engaging in the head and threshold of the frame.

        19.   “Fully tempered glass” means those materials meeting or exceeding ANSI standard Z 97.1—Safety Glazing.

        20.   “Jamb” means the vertical members of a door frame to which the door is secured.

        21.   “Jamb/wall” means that component of a door assembly to which a door is attached and secured; the wall and jamb used together are considered a unit.

        22.   “Key-in-knob” means a lockset having the key cylinder and other lock mechanisms contained in the knob.

        23.   “Latch” or “latch bolt” means a beveled, spring-actuated bolt which may or may not have a deadlocking device.

        24.   “Lock” or “lockset” means a keyed device, complete with cylinder, latch or deadbolt mechanism and trim such as knobs, levers, thumb turns, escutcheons, etc., for securing a door in a closed position against forced entry. For the purposes of this chapter, “lock” does not include the strike plate.

        25.   “Locking device” means a part of a window assembly which is intended to prevent movement of the movable sash, which may be the sash lock or sash operator.

        26.   “Multifamily dwelling” means a building or portion thereof designed for occupancy by two or more families living independently of each other, including hotels, motels, apartments, duplexes and townhomes.

        27.   “Part,” as distinguished from “component,” means a unit or subassembly which combines with other units to make up a component.

        28.   “Primary locking device” means the single locking system on a door or window unit whose primary function is to prevent unauthorized intrusion.

        29.   “Single-family dwelling” means a building designed exclusively for occupancy by one family.

        30.   “Rail” means the horizontal member of a window or door. A “meeting rail” is one which mates with a rail of another sash or a framing member of the door or window frame when the sash is in the closed position.

        31.   “Sash” means an assembly of stiles, rails and sometimes mullions assembled into a single frame which supports the glazing material. A “fixed sash” is one which is not intended to be opened. A “movable sash” is intended to be opened.

        32.   “Sill” means the lowest horizontal member of a window frame.

        33.   “Single-cylinder deadbolt” means a deadbolt lock which is activated from the outside by a key and from the inside by a knob, thumb-turn, lever or similar mechanism.

        34.   “Solid-core door” means a door composed of solid wood or composed of compressed wood equal in strength to solid wood construction.

        35.   “Stile” means a vertical framing member of a window or door.

        36.   “Strike” means a metal plate attached to or mortised into a door or door jamb to receive and to hold a projected latch bolt and/or deadbolt in order to secure the door to the jamb.

        37.   “Swinging door” means a door hinged at the stile or at the head and threshold.

        38.   “U.L. listed” means tested and listed by Underwriters Laboratory, Inc.

        39.   “Window assembly” means a unit which includes a window and the anchorage between the window and the wall.

        40.   “Window frame” means that part of a window which surrounds and supports the sashes and is attached to the surrounding wall. The members include side jambs (vertical), head jamb (upper, horizontal), sill and mullions. (Ord. 1136 § 1, 1981)

 

15.60.030 Provisions not exclusive.
        This chapter is supplemental to any local, state or federal laws, regulations or codes dealing with life safety factors. (Ord. 1136 § 1, 1981)

 

15.60.040 Keying requirements.
        Upon occupancy by the owner or proprietor, each single unit in the same residential project or commercial building development, constructed under the same development plan, shall have locks using combinations which are interchange-free from locks used in all other separate dwellings, proprietorships or similar distinct occupancies within such residential project or commercial building development. (Ord. 1136 § 1, 1981)

 

15.60.050 Residential door frames, jambs, strikes and hinges.
        Except for vehicular access doors, all exterior swinging doors of any residential building and attached garages, including the door leading from the garage area into the dwelling units, shall be equipped as follows:

        A.    Door jambs shall be installed with a solid backing in such a manner that no voids exist between the strike side of the jamb and the frame opening for a vertical distance of six inches each side of the strike.

        B.     In wood framing, horizontal blocking shall be placed between studs at door lock height for three stud spaces each side of the door openings.

        C.     Door stops on wooden jambs for in-swinging doors shall be of one-piece construction with the jamb. Jambs for all doors shall be constructed or protected so as to prevent violation of the strike.

        D.    The strike plate for deadbolts on all wood-framed doors shall be constructed of minimum sixteen U.S. gauge steel, bronze or brass and secured to the jamb by a minimum of two screws, which must penetrate at least two inches into solid backing beyond the surface to which the strike is attached.

        E.     Hinges for out-swinging doors shall be equipped with nonremovable hinge pins or a mechanical interlock to preclude removal of the door from the exterior by removing the hinge pins. (Ord. 1136 § 1, 1981)

 

15.60.060 Windows and sliding glass doors.
        The following requirements must be met for windows and sliding glass doors:

        A.    Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, all operable exterior windows and sliding glass doors shall comply with the tests set forth in this chapter.

        B.     Louvered windows shall not be used when any portion of the window is less than twelve feet vertically or six feet horizontally from an accessible surface or any adjoining roof, balcony, landing, stair tread, platform or similar structure. (Ord. 1136 § 1, 1981)

 

15.60.070 Garage doors.
        All garage doors shall conform to the following standards:

        A.    Wood doors shall have panels a minimum of five-sixteenths inch in thickness with the locking hardware being attached to the support framing.

        B.     Aluminum doors shall be a minimum thickness of .0215 inches and riveted together with a minimum of eighteen inches on center along the outside seams. There shall be a full-width horizontal beam attached to the main door structure which shall meet the pilot, or pedestrian access, door framing within three inches of the strike area of the pilot or pedestrian access door.

        C.     Fiberglass doors shall have panels a minimum density of six ounces per square foot from the bottom of the door to a height of seven feet. Panels above seven feet and panels in residential structures shall have a density of not less than five ounces per square foot.

        D.    Doors utilizing a cylinder lock shall have a minimum five-pin-tumbler operation with the locking bar or bolt extending into the receiving guide a minimum of one inch.

        E.     Doors that exceed sixteen feet in width, but do not exceed nineteen feet in width, shall have the following options as to locking devices:

        1.     Two lock receiving points, or one garage-door-type slide bolt may be used if mounted no higher than twenty-six inches from the bottom of the door.

        2.     A single bolt may be used if placed in the center of the door with the locking point located either at the floor or door frame header.

        3.     Torsion spring counterbalance type hardware may be used if such hardware substantially complies with the requirements of this chapter.

        F.     Except in a residential building, doors secured by electrical operation shall have a key-switch to open the door when in a closed position, or shall have a signal-locking device to open the door.

        G.    Doors with slide-bolt assemblies shall have frames a minimum of .120 inches in thickness, with a minimum bolt diameter of one-half inch and protrude at least one and one-half inches into the receiving guide. A bolt diameter of three-eighths inch may be used in a residential building. The slide bolt shall be attached to the door with nonremovable bolts from the outside. Rivets shall not be used to attach slide-bolt assemblies.

        H.    Except in a residential building, padlock(s) used with exterior-mounted slide bolt(s) shall have a hardened steel shackle locking both at heel and toe and a minimum five-pin-tumbler operation with nonremovable key when in an unlocked position. Padlock(s) used with interior-mounted slide bolt(s) shall have a hardened steel shackle with a minimum four-pin-tumbler operation. (Ord. 1136 § 1, 1981)

 

15.60.080 Residential door construction and locking.
        Except for vehicular access doors, all exterior swinging doors of any residential building and attached garages, including the door leading from the garage area into the dwelling unit, shall be equipped as follows:

        A.    All wood doors shall be of solid-core construction with a minimum thickness of one and three-fourths inches, or with panels not less than nine-sixteenths inch thick.

        B.     A single or double door shall be equipped with a single-cylinder deadbolt lock. The bolt shall have a minimum projection of one inch and be constructed so as to repel cutting tool attack. The deadbolt shall have an embedment of at least three-fourths inch into the strike receiving the projected bolt. The cylinder shall have a cylinder guard, a minimum of five pin tumblers, and shall be connected to the inner portion of the lock by connecting screws of at least one-fourth inch in diameter. A dual locking mechanism constructed so that both deadbolt and latch can be retracted by a single action of the inside door knob or lever may be substituted provided it meets all other specifications for locking devices.

        C.     The inactive leaf of double door(s) shall be equipped with metal flush bolts having a minimum embedment of five-eighths inch into the head and threshold of the door frame.

        D.    Glazing in exterior doors or within twelve inches of any locking mechanism shall be of fully tempered glass or rated burglary resistant glazing.

        E.     Except where clear vision panels are installed, all front exterior doors shall be equipped with a wide-angle (one hundred eighty degree) door viewer, not to be mounted more than fifty-eight inches from the bottom of the door. (Ord. 1136 § 1, 1981)

 

15.60.090 Residential address information.
        Street number and other identifying data shall be displayed as follows:

        A.    All residential dwellings shall display a street number in a prominent location on the street side of the residence in such a position that the number is easily visible to approaching emergency vehicles. The numerals shall be no less than four inches in height and shall be of a contrasting color to the background to which they are attached. Single-family dwellings shall have these numerals illuminated during the hours of darkness.

        B.     There shall be positioned at each entrance of a multifamily dwelling complex an illuminated diagrammatic representation of the complex which shows the location of the viewer and the unit designations within the complex. In addition, each individual unit within the complex shall display a prominent identification number, not less than four inches in height, which is easily visible to approaching vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic. (Ord. 1136 § 1, 1981)

15.60.100 Multifamily dwelling lighting.
        Lighting in multifamily dwellings shall be as follows:

        A.    Aisles, passageways and recesses related to and within the building complex shall be illuminated with an intensity of at least twenty-five one hundredths foot-candles at the ground level during the hours of darkness. Lighting devices shall be protected by weather-resistant and vandalism-resistant covers.

        B.     Open parking lots and carports shall be provided with a maintained minimum of one foot-candle of light on the parking surface during the hours of darkness. Lighting devices shall be protected by weather-resistant and vandalism-resistant covers. (Ord. 1136 § 1, 1981)

 

15.60.110 Residential parking vehicular access doors.
        Residential garage or any parking areas required to be covered shall have vehicular access door(s) which conform to the provisions of this chapter. Exception: A vehicular access door will not be required when the inside of the garage, including the entire rear wall, is visible from floor level to a height of five feet. Visibility shall constitute an unobscured line of vision, not to exceed eighty feet, from the window of a dwelling unit to the inside of the garage. This window is to have a clear vision panel with the dimensions not less than three feet either horizontally or vertically, and the window sill to be not more than four feet from the floor. The visibility factor shall apply to those garages and windows of the same multifamily dwelling complex. (Ord. 1136 § 1, 1981)

 

15.60.120 Commercial door construction generally.
        Swinging exterior glass doors, wood or metal doors with glass panels, solid wood or metal doors in commercial buildings shall be constructed or protected as follows:

        A.    Wood doors shall be of solid-core construction with minimum thickness of one and three-fourths inches. Wood panel doors with panels less than one inch thick shall be covered on the inside with a minimum sixteen U.S. gauge sheet steel, or its equivalent, which is to be attached with screws on minimum sixteen-inch centers. Hollow steel doors shall be of a minimum sixteen U.S. gauge and have sufficient reinforcement to maintain the designed thickness of the door when any locking device is installed; such reinforcement being able to restrict collapsing of the door around any locking device.

        B.     Except when double-cylinder deadbolts are utilized, any glazing in exterior doors or within forty-eight inches of any door locking mechanism shall be constructed or protected as follows:

        1.     Fully tempered glass or rated burglary resistant glazing; or

        2.     Iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth inch material with a minimum two-inch mesh secured on the inside of the glazing may be utilized; or

        3.     The glazing shall be covered with iron bars of at least one-half-inch round or one-inch by one-fourth-inch flat steel material, spaced not more than five inches apart, secured on the inside of the glazing;

        4.     Subdivisions 2 and 3 of this subsection shall not interfere with the operation of opening windows if such windows are required to be openable by the Uniform Building Code. (Ord. 1136 § 1, 1981)

 

15.60.130 Commercial door locks—Wood and steel doors.
        All swinging exterior wood and steel doors in commercial buildings shall be equipped as follows:

        A.    A single or double door shall be equipped with a single-cylinder deadbolt. The bolt shall have a minimum projection of one and one-half inches and be constructed so as to repel cutting tool attack. The deadbolt shall have an embedment of at least three-fourths inch into the strike receiving the projected bolt. The cylinder shall have a cylinder guard, a minimum of five pin tumblers, and shall be connected to the inner portion of the lock by connecting screws of at least one-fourth inch in diameter.

        B.     The provisions of subsection A of this section do not apply where:

        1.     Panic hardware is required; or

        2.     An equivalent device is approved by the enforcing authority. (Ord. 1136 § 1, 1981)

 

15.60.140 Commercial double doors.
        Double doors in commercial buildings shall be equipped as follows:

        A.    The inactive leaf of double doors shall be equipped with metal flush bolts having a minimum embedment of five-eighths inch into the head and threshold of the door frame.

        B.     Double doors shall have an astragal constructed of steel a minimum of .125 inch thick which will cover the opening between the doors. The astragal shall be a minimum of two inches wide, and extend a minimum of one inch beyond the edge of the door to which it is attached. The astragal shall be attached to the outside of the active door by means of welding or with nonremovable bolts spaced apart on not more than ten-inch centers. (The door to which such an astragal is attached must be determined by the fire-safety codes adopted by the enforcing authority.) (Ord. 1136 § 1, 1981)

 

15.60.150 Commercial aluminum-frame doors.
        Aluminum-frame swinging doors in commercial buildings shall be equipped as follows:

        A.    The jamb on all aluminum-frame swinging doors shall be so constructed or protected to withstand one thousand six hundred pounds of pressure in both a vertical distance of three inches and a horizontal distance of one inch each side of the strike, so as to prevent violation of the strike.

        B.     A single or double door shall be equipped with a single-cylinder deadbolt with a bolt projection exceeding one and one-half inches, or a hook-shaped or expanding dog bolt that engages the strike sufficiently to prevent spreading. The deadbolt lock shall have a minimum of five pin tumblers and a cylinder guard. (Ord. 1136 § 1, 1981)

 

15.60.160 Panic hardware.
        Panic hardware, whenever required by the La Habra building code or Title 19, California Administrative Code, shall be installed in commercial buildings as follows:

        A.    Panic hardware shall contain a minimum of two locking points on each door; or

        B.     On single doors, panic hardware may have one locking point which is not to be located at either the top or bottom rails of the door frame. The door shall have an astragal constructed of steel .125 inch thick which shall be attached with nonremovable bolts to the outside of the door. The astragal shall extend a minimum of six inches vertically above and below the latch of the panic hardware. The astragal shall be a minimum of two inches wide and extend a minimum of one inch beyond the edge of the door to which it is attached.

        C.     Double doors containing panic hardware shall have an astragal attached to the doors at their meeting point which will close the opening between them, but not interfere with the operation of either door. (Ord. 1721, 2010; Ord. 1136 § 1, 1981)

 

15.60.170 Commercial sliding doors.
        Horizontal sliding doors in commercial buildings shall be equipped with a metal guide track at top and bottom and a cylinder lock and/or padlock with a hardened steel shackle which locks at both heel and toe, with a minimum five-pin-tumbler operation with nonremovable key when in an unlocked position. (Ord. 1136 § 1, 1981)

 

15.60.180 Multiple-occupancy office buildings.
        In multiple-occupancy office buildings, all entrance doors to individual office suites shall meet the construction and locking requirements for exterior doors. (Ord. 1136 § 1, 1981)

 

15.60.190 Accessible windows.
        Windows in commercial buildings shall be “accessible” if less than twelve feet above ground. Accessible windows and all exterior transoms having a pane exceeding ninety-six square inches in an area with the smallest dimension exceeding six inches and not visible from a public or private vehicular access way shall be protected in the following manner:

        A.    Fully tempered glass or burglary resistant glazing.

        B.     The following window barriers may be used but shall be secured with nonremovable bolts:

        1.     Inside or outside iron bars of at least one-half-inch round or one-inch by one-fourth-inch flat steel material, spaced not more than five inches apart and securely fastened. Barriers must have quick-opening capability;

        2.     Inside or outside iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth-inch material with not more than a two-inch mesh and securely fastened. Barriers must have quick-opening capability.

        C.     If a side or rear window is of the type that can be opened, it shall, where applicable, be secured on the inside with either a slide bar, bolt, crossbar, auxiliary locking device and/or padlock with hardened steel shackle, a minimum four-pin-tumbler operation.

        D.    The protective bars or grills shall not interfere with the operation of opening windows if such windows are required to be openable by the Uniform Building Code. (Ord. 1136 § 1, 1981)

 

15.60.200 Roof openings.
        Roof openings in commercial buildings shall be equipped as follows:

        A.    All skylights on the roof of any building or premises used for business purposes shall be provided with:

        1.     Rated burglary resistant glazing; or

        2.     Iron bars of at least one-half-inch round or one-inch by one-fourth-inch flat steel material under the skylight and securely fastened; or

        3.     A steel grill of at least one-eighth-inch material with a maximum two-inch mesh under the skylight and securely fastened.

        B.     All hatchway openings on the roof of any building or premises used for business purposes shall be secured as follows:

        1.     If the hatchway is of wooden material, it shall be covered on the inside with at least sixteen U.S. gauge sheet metal, or its equivalent, attached with screws.

        2.     The hatchway shall be secured from the inside with a slide bar or slide bolts.

        3.     Outside hinges on all hatchway openings shall be provided with nonremovable pins when using pin-type hinges.

        C.     All air duct or air vent openings exceeding ninety-six square inches on the roof or exterior walls of any building or premises used for business purposes shall be secured by covering the same with either of the following:

        1.     Iron bars of at least one-half-inch round or one-inch by one-fourth-inch flat steel material spaced no more than five inches apart and securely fastened;

        2.     Iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth-inch material with a maximum two-inch mesh and securely fastened;

        3.     If the barrier is on the outside, it shall be secured with bolts which are nonremovable from the exterior;

        4.     Subdivisions 1 and 2 of this subsection must not interfere with venting requirements creating a potentially hazardous condition to health and safety or conflict with the provisions of the Uniform Building Code or Title 19 of the California Administrative Code. (Ord. 1136 § 1, 1981)

 

15.60.210 Roof ladders.
        Permanently affixed ladders leading to roofs of commercial buildings shall be fully enclosed with sheet metal to a height of ten feet. This covering shall be locked against the ladder with a case-hardened hasp, secured with nonremovable screws or bolts. Hinges on the cover will be provided with nonremovable pins when using pin-type hinges. If a padlock is used, it shall have a hardened steel shackle, locking at both heel and toe, and a minimum five-pin-tumbler operation with nonremovable key when in an unlocked position. (Ord. 1136 § 1, 1981)

 

15.60.220 Commercial illumination and identification.
        The following standards shall apply to lighting, address identification and parking areas:

        A.    The address number of every commercial building shall be illuminated during the hours of darkness so that it shall be easily visible from the street. The numerals in these numbers shall be no less than six inches in height and be of a color contrasting to the background. In addition, any business which affords vehicular access to the rear through any driveway, alleyway or parking lot shall also display the same numbers on the rear of the building.

        B.     All exterior commercial doors, during the hours of darkness, shall be illuminated with a minimum of one foot-candle of light. All exterior bulbs shall be protected by weather-resistant and vandalism-resistant covers.

        C.     Open parking lots, and access thereto, providing more than ten parking spaces and for use by the general public, shall be provided with a maintained minimum of one foot-candle of light on the parking surface from dusk until the termination of business every operating day. (Ord. 1136 § 1, 1981)

 

15.60.230 Commercial elevators.
        A.    Passenger elevators in commercial buildings, the interiors of which are not completely visible when the car door(s) is open, shall have mirrors so placed as to make visible the whole of the elevator interior to prospective passengers outside the elevator; mirrors shall be framed and mounted to minimize the possibility of their accidentally falling or shattering.

        B.     Elevator emergency stop buttons shall be so installed and connected as to activate the elevator alarm. (Ord. 1136 § 1, 1981)

 

15.60.370 Construction site security.
        All new construction, on sites exceeding one acre in area, shall comply with the following security measures until the utilities have been released by the city:

        A.    Perimeter lighting shall be installed at a minimum of one-hundred-fifty-foot intervals and at a height not less than fifteen feet from the ground. The light source used shall have a minimum light output of two thousand lumens, be protected by a vandalism-resistant cover, and be lighted during the hours of darkness. Additional lighting shall be required if the construction site exceeds four acres in area. Lighting shall be installed at locations designated by the chief building inspector.

        B.     In addition to perimeter lighting described in subsection A of this section, one of the following shall be used:

        1.     Fencing, not less than six feet in height, which is designed to preclude human intrusion, shall be installed along the perimeter boundaries of the construction site; or

        2.     A uniformed security guard, licensed according to Chapter 11 of the Business and Professions Code, shall be utilized to continually patrol the construction site during the hours when construction work has ceased. (Ord. 1136 § 1, 1981)

 

15.60.380 Rural and private street lighting.
        All rural and private streets shall have lighting that complies with city standards which are on file with the public works department. The following alternate provisions may be used, if approved, by the enforcing authority designated under this chapter.

        A.    The mounting height of light fixtures may vary, depending upon the width of the street served.

        B.     Light fixtures shall be located at all intersections, stub streets, culs-de-sac and unusual conditions (i.e., roadway alignment and access points). This includes any location where there are no street light fixtures within a maximum distance of two hundred feet of each other along the roadway.

        C.     Light output from each fixture shall be equivalent to a minimum of three thousand lumens.

        D.    A lighting fixture, other than standard city fixtures, may be used, is approved. Approval may be given upon a determination of substantial compliance with reasonable safety and engineering standards. (Ord. 1136 § 1, 1981)

 

15.60.390 Alternate materials and methods.
        A.    The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this chapter provided any such alternate has been approved by the enforcing authority, nor is it the intention of this chapter to exclude any sound method of structural design or analysis not specifically provided for in this chapter. Materials, methods of construction or structural design limitations provided for in this chapter shall be used unless an exception is granted by the enforcing authority.

        B.     The enforcing authority may approve any such alternate provided they find the proposed design, material and method of work to be for the purpose intended, at least equivalent to that prescribed in this chapter in quality, strength, effectiveness, burglary resistance, durability and safety. (Ord. 1136 § 1, 1981)

 

15.60.400 Appeals.
        A.    In case of any dispute regarding the suitability of alternate materials and methods of construction, the decision of the enforcing authority may be immediately appealed to a building safety board of appeals. This board shall consist of the chief building official, the manager of planning and the chief of police, or any of their authorized representatives.

        B.     All appeals shall be presented in writing to the building safety board of appeals. The board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its hearings and will issue written findings and conclusions within ten days after the submittal of an appeal. Any decision of the building safety board of appeals may be directly appealed to the city council. (Ord. 1721, 2010; Ord. 1136 § 1, 1981)

 

15.60.410 Enforcement—Plan approval.
        The chief building official, or duly authorized representatives, are empowered and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Plans and specifications for any proposed construction must, however, be approved by the chief building official or duly authorized representatives in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. No building permit is to be finally approved unless the applicant has satisfied the enforcing authority that all provisions of this chapter have been met. (Ord. 1721, 2010; Ord. 1136 § 1, 1981)

 

15.60.420 Violations.
        It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, move, improve, convert or equip, use or occupy or maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1136 § 1, 1981)

Chapter 15.64 FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ords. 1108, 1355, 1390 and 1456.

 

15.64.010 Statutory authorization.
        The legislature of the state of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560 and 65800 conferred upon local government units’ authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council of the city of La Habra does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations, replacing the existing Chapter 15.64, Ord. 1390 § 6.2 (F), 1990. (Ord. 1641, 2004)

 

15.64.020 Findings of fact.
        A.    The flood hazard areas of the city of La Habra are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.

        B.     These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, flood proofed or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards that increase flood heights and velocities also contribute to the flood loss. (Ord. 1641, 2004)

 

15.64.030 Purpose.
        It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:

        A.    Protect human life and health;

        B.     Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

        C.     Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

        D.    Minimize prolonged business interruptions;

        E.     Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

        F.     Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage;

        G.    Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

        H.    Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 1641, 2004)

 

15.64.040 Methods of reducing flood losses.
        In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions to:

        A.    Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;

        B.     Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

        C.     Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;

        D.    Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and

        E.     Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. (Ord. 1641, 2004)

 

15.64.050 Definitions.
        Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

        “Accessory use” means a use that is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located.

        “Alluvial fan” means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition and channel migration.

        “Apex” means the point of highest elevation on an alluvial fan, which on undisturbed fans is generally the point where the major stream that formed the fan emerges from the mountain front.

        “Appeal” means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator’s interpretation of any provision of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

        “Area of shallow flooding” means an area designated as Zone AO or AH on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.

        “Area of special flood hazard”—See “Special flood hazard area.”

        “Base flood” means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “100-year flood”). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter.

        “Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade i.e., below ground level on all sides.

        “Building”—see “Structure”.

        “Development” means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.

        “Encroachment” means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.

        “Existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.

        “Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).

        “Flood, flooding, or flood water” means:

        A.    A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and

        B.     The condition resulting from flood-related erosion.

        “Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway.

        “Flood Hazard Boundary Map” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of flood hazards.

        “Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

        “Flood Insurance Study” means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

        “Floodplain or flood-prone area” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source—see “Flood, flooding, or flood water.”

        “Floodplain administrator” is the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.

        “Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations and open space plans.

        “Floodplain management regulations” means the ordinance codified in this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof that provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.

        “Flood proofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. (Refer to FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93 and TB 7-93 for guidelines on dry and wet flood proofing.)

        “Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as “Regulatory Floodway”.

        “Floodway fringe” is that area of the floodplain on either side of the “Regulatory Floodway” where encroachment may be permitted.

        “Fraud and victimization” as related to Section 6, Variance Procedure, of this chapter, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the city of La Habra will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty to one-hundred years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates.

        “Functionally dependent use” means a use that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.

        “Governing body” is the local governing unit, i.e. county or municipality, which is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.

        “Hardship” as related to Section 6, Variance Procedure, of this chapter means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The city of La Habra requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.

        “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

        “Historic structure” means any structure that is:

        A.    Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

        B.     Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

        C.     Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or

        D.    Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.

        “Levee” means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.

        “Levee system” means a flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices.

        “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement (see “Basement” definition).

        A.    An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements, including, but not limited to:

        1.     The wet flood proofing standard in Section 5.1 C.3.

        2.     The anchoring standards in Section 5.1 A.

        3.     The construction materials and methods standards in Section 5.1 B.

        4.     The standards for utilities in Section 5.2.

        B.     For residential structures, all subgrade-enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see “Basement” definition). This prohibition includes belowgrade garages and storage areas.

        “Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”

        “Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

        “Market Value” shall be determined by estimating the cost to replace the structure in new condition and adjusting that cost figure by the amount of depreciation which has accrued since the structure was constructed. The cost of replacement of the structure shall be based on a square foot cost factor determined by reference to a building cost estimating guide recognized by the building construction industry. The amount of depreciation shall be determined by taking into account the age and physical deterioration of the structure and functional obsolescence as approved by the floodplain administrator but shall not include economic or other forms of external obsolescence. Use of replacement costs or accrued depreciation factors different from those contained in recognized building cost estimating guides may be considered only if such factors are included in a report prepared by an independent professional appraiser and supported by a written explanation of the differences.

        “Mean sea level” means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.

        “New construction”, for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

        “New manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community.

        “Obstruction” includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.

        “One-hundred-year flood” or “100-year flood”—see “Base flood.”

        “Public safety and nuisance” as related to Section 6, Variance Procedure, of this chapter means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal or basin.

        “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle that is:

        A.    Built on a single chassis;

        B.     Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

        C.     Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and

        D.    Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.

        “Regulatory floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

 

 

        “Remedy a violation” means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.

        “Riverine” means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.

        “Sheet flow area”—see “Area of shallow flooding”.

        “Special flood hazard area (SFHA)” means an area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH.

        “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty 180 days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

        “Structure” means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.

        “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

        “Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

        1.     Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or

        2.     Any alteration of a “historic structure”, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.”

        “Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.

        “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

        “Water surface elevation” means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.

        “Watercourse” means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. (Ord. 1641, 2004)

 

15.64.060 Lands to which this chapter applies.
        This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city of La Habra. (Ord. 1641, 2004)

 

15.64.070 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
        The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFMs), dated February 18, 2004, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city of La Habra by the floodplain administrator. The study, FIRMs and FBFMs are on file at the building and safety division of the city of La Habra in City Hall. (Ord. 1782 § 3, 2017; Ord. 1641, 2004)

 

15.64.080 Compliance.
        No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the term of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city of La Habra from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 1641, 2004)

 

15.64.090 Abrogation and greater restrictions.
        This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where the ordinance codified in this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 1641, 2004)

 

15.64.100 Interpretation.
        In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

        A.    Considered as minimum requirements;

        B.     Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

        C.     Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. 1641, 2004)

 

15.64.110 Warning and disclaimer of liability.
        The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city of La Habra, any officer or employee thereof, the state of California, or the Federal Insurance Administration, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 1641, 2004)

 

15.64.115 Severability.
        This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 1641, 2004)

 

15.64.120 Establishment of a development permit.
        A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 3.2. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Floodplain Administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:

        A.    Site plan, including, but not limited to:

        1.     For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and twenty-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one foot contour elevations throughout the building site; and

        2.     Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer and utilities; and

        3.     If available, the base flood elevation from the Flood Insurance Study and/or Flood Insurance Rate Map; and

        4.     If applicable, the location of the regulatory floodway; and

        B.     Foundation design detail, including, but not limited to:

        1.     Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; and

        2.     For a crawl-space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in Section 5.1.C(3) of this chapter and FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93; and

        3.     For foundations placed on fill, the location and height of fill, and compaction requirements (compacted to 95 percent using the Standard Proctor Test method); and

        C.     Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be flood proofed, as required in Section 5.1 C.2 of this chapter and FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93; and

        D.    All appropriate certifications listed in Section 4.3 D of this chapter; and

        E.     Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. (Ord. 1641, 2004)

 

15.64.130 Designation of the floodplain administrator.
        The director of building and safety is hereby appointed to administer, implement and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions. (Ord. 1641, 2004)

 

15.64.140 Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.
        The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following. (Ord. 1641, 2004)

 

15.64.150 Permit review.
        Review all development permits to determine that:

        A.    Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied,

        B.     All other required state and federal permits have been obtained,

        C.     The site is reasonably safe from flooding, and

        D.    The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, “adversely affects” means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point. (Ord. 1641, 2004)

 

15.64.160 Review, use and development of other base flood data.
        A.    When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 3.2, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer Section 5. Any such information shall be submitted to the city council of La Habra for adoption; or

        B.     If no base flood elevation data is available from a federal or state agency or other source, then a base flood elevation shall be obtained using one of two methods from the FEMA publication “Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas—A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood Elevations” dated July 1995 in order to administer Section 5:

        1.     Simplified method.

        a.     One hundred year or base flood discharge shall be obtained using the appropriate regression equation found in a U.S. Geological Survey publication, or the discharge-drainage area method; and

        b.     Base flood elevation shall be obtained using the Quick-2 computer program developed by FEMA; or

        1.     Detailed method.

        a.     One hundred year or base flood discharge shall be obtained using the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ HEC-HMS computer program; and

        b.     Base flood elevation shall be obtained using the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ HEC-RAS computer program. (Ord. 1641, 2004)

 

15.64.170 Notification of other agencies.
        In the event of alteration or relocation of a watercourse, the floodplain administrator shall:

        A.    Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation;

        B.     Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; and

        C.     Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. (Ord. 1641, 2004)

 

15.64.180 Documentation of floodplain development.
        The floodplain administrator shall obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available, as needed, the following:

        A.    Certification required by Section 5.1 C.1 and 5.4 (lowest floor elevations),

        B.     Certification required by Section 5.1 C.2 (elevation or flood proofing of nonresidential structures),

        C.     Certification required by Sections 5.1 C.3 (wet floodproofing standard),

        D.    Certification of elevation required by Section 5.3 B (subdivision standards),

        E.     Certification required by Section 5.6 A (floodway encroachments). (Ord. 1641, 2004)

 

15.64.190 Map determinations.
        Make interpretations where needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard. Where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, grade and base flood elevations shall be used to determine the boundaries of the special flood hazard area. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 6. (Ord. 1641, 2004)

 

15.64.200 Remedial action.
        Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 3.3. (Ord. 1641, 2004)

 

15.64.205 Appeals.
        The city council of the city of La Habra shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. (Ord. 1641, 2004)

 

15.64.210 Provisions for flood hazard reduction—Standards of construction.
        In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards in Sections 15.64.220—15.64.240, are required. (Ord. 1641, 2004)

 

15.64.220 Anchoring.
        A.    All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

        B.     All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 15.64.270. (Ord. 1641, 2004)

 

15.64.230 Construction materials and methods.
        All new construction and substantial improvement shall be constructed:

        A.    With flood resistant materials as specified in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 2-93, and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;

        B.     Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;

        C.     With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and if

        D.    Within Zone AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures.

 

15.64.240 Elevation and flood proofing.
        (See Section 15.64.050 definitions for “basement,” “lowest floor,” “new construction,” “substantial damage” and “substantial improvement”.)

        A.    Residential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall have the lowest floor, including basement:

        1.     In a Zone AO, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.

        2.     In a Zone A, elevated to or above the base flood elevation; said base flood elevation shall be determined by one of the methods in Section 15.64.160 of this chapter.

        3.     In all other zones, elevated to or above the base flood elevation. Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

        B.     Nonresidential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall either be elevated to conform with subsection 15.64.230(A) or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:

        1.     Be flood proofed below the elevation recommended under subsection 15.64.230(A) so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

        2.     Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and

        3.     be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this Section (15.64.230(B)) are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

        C.     All new construction and substantial improvement with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement shall follow the guidelines in FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93 and TB 7-93, and must exceed the following minimum criteria:

        1.     Have a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; or

        2.     Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as providing an equivalent level of safety as provided by the methods specified in 15.64.230(C)(1).

        D.    Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in Section 15.64.270 (Ord. 1641, 2004)

 

15.64.250 Standards for utilities.
        A.    All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate:

        1.     Infiltration of flood waters into the systems, and

        2.     Discharge from the systems into flood waters.

        B.     On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 1641, 2004)

 

15.64.260 Standards for subdivisions.
        A.    All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood.

        B.     All subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pad(s). If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the lowest floor and pad elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator.

        C.     All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

        D.    All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

        E.     All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. (Ord. 1641, 2004)

 

15.64.270 Standards for manufactured homes.
        A.    All manufactured homes that are placed, or substantially improved, within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map, on sites located:

        1.     Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision,

        2.     In a new manufactured home park or subdivision,

        3.     In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or

        4.     In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as the result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.

        B.     All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map that are not subject to the provisions of paragraph 5.4 A will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so that either the:

        1.     Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation, or

        2.     Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six inches in height above grade.

        Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community building-inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. (Ord. 1641, 2004)

 

15.64.280 Standards for recreational vehicles.
        A.    All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map will either:

        1.     Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty consecutive days, and be fully licensed and ready for highway use—a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions, or

        2.     Meet the permit requirements of Section 15.64.150 of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 15.64.270. (Ord. 1641, 2004)

 

15.64.290 Floodways.
        Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 3.2 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

        A.    Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement and other new development unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in the base flood elevation during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

        B.     If Section 15.64.290(A) is satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Sections 15.64.210—15.64.280. (Ord. 1641, 2004)

 

15.64.300 Variance procedure.
        A.    Nature of Variances. The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on the general principle of zoning laws that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners.

        It is the duty of the city of La Habra to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level is so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate.

        B.     Appeal Board.

        1.     In passing upon requests for variances, the city of La Habra shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the:

        a.     Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

        b.     Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

        c.     Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property;

        d.     Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

        e.     Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

        f.      Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

        g.     Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

        h.     Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

        i.      Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

        j.      Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and

        k.     Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges.

        2.     Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that:

        a.     The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars for one hundred dollars of insurance coverage, and

        b.     Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the Office of the Orange County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.

        3.     The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency.

        C.     Conditions for Variances.

        1.     Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Sections 4 and 5 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

        2.     Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of “historic structures” (as defined in Section 2 of the ordinance codified in this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.

        3.     Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

        4.     Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the “minimum necessary” considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. “Minimum necessary” means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the city of La Habra need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the city of La Habra believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance.

        5.     Variances shall only be issued upon a:

        a.     Showing of good and sufficient cause;

        b.     Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional “hardship” (as defined in Section 15.64.050 of this chapter) to the applicant; and

        c.     Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (as defined in Section 15.64.050—see “public safety and nuisance”), cause fraud or victimization (as defined in Section 15.64.050) of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

        6.     Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of Sections 15.64.300(C)(1) through 15.64.300(C)(5) are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance.

        G.    Upon consideration of the factors of Section 15.64.300(C) and the purposes of this chapter, the city of La Habra may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 1641, 2004)

Chapter 15.67 ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS
15.67.010 Purpose.
        The purpose of this chapter is to adopt an expedited, streamlined electric vehicle charging station permitting process that complies with Assembly Bill (AB) 1236 (Chapter 598, Statutes 2015) to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of electric vehicle charging stations. The provisions of this chapter encourage the use of electric vehicle charging stations by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the city, and expanding the ability of property owners to install electric vehicle charging stations. The provisions of this chapter further allow the city to achieve these goals while protecting the public’s health, welfare and safety. (Ord. 1787 § 3, 2017)

 

15.67.020 Applicability.
        A.    This chapter applies to the permitting of all electric vehicle charging station systems in the city.

        B.     Electric vehicle charging station systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of an electric vehicle charging station system. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements of electric vehicle charging stations shall not require a permit. (Ord. 1787 § 3, 2017)

 

15.67.030 Definitions.
        A.    “Association” means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development.

        B.     “Electronic submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the following:

        1.     Email;

        2.     The Internet; or

        3.     Facsimile.

        C.     “Common interest development” means any of the following:

        1.     A community apartment project;

        2.     A condominium project;

        3.     A planned development; or

        4.     A stock cooperative.

        D.    “Electric vehicle charging station” or “charging station” means any level of electric vehicle supply equipment that is designed and built in compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, or any successor regulation, and delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle.

        E.     “Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete.

        F.     “Community Readiness Guidebook” means the guidebook published by the Office of Planning and Research, with recommendations in the most current version of the “Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist” of the “Zero-Emission Vehicles in California.” (Ord. 1787 § 3, 2017)

 

15.67.040 Electric vehicle charging station system requirements.
        A.    All electric vehicle charging station systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state and the California Fire Code, as adopted and amended by the city.

        B.     Electric vehicle charging station systems shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Electrical Code.

        C.     Electric vehicle charging station systems shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories, and rules of Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. (Ord. 1787 § 3, 2017)

 

15.67.050 Duties of the building and safety division and chief building official.
        A.    All documents required for the submission of an expedited electric vehicle charging station system application shall be made available on the publicly accessible city website.

        B.     Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents by email, the Internet, or facsimile shall be made available to all electric vehicle charging station system permit applicants.

        C.     An applicant’s electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature.

        D.    The electric vehicle charging station system permit process and checklist(s) shall substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting, including the “Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist” contained in the most current version of the Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook published by the Office of Planning and Research.

        E.     The city council, by resolution, may establish a fee for the processing of electric vehicle charging station system applications. (Ord. 1787 § 3, 2017)

 

15.67.060 Permit review requirements.
        A.    The building and safety division shall administratively approve an application to install electric vehicle charging stations through issuance of a building permit or similar nondiscretionary permit.

        B.     The chief building official may require an applicant to apply for a conditional use permit if the official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the electric vehicle charging station system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety.

        C.     Review of the application shall be limited to the chief building official’s review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements.

        D.    If a conditional use permit is required, the city may deny an application for the conditional use permit if the city makes written findings based upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid, as defined, the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact.

        E.     Decisions regarding an electric vehicle charging station system permit application may be appealed to the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 18.66, or any successor chapter.

        F.     Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost.

        G.    The city shall not condition approval of an application on the approval of an association, as defined in Section 4080 of the California Civil Code, or any successor statute.

        H.    If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission. (Ord. 1787 § 3, 2017)

Chapter 15.68 ENERGY REQUIREMENTS
15.88.010 Adoption of the 2019 Edition of the California Energy Code.
        Except as provided in this chapter, the California Energy Code, 2019 Edition, as developed by the California Energy Commission, shall be and become the energy code of the city of La Habra, regulating and controlling the energy efficiency of buildings within the city of La Habra. (Ord. 1812 § 1, 2019)

 

15.68.020 Amendments to the 2019 California Energy Code.
        The 2019 Edition of the California Energy Code is hereby adopted with no amendments. (Ord. 1812 § 1, 2019)

Chapter 15.69 SOLAR ENERGY PERMITS
15.69.010 Definitions.
        The following words and phrases as used in this chapter are defined as follows:

        A.    “Electronic submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the following:

        1.     E-mail;

        2.     The city’s website;

        3.     Facsimile.

        B.     “Small residential rooftop solar energy system” means all of the following:

        1.     A solar energy system that is no larger than ten kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty kilowatts thermal.

        2.     A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state, fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city and paragraph (iii) of subdivision (c) of Section 714 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or re-designated from time to time.

        3.     A solar energy system that is installed on a single- or duplex-family dwelling.

        4.     A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height in the residential zone the property is located within.

        5.     “Solar energy system” has the same meaning set forth in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subdivision (a) of Section 801.5 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or re-designated from time to time. (Ord. 1763 § 2, 2015)

 

15.69.020 Application.
        The applicant shall submit the permit application and associated documentation (checklist) to the city’s building division in person, by mail, or by electronic submission together with any required permit processing and inspection fees. In the case of electronic submittal, the electronic signature of the applicant on all forms, applications and other documentation may be used in lieu of an actual signature. (Ord. 1763 § 2, 2015)

 

15.69.030 Verification by applicant.
        Prior to submitting an application, the applicant shall:

        A.    Verify through the use of standard engineering evaluation techniques that the support structure for the small residential rooftop solar energy system is stable and adequate to transfer all wind, seismic, and dead and live loads associated with the system to the building foundation through the use of the checklist referenced in Section 15.69.020; and

        B.     Verify through the use of standard electrical inspection techniques that the existing electrical system including existing line, load, ground and bonding wiring as well as main panel and subpanel sizes are adequately sized, based on the existing electrical system’s current use, to carry all new photovoltaic electrical loads through the use of the checklist referenced in Section 15.69.020. (Ord. 1763 § 2, 2015)

 

15.69.040 Inspection.
        For a small residential rooftop solar energy system eligible for expedited review, only one inspection shall be required, which shall be done in a timely manner and may include a consolidated inspection by the chief building official. If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection/inspections is/are required to final the system. (Ord. 1763 § 2, 2015)

 

15.69.050 Written correction notice.
        An application that satisfies the information requirements in the checklist, as determined by the chief building official, shall be deemed complete. Upon receipt of an incomplete application, the chief building official shall issue a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance. (Ord. 1763 § 2, 2015)

 

15.69.060 Permit issuance.
        Upon confirmation by the chief building official of the application and supporting documentation being complete and meeting the requirements of the checklist, the chief building official shall administratively approve the application and issue all required permits or authorizations. Such approval does not authorize an applicant to connect the small residential rooftop energy system to the local utility provider’s electricity grid. The applicant is responsible for obtaining such approval or permission from the local utility provider. Conditions imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety at the lowest cost possible. (Ord. 1763 § 2, 2015)

 

15.69.070 Denial.
        The chief building official may deny the installation of a solar energy system subject to findings, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact. The findings shall include the basis for rejection of potential feasible alternatives of preventing the adverse impact. The decision of the chief building official may be appealed to the planning commission. (Ord. 1763 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 15.70 WATER SYSTEM BACKFLOW AND CROSS-CONNECTIONS
15.70.010 Purpose.
        It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation at any time to make or maintain or cause to be made or maintained, temporarily or permanently, for any period of time whatsoever, any cross-connection between plumbing pipes or water fixtures being served with water by the city water department and any other source of water supply or to maintain any sanitary fixture or other appurte-

nances or fixtures which, by reason of their construction, may cause or allow backflow of water or other substances into the water supply system of the city and/or the service of water pipes or fixtures of any consumer of the city. (Ord. 1521 § 1, 1997)

 

15.70.020 Definitions.
        As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined in this section:

        Air-Gap Separation. The term “air-gap separation” means a physical break between a supply pipe and a receiving vessel. The air-gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel, in no case less than one inch.

        Approved Backflow Prevention Assembly. The term “approved backflow prevention assembly” means an assembly which has passed laboratory and field evaluation tests performed by a rec-

ognized testing organization which has demonstrated their competency to perform such tests to the California Department of Health Services.

        Approved Water Supply. The term “approved water supply” means any water supply whose potability is regulated by a state or local health agency.

        Auxiliary Supply. The term “auxiliary supply” means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the approved water supply.

        AWWA Standard. The term “AWWA standard” means an official standard developed and approved by the American Water Works Association (AWWA).

        Backflow. The term “backflow” shall mean a flow condition, caused by a differential in pressure, that causes the flow of water or other liquids, gases, mixtures or substances into the distributing pipes of a potable supply of water from any source or sources other than an approved water supply source. Back siphonage is one cause of backflow. Back pressure is the other cause.

        Contamination. The term “contamination” means a degradation of the quality of the potable water by any foreign substance which creates a hazard to the public health, or which may impair the usefulness or quality of the water.

        Cross-Connection. The term “cross-connection” as used in this chapter means any unprotected actual or potential water for drinking purposes and any source or system containing unapproved water or a substance that is not or cannot be approved as safe, wholesome, and potable. By-pass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover assemblies, or other assembly through which backflow could occur, shall be considered to be cross-connections.

        Double Check Valve Assembly. The term “double check valve assembly” means an assembly of two internally loaded, independently acting check valves, including resilient seated shut-off valves on each end of the assembly and test cocks for testing the water tightness of each check valve.

        Health Agency. The term “health agency” means the California Department of Health Services, or the local health agency with respect to a small water system.

        Local Health Agency. The term “local health agency” means the county or city health authority.

        Person. The term “person” means an individual, corporation, company, association, partnership, municipality, public utility, or other public body or institution.

        Premises. The term “premises” means any and all areas on a water user’s property which are served or have the potential to be served by the public water system.

        Public Water System. The term “public water system” means a system for the provision of piped water to the public for human consumption that has five or more service connections or regularly serves an average of twenty-five individuals daily at least sixty days out of the year.

        Reclaimed Water. The term “reclaimed water” means a wastewater which, as a result of treatment, is suitable for uses other than potable use.

        Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Assembly. The term “reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly” means an assembly incorporating two internally loaded, independently operating check valves and an automati-

cally operating differential relief valve located between the two checks, including resilient seated shut-off valves on each end of the assembly, and equipped with necessary test cocks for testing the assembly.

        Service Connection. The term “service connection” refers to the point of connection of a user’s piping to the water supplier’s facilities.

        Water Supplier. The term “water supplier” means the person who owns or operates the approved water supply system.

        Water User. The term “water user” means any person obtaining water from an approved water supply system. (Ord. 1521 § 2, 1997)

 

15.70.030 Cross-connection protection requirements.
        A.    General Provisions.

        1.     Unprotected cross-connections with the public water supply are prohibited.

        2.     Whenever backflow protection has been found necessary, the city will require the water user to install an approved backflow prevention assembly by and at his expense for continued services or before a new service will be granted.

        3.     Wherever backflow protection has been found necessary on a water supply line entering a water user’s premises, then any and all water supply lines from the city’s mains entering such premises, buildings, or structures shall be protected by an approved backflow prevention assembly. The type of assembly to be installed will be in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.

        B.     Where Protection is Required.

        1.     Each service connection from the city water system for supplying water to premises having an auxiliary water supply shall be protected against backflow of water from the premises into the public water system unless the auxiliary water supply is accepted as an additional source by the city, and is approved by the public health agency having jurisdiction.

        2.     Each service connection from the city water system for supplying water to any premises on which any substance is handled in such fashion as may allow its entry into the water system shall be protected against backflow of the water from the premises into the public system. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the city water system which have been subjected to deterioration in sanitary quality.

        3.     Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed on the service connection to any premises having: (a) internal cross-connections that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled to the satisfaction of the state or local health department and the city; or (b) intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not cross-connections exist.

        C.     Type of Protection Required.

        1.     The type of protection that shall be provided to prevent backflow into the approved water supply shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard that exists on the consumer’s premises. The type of protective assembly that may be required (listing in an increasing level of protection) includes: double check valve assembly (DC), reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly (RP), and an air-gap separation (AG). The water user may choose a higher level of protection than required by the city. The minimum types of backflow protection required to protect the approved water supply, at the user’s water connection to premises with varying degrees of hazard are given in Table 15.70.030. Situations which are not covered in Table 15.70.030 shall be evaluated on a case by case basis and the appropriate backflow protection shall be determined by the city or health agency.

 

 

Table 15.70.030
Type of Backflow Protection Required

 

Degree of Hazard

Minimum Type of Backflow Prevention

(a) Sewage and Hazardous Substances.

 

(1) Premises where the public water system is used to supplement the reclaimed water supply.

AG

(2) Premises where there are wastewater pumping and/or treatment plants and there is no interconnection with the potable water system. This does not include a single-family residence that has a sewage lift pump. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the city.

AG

(3) Premises where reclaimed water is used and there is no interconnection with the potable water system. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the city.

AG

(4) Premises where hazardous substances are handled in any manner in which the substances may enter a potable water system. This does not include a single-family residence that has a sewage lift pump. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the city.

AG

(5) Premises where there are irrigation systems into which fertilizers, herbicides, or pesticides are, or can be, injected.

RP

(b) Auxiliary Water Supplies.

 

(1) Premises where there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply which is interconnected with the public water system. An RP or DC may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the city.

AG

(2) Premises where there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply and there are no interconnections with the public water system. A DC may be provided in lieu of an RP if approved by the health agency and the city.

RP

(c) Fire Protection Systems.

 

(1) Premises where the fire system is directly supplied from the public water system and there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply on or to the premises (not interconnected).

DC

(2) Premises where the fire system is supplied from the public water system and interconnected with an unapproved auxiliary water supply. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the city.

AG

(3) Premises where the fire system is supplied from the public water system and where either elevated storage tanks or fire pumps which take suction from the private reservoirs or tanks are used.

DC

(d) Dockside Watering Points and Marine Facilities.

 

(1) Pier hydrants for supplying water to vessels for any purpose.

RP

(2) Premises where there are marine facilities.

RP

(e) Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for cross-connections cannot be made sufficient frequency or at sufficiently short notice to assure that cross-connections do not exist.

RP

(f) Premises where there is a repeated history of cross-connections being established or reestablished.

RP

 

        2.     Two or more services supplying water from different street mains to the same building, structure, or premises through which an interstreet main flow may occur, shall have at least a standard check valve on each water service to be located adjacent to and on the property side of the respective meters. Such check valve shall not be considered adequate if backflow protection is deemed necessary to protect the city’s mains from pollution or contamination; in such cases the installation of approved backflow assemblies at such service connections shall be required. (Ord. 1521 § 3, 1997)

 

15.70.040 Backflow prevention assemblies.
        A.    Approved Backflow Prevention Assemblies.

        1.     Only backflow prevention assemblies which have been approved by the city shall be acceptable for installation by a water user connected to the city’s potable water system.

        2.     The city will provide, upon request, to any affected customer with a list of approved backflow prevention assemblies.

        B.     Backflow Prevention Assembly Installation.

        1.     Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in a manner prescribed in Section 7603, Title 22 of the California Administrative Code. Location of the assemblies should be as close as practical to the user’s connection. The city shall have the final authority in determining the required location of a backflow prevention assembly.

        a.     Air-gap separation (AG). The air-gap separation shall be located on the user’s side of and as close to the service connection as is practical. All piping from the service connection to the receiving tank shall be above grade and be entirely visible. No water use shall be provided from any point between the service connection and the air-gap separation. The water inlet piping shall terminate a distance of at least two pipe diameters of the supply inlet, but in no case less than one inch above the overflow rim of the receiving tank.

        b.     Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly (RP). The approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on the user’s side of and as close to the service connection as is practical. The assembly shall be installed a minimum of twelve inches above grade and not more than thirty-six inches above grade measured from the bottom of the assembly and with a minimum of twelve inches side clearance. The assembly shall be installed so that it is readily accessible for maintenance and testing. Water supplied from any point between the service connection and the RP assembly shall be protected in a manner approved by the city.

        c.     Double check valve assembly (DC). The approved double check valve assembly shall be located as close as practical to the user’s connection and shall be installed above grade, if possible, and in a manner where it is readily accessible for testing and maintenance. If a double check valve assembly is put below grade it must be installed in a vault such that there is a minimum of six inches between the bottom of the vault and the bottom of the assembly, so that the top of the assembly is no more than a maximum of eight inches below grade, so there is a minimum of twenty-four inches of clearance between the side of the assembly with the test cocks and the side of the assembly and the side of the vault, and so there is a minimum of twelve inches clearance between the other side of the assembly and the side of the vault. Special consideration must be given to double check valve assemblies of the “Y” type. These assemblies must be installed on their “side” with the tests cocks in a vertical position so that either check valve may be removed for service without removing the assembly. Vaults which do not have an integrated bottom must be placed on a three inch layer of gravel.

        C.     Backflow Prevention Assembly Testing and Maintenance.

        1.     The owners of any premises on which, or on account of which, backflow prevention assemblies are installed, shall have the assemblies tested by a person who has demonstrated their competency in testing of these assemblies to the city. Backflow prevention assemblies must be tested at least annually and immediately after installation, relocation or repair. The city may require a more frequent testing schedule if it is determined to be necessary. No assembly shall be placed back in service unless it is functioning as required. A report in a form acceptable to the city shall be filed with the city each time an assembly is tested, relocated, or repaired. These assemblies shall be serviced, overhauled, or replaced whenever they are found to be defective and all costs of testing, repair, and maintenance shall be borne by the water user.

        2.     The city will supply affected water users with a list of persons acceptable to the city to test backflow prevention assemblies. The city will notify affected customers by mail when annual testing of an assembly is needed and also supply users with the necessary forms which must be filled out each time an assembly is tested or repaired.

        D.    Backflow Prevention Assembly Removal.

        1.     Approval must be obtained from the city before a backflow prevention assembly is removed, relocated, or replaced.

        a.     Removal. The use of an assembly may be discontinued and the assembly removed from service upon presentation of sufficient evidence to the city to verify that a hazard no longer exists or is not likely to be created in the future;

        b.     Relocation. An assembly may be relocated following confirmation by the city that the relocation will continue to provide the required protection and satisfy installation requirements. A retest will be required following the relocation of the assembly;

        c.     Repair. An assembly may be removed for repair, provided the water use is either discontinued until repair is completed and the assembly is returned to service, or the service connection is equipped with other backflow protection approved by the city. A retest will be required following the repair of the assembly; and

        d.     Replacement. An assembly may be removed and replaced provided the water use is discontinued until the replacement assembly is installed. All replacement assemblies must be approved by the city and must be commensurate with the degree of hazard involved. (Ord. 1521 § 4, 1997)

 

15.70.050 User supervisor.
        At each premises where it is necessary, in the opinion of the city, a user supervisor shall be designated by and at the expense of the water user. This user supervisor shall be responsible for the monitoring of the backflow prevention assemblies and for avoidance of cross-connections. In the event of contamination or pollution of the drinking water system due to a cross-connection on the premises, the city shall be promptly notified by the user supervisor so that appropriate measures may be taken to overcome the contamination. The water user shall inform the city of the user supervisor’s identity on, as a minimum, an annual basis and whenever a change occurs. (Ord. 1521 § 5, 1997)

 

15.70.060 Administrative procedures.
        A.    Water System Survey.

        1.     The city shall review all requests for new services to determine if backflow protection is needed. Plans and specifications must be submitted to the city upon request for review of possible cross-connection hazards as a condition of service for new service connections. If it is determined that a backflow prevention assembly is necessary to protect the public water system, the required assembly must be installed before service will be granted.

        2.     The city may require an on-premises inspection to evaluate cross-connection hazards. The city will transmit a written notice requesting an inspection appointment to each affected water user. Any water user who cannot or will not allow an on-premises inspection of his piping system shall be required to install the backflow prevention assembly the city considers necessary.

        3.     The city may, at its discretion, require a reinspection for cross-connection hazards of any premises to which it serves water. The city will transmit a written notice requesting an inspection appointment to each affected water user. Any water user who cannot or will not allow an on-premises inspection of his piping system shall be required to install the backflow prevention assembly the city considers necessary.

        B.     Customer Notification—Assembly In-stallation.

        1.     The city will notify the water user of the survey findings, listing the corrective actions to be taken if any are required. A period of sixty days will be given to complete all corrective actions required, including installation of backflow prevention assemblies.

        2.     A second notice shall be sent to each water user which does not take the required corrective actions prescribed in the first notice within the sixty days period allowed. The second notice will give the water user a two week period to take the required corrective action. If no action is taken within the two week period the city may terminate water service to the affected water user until the required corrective actions are taken.

        C.     Customer Notification—Testing and Maintenance.

        1.     The city will notify each affected water user when it is time for the backflow prevention assembly installed on their service connection to be tested. This written notice shall give the water user thirty days to have the assembly tested and supply the water user with the necessary form to be completed and resubmitted to the city.

        2.     A second notice shall be sent to each water user which does not have his/her backflow prevention assembly tested as prescribed in the first notice within the thirty day period allowed. The second notice will give the water user a two week period to have his/her backflow prevention assembly tested. If no action is taken within the two week period the city may terminate water service to the affected water user until the subject assembly is tested. (Ord. 1521 § 6, 1997)

 

15.70.070 Water service termination.
        A.    General. When the city encounters water users that represent a clear and immediate hazard to the potable water supply that cannot be immediately abated, the city shall institute the procedure for discontinuing the city water service.

        B.     Basis For Termination. Conditions or water uses that create a basis for water service termination shall include, but are not limited to, the following items:

        1.     Refusal to install a required backflow prevention assembly;

        2.     Refusal to test a backflow prevention assembly;

        3.     Refusal to repair a faulty backflow prevention assembly;

        4.     Refusal to replace a faulty backflow prevention assembly;

        5.     Direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a sewer line;

        6.     Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a system or equipment containing contaminants;

        7.     Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and an auxiliary water system;

        8.     A situation which presents an immediate health hazard to the public water system.

        C.     Water Service Termination Procedures.

        1.     For conditions 1, 2, 3 or 4, the city will terminate service to a customer’s premises after two written notices have been sent specifying the corrective action needed and the time period in which it must be done. If no action is taken within the allowed time period, water service may be terminated.

        2.     For conditions 5, 6, 7 or 8, the city will take the following steps:

        a.     Make reasonable effort to advise water user of intent to terminate water service;

 

        b.     Terminate water supply and lock service valve. The water service will remain inactive until correction of violations has been approved by the city. (Ord. 1521 § 7, 1997)

Chapter 15.74 OIL DRILLING AND PRODUCTION REGULATIONS
15.74.010 Purpose.
        A.    It is the intent of this chapter to regulate the exploration and drilling for and the production of petroleum so that this activity may be conducted in harmony with other uses of land within this chapter, thus protecting people of the city in the enjoyment and use of their property and providing for their comfort, health, safety and general welfare.

        B.     It is further the intent of the city council that petroleum operations shall be permitted within the city subject to the application of this chapter, the requirements of which have been carefully designed for the fulfillment of the intent expressed in subsection A of this section.

        C.     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to landfill gas recovery operations. (Ord. 1385, 1990)

 

15.74.020 Definitions.
        A.    “Abandonment” means the permanent plugging of a well in accordance with the requirements of the Department of Conservation, Division of Oil and Gas of the state, the removal of all equipment related to the well, and includes the restoration of the drill sites as required by these regulations.

        B.     “A.N.S.I.” means the American National Standards Institute.

        C.     “A.P.I.” means the American Petroleum Institute.

        D.    “Approved” means approved by the director. “Approved type” or “approved design” means and includes improvements, equipment or facilities of a type or design approved by the director.

        E.     “A.S.M.E.” means the American Society of Mechanical Engineers.

        F.     “Blowout” means the uncontrolled discharge of gas, liquids or solids or a mixture thereof from a well into the atmosphere.

        G.    “Blowout preventer” means a mechanical, hydraulic or pneumatic or other device or a combination of such devices secured to the top of a well casing, including valves, fittings and control mechanisms connected therewith designed and capable of preventing a blowout.

        H.    “Cellar” means an excavation around or above the top joint of the casing in a well.

        I.      “Completion of drilling” means a well is completed, for the purpose of these regulations, thirty days after the drilling crew has been released, unless drilling or remedial operations are resumed before the end of the thirty days.

        J.      “Derrick” means any framework, tower or mast together with all parts of an appurtenance to such structure, including any foundations, pump house, pipe racks, and each and every part thereof, which is or are required, or used or useful for the drilling for and the production of oil, gas or other hydrocarbons from the earth except tanks used for storage purposes.

        K.    “Desertion” means the cessation of operations at a drill site without compliance with the provisions of this chapter relating to suspended operations or abandonment.

        L.     “Diligence,” as used in these regulations, means that the drilling derrick is in its operating position over the well, properly anchored and supported and that an operating crew is on duty at the drill site at all reasonable times.

        M.    “Director” means and includes the chief building official of the city, his assistants, deputies and inspectors.

        N.    “Division of Oil and Gas” means the Division of Oil and Gas of the Department of Natural Resources of the state or any other state agency that may in the future be charged with its responsibilities.

        O.    “Drilling” means digging a hole in earth formation with a power-driven drill bit for the purpose of exploring for or developing of oil or gas. “Drilling” includes those operations that are concerned with the completion of a well. “Drilling” does not include “shot hole”.

        P.     “Drill site” means the premises used during the drilling and subsequent life of a well or wells, which is necessary for the safe operations thereof.

        Q.    “Gas” means the gaseous components or vapors occurring in or derived from petroleum or natural gas.

        R.     “Lessee” means the possessor of the right to exploit the premises for minerals.

        S.     “Lessor” means the mineral right owner.

        T.     “Maintenance” means and includes the repair and replacement of parts of a structure where same does not alter or lessen the strength or stability of the structure.

        U.    “Natural gasoline plant or absorption plant” means a plant for the processing of natural gas from the production wells and processed into its various components.

        V.    “Oil” includes petroleum, and petroleum includes oil.

        W.    “Operator” means the person, whether proprietor, lessee or independent contractor, actually in charge and in control of the drilling, maintenance, operation or pumping of a well or lease.

        X.    “Outer boundary line.” Where several contiguous parcels of land in one or different ownerships are operated as a single oil or gas lease or operating unit, the term “outer boundary line” means the exterior limits of the land included in the lease or unit. In determining the contiguity of any such parcels of land, no street, road or alley lying within the lease or unit shall be deemed to interrupt such contiguity.

        Y.    “Owner” means a person who owns a legal or equitable title in and to the surfaces of the drill site.

        Z.     “Person” includes any individual, firm, association, corporation, joint venture or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

        AA.  “Redrilling” means the deepening of an existing oil well or otherwise drilling beyond the extremities of the existing well casing. The provisions of this chapter relating to drilling shall be equally applicable to redrilling.

        BB.  “Seismic petroleum prospecting.” Prospecting for oil by means of drilling holes into the ground, placing an explosive charge therein and detonating such charge, thereby exciting an energy or sound wave through the earth, the results of which are recorded and read by seismograph equipment placed at various locations on the surface of the earth.

        CC.  “Shot hole” means the hole drilled in seismic petroleum prospecting.

        DD.  “Source of ignition” means any flame, arc, spark or heated object or surface capable of igniting flammable liquids, gases or vapors.

        EE.   “Structure” means that which is built or constructed; a tank, edifice or building of any kind.

        FF.   “Suspended operations” means the approved, temporary suspension of drilling or redrilling operations pending a resumption of operations or abandonment. Such suspension of operations shall not exceed a period of two years from the approved date.

 

        GG.  “Tank” means a container, covered or uncovered, used in conjunction with the drilling or production of an oil well, for holding or storing liquids at or near atmospheric pressure.

        HH.  “Well or oil well” means a well or hole drilled into the earth for the purpose of exploring for or extracting from the earth oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances, or a well or hole in the earth by means of and through which oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances are extracted, produced or capable of being produced from the earth, or a well or hole for the purpose of secondary recovery or disposal thereof. “Well” does not include “shot hole.”

        II.     “Well servicing” means remedial or maintenance work performed within any existing well which does not involve drilling or redrilling. (Ord. 1385, 1990)

 

15.74.030 Permits.
        A.    A permit from the director shall be obtained:

        1.     For drilling or redrilling operation in connection with the exploration for or the production of petroleum; or for the purpose of secondary recovery;

        2.     To erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish any structure.

        B.     No permit shall be required for well servicing or maintenance of or for any structure for which a building permit is not required. (Ord. 1385, 1990)

 

15.74.040 Permit procedure.
        The applicant shall file an application in writing for a permit on a form furnished for that purpose by the city. The application shall be accompanied by:

        A.    A complete legal description of the property.

        B.     A fully informative plot plan showing the location of the well, the location of which has been staked on the ground. appurtenant structures and their relation to any existing hospital, sanitarium, church, rest home, airport, school and dwelling within the radius required by this chapter.

        C.     Plans and engineering specifications of structures, drilling derricks, drilling masts, tanks and high pressure systems regulated by this chapter. Applicant need not file plans and engineering specifications of standard derricks, masts and tanks when such plans and specifications are already on file in the office of the director.

        D.    A corporate surety bond in conformity with provisions of Section 15.74.050.

        E.     A verified statement signed by the applicant certifying that he is duly authorized by operator to make and file the application and that he has read the application and the same is true and correct.

        F.     An acknowledged statement in writing subscribed by the owner of the surface rights of the drill site and by the owner of any private land over which access is had to the drill site granting to the city the right to enter upon the drill site and such private land for the purpose of inspection and restoring the premises in the event the applicant should fail to do so.

        G.    A statement as to the means by which liquid spills will be removed from diked area or catchment basins.

        H.    The director shall require any other such pertinent information that indicates the extent of the work proposed and which shows in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this chapter, Chapter 18.50 and all other relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of this code.

        I.      A drilling permit may be amended insofar as it relates to the drill site area and a drill site may be modified as to size and shape by filing with the director a modified plot plan if the modified drill site conforms to the applicable provisions of this chapter and of Title 18, Chapter 18.77 of this code, but not otherwise. (Ord. 1719 § 1 (Exh. B), 2010; Ord. 1385, 1990)

 

15.74.050 Bonds.
        A.    Existing Wells. A bond in the form required by this section shall be filed for each ex-

isting well within thirty days following the effective date of this chapter.

        B.     New Wells. A bond in the form required by this section shall accompany every application for the drilling or redrilling of any oil well for which a bond is not on file.

        C.     Bond Forms. Bonds shall be on a form approved by the city attorney and shall be filed with the city.

        1.     Single Bonds. Corporate surety bonds in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars. The bond shall be executed by the operator as principal and by the authorized surety company as surety and conditioned that the principal named in the bond shall faithfully comply with all the provisions of this chapter in drilling or redrilling and maintaining all production facilities as required by this chapter until properly abandoned in conformity with the provisions thereof. The bond shall secure the city against all costs, charges and expenses incurred by it by reason of the failure of the principal to fully comply with the provisions of this chapter. The bond shall include the correct name or number of the well and such other information as may be necessary to readily identify the oil well.

        2.     Blanket Bonds. Any operator may, in lieu of filing a single bond for each well as required by subsections A and B of this section, file a bond in the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars to cover all of his said operations conducted within the city. A rider to said bond shall be filed with the director showing the correct name or number of the well and such other information as may be necessary to readily identify the oil well for each well covered by the bond.

        D.    Default in Performance of Conditions; Notice to be Given.

        1.     Whenever the director finds that a default has occurred in the performance of any requirement or condition of these regulations, written notice thereof shall be given to the principal and to the surety on the bond.

        2.     Such notice shall specify the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof and the period of time deemed by the director to be reasonably necessary for the completion of such work.

        3.     After receipt of such notice, the surety shall within the time therein specified either cause or require work to be performed or failing therein, shall pay over to the director the estimated cost of doing the work as set forth in the notice, plus an additional sum equal to twenty-five percent of said estimated cost. Upon receipt of such moneys, the director shall proceed by such mode as he deems convenient to cause the required work to be performed and completed, but no liability shall be incurred therein other than for the expenditure of said sum in hand. In the event that the well has not been properly abandoned under the regulations of the Division of Oil and Gas, such additional moneys may be demanded from the surety as is necessary to restore the drill site in conformity with the regulations of this chapter.

        E.     Exoneration. Any bond issued in compliance with these regulations shall be terminated and cancelled and the surety be relieved of all obligations thereunder when the well has been properly abandoned in conformity with all regulations of the Division of Oil and Gas and notice to that effect has been received by the city.

        F.     Substitution. A substitute bond may be filed in lieu of any bond on file hereunder and the director shall accept and file the same if it is qualified and in proper form and substance and the bond for which it is substituted shall be exonerated but only if the director finds that all of the conditions of last mentioned bonds have been satisfied and that no default exist as to the performance upon which the bond is conditioned. (Ord. 1385, 1990)

 

15.74.060 Permit fees.
        A.    Drilling or Redrilling Permit Fees.

        1.     A fee for each drilling permit or redrilling permit shall be paid to the director as established by resolution of the city.

 

        2.     Where drilling, redrilling, construction or other work for which a permit is required by this chapter is started or proceeded with prior to obtaining said permit, the fees hereunder specified shall be doubled, but the payment of such double fee shall not relieve any persons, firms, corporation or employees from fully complying with the requirements of this chapter or the execution of the work, nor from any other penalties prescribed herein.

        B.     Plan Checking Fees. A plan-checking fee shall not be charged for the derrick or its appurtenances. A plan-checking fee shall be charged for all permanent buildings, production tanks, washing tanks, skim ponds and such other structures not directly connected with the derrick itself. A plan-checking fee shall be charged for oil well cellars designed to accommodate more than one oil well. Said plan-checking fee shall be established by resolution of the city council.

        C.     Annual Inspection Fees. The directors shall inspect annually and at such-other times as they deem necessary, each producing oil well and suspended oil well regulated by this chapter for the purpose of ascertaining whether the well is being operated or maintained in conformity with the minimum standards of this chapter. To meet the expense of such inspection, the operator shall pay to the city an annual inspecting fee as established by resolution of the city council. The year for which each fee is applicable runs from July first to June thirtieth. The fees shall be based upon the total number of wells existing (whether producing or not on July first). The fees shall be due prior to July first of the year to which they pertain. No additional fee shall be charged for additional inspections which may be required during the year. The director shall keep a permanent, accurate account of all annual inspection fees collected and received under this chapter, the name of the operator for whose account the same were paid, the date and amount thereof, together with the well name and designation and the general location of the well. A report of the director’s annual inspection findings shall be furnished to the operator.

        D.    Building Permit Fees. A building permit fee, as established by resolution of the city council shall be charged for the erection or construction or relocation of any permanent building, tank or other structures hereinabove included and such fee shall be based on the total valuation of the structure when completed.

        E.     No permit issued hereunder shall be valid unless utilization of the privileges granted thereby be commenced within one hundred eighty days from and after the date of issuance of the and diligently and progressively prosecuted thereafter. (Ord. 1385, 1990)

 

15.74.070 Drilling and operating.
        A.    Location of Oil Wells.

        1.     No oil well shall be drilled within the following distances measured from the center line of any local street or any highway shown on the master plan of arterial highways, as amended:

        Major highways, 210 feet;

        Primary highways, 200 feet;

        Secondary highways, 190 feet;

        Local streets, 180 feet, except that in the case of a local street, the right-of-way of which is more than sixty feet in width, the distance shall be one hundred fifty feet plus one-half of the existing right-of-way which is more than sixty (60) feet in width, the director may determine that because of the degree of slope or other feature of the topography, a lesser distance than one-half of the right-of-way in addition to the one hundred feet is reasonable to insure the safety of the traveling public in conformity with the purpose and intent of this provision, in which case the distance thus set by the director shall prevail. No oil well shall be drilled within one hundred fifty feet of the nearest rail of a railway which carries passengers for hire.

        2.     No oil well shall be drilled within one hundred fifty feet of any building used for human occupancy, nor shall any such buildings be erected within one hundred fifty feet of any oil well not abandoned, except buildings incidental to the operation of the well. No oil well shall be drilled within one hundred fifty feet from the outer boundary line.

        3.     No oil well shall be drilled within one thousand feet of any building used as a place of public assemblage, institution or schools; nor shall any such building be erected within one thousand feet of any oil well not abandoned.

        4.     The director may suspend any provision of subsection A in whole or in part, or impose less restrictive requirements if such provisions or requirements are rendered unnecessary or unreasonable by the then-existing special features, such as: topography, nature of the use and occupancy of and the proximity to buildings on adjoining property, the height, character and structure of such buildings, the type and character of oil fields development and may impose additional safety requirements rendered necessary because of such special features.

        B.     Private Roads and Drill Sites. Prior to commencement of any drilling operations, all private roads used for access to the drill site and the drill itself shall be surfaced by clean, crushed rock, gravel or decomposed granite or oiled and maintained to prevent dust and mud. In particular cases, these requirements governing surfacing or private roads and drill sites may be altered at the discretion of the director after consideration of all of the circumstances including but not limited to distances from public streets and highways, distances from adjoining and nearby property owners whose surface rights are not leased by the operator and the purposes for which the property of such owners are or may be used, topographical features, nature of the soil and exposure to wind.

        C.     Derricks. All derricks and masts hereinafter erected for drilling or redrilling shall be at least equivalent to the current American Petroleum Institute standards.

        D.    Signs. A sign having a surface area of not less than two square feet and no more than six square feet bearing the current name and number of the well and the name and/or insignia of the operator shall be displayed at all times from the commencement of drilling operations _ until the well is abandoned. In the event there are more than two producing wells on one leasehold, it shall be sufficient if the entrances to said leasehold are posted with a sign not less than eighteen inches by twenty-four inches bearing the name of the operator together with the name or designation of the lease, together with an openly visible sign on each producing well designating the particular number thereof.

        E.     Blowout Prevention. Protection shall be provided to prevent the blowout of an oil well during drilling and redrilling operation and shall conform to the requirements of the California Administrative Code, Title 8, Petroleum Safety Orders — Drilling and Production, Article 55, Blow-out Prevention, Section 6691, 6691.1 and 6691.2.

        F.     Blowout Prevention for Wells Other Than Drilling Wells.

        1.     Protection shall be provided to prevent the blowout of an oil well, conforming to the requirements of the California Administrative Code, Title 8, Petroleum Safety Orders—Drilling and Protection, Article 55, Blow-out Prevention, Section 6692, in the following cases:

        a.     During perforating, shooting or cutting off of string of casing;

        b.     During well servicing operations on a well that is known to have sufficient gas pressure to cause the well to flow, or where the gas pressure is unknown.

        2.     The operator shall notify the director, in writing, at least one day before any of the operations described in this subsection are commenced. In the event that the day following the day on which notice be given falls on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, then such additional days’ notice must be given as may be required so that there shall be one day, Saturday, Sunday and holidays excepted, between the date notice be given and any of the said operations commenced.

        G.    Waiver of Blowout Prevention Requirements. The blowout preventive requirements of subsections E and F of this section may be waived by the director upon such conditions and for such operations as he may determine, upon written application by the operator and upon a showing by him of sufficient cause therefor based upon information regarding depth of hole, probable gas pressures to be encountered, the proposed drilling, completion or abandonment program or whatever further information the director may require.

        H.    Drilling and Production Waste Control.

        1.     Rotary mud, drill cuttings, oil field waste, oil or liquid hydrocarbons and all other field wastes derived or resulting from or connected with the drilling of any well shall be discharged into a sump hole or steel tank. Such drill cuttings, rotary mud and drilling waste materials shall be removed from the drill site upon completion of drilling operations. Tanks used as and for sump purposes shall be removed from the drill site and sump holes shall be drained and backfilled within thirty days from and after completion of drilling.

        2.     Furthermore, all waste water and all other waste materials resulting from production operations shall be disposed of into an appropriate waste facility such as, but not limited to, an existing sump, a waste water disposal system or a sewer, subject to the approval of the agency governing the facility involved.

        3.     Excepting temporary sumps for the disposal or storage of materials used for or produced by drilling operations. no new sumps or ponds shall be created without the written approval of the director of the city.

        I.      Fencing. The following regulations shall apply to fencing:

        1.     All sumps or sump holes and all oil well production equipment having external, moving parts hazardous to life or limb shall be attended twenty-four hours per day or be enclosed by a steel chain link type fence not less than six feet in height and in addition having not less than three strands of barbed wire sloping inward at approximately a forty-five degree angle and for eighteen inches from the top of the fence. There shall be no aperture below such fence greater than four inches. Fence gates shall be placed at nonhazardous locations and shall be locked at all times when unattended by a watchman or serviceman.

        2.     Upon completion of the drilling operation, the drill site shall be enclosed by a solid redwood fence or a solid masonry wall eight feet high on all sides, except those sides on which exists a natural or artificial barrier of equal or greater solidarity and height. Solid redwood board gates shall be installed and be equipped with keyed locks and shall be kept locked at all times when unattended. Any and all supporting members of the fence shall be on the interior of said fence. Landscaping of shrubs and trees shall be planted and maintained along the exterior of the fence or wall enclosing the drill site.

        J.      Cellars. The following regulations shall apply to cellars:

        1.     Every cellar shall be constructed in accordance with the current Uniform Building Code, as amended and adopted by the city council.

        2.     Such cellars shall be kept free from water, oil drilling fluids or other substances which might constitute a hazard, except during drilling and servicing operations.

        3.     The depth of such cellars shall be the vertical measurement between the lowest point of the floor area in the bottom of such cellar and the lowest point of ground or any surface adjacent to the top of the cellar wall.

        4.     All multiwell cellars exceeding three feet in depth and twenty-five feet in length shall have two separate means of exit or entrance. If the cellar exceeds fifty feet in length, one of the means of entrance or exit shall be a stairway. If the cellar exceeds two hundred feet in length, a third means of entrance or exit shall be provided.

        5.     Multiwell cellars shall have a steel grate covering with no unobstructed openings m excess of three inches. Materials, equipment or other appurtenances shall not be stored or placed on the grating so as to interfere with the escape of gases and vapors.    K. Removal of Equipment. All drilling equipment and the derrick shall be removed from the premises with sixty days following the completion, abandonment or desertion of any well. Once the well is a producing well, it shall be serviced with a portable derrick when required. Drilling operations shall be diligently prosecuted until the well is completed or abandoned.

        L.     Soundproofing. When drilling operations are to be conducted continuously, the derrick and all machinery shall be enclosed in soundproofing material. Soundproofing acoustical blankets for the drilling derrick and accessory structures shall be: fibrous glass insulation one and one-half inches thick, 0.50 pounds per cubic foot, density, 0.063 pounds pet square foot, weight, 0.00010 to 0.00015 fiber diameter (inches) with a phenolic binder having a temperature limit of four hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit sewed between layers of fire retardant, vinyl fiberglass cloth, fifteen to seventeen ounces per square yard sewed with Dacron thread D-92 with stitches not more than six to the inch. The lacing cord shall be flat vinyl coated tape composed of fibrous glass yarn braided, heat set and bonded. The tape shall have a ninety-pound tensile strength. Grommets shall be #4 brass. All doors and similar openings shall be kept closed, during drilling operations, except for ingress and egress.

        M.    Alternate Materials and Methods of Construction.

        1.     The provisions of this chapter are. not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this chapter, provided any such alternate has been approved.

        2.     The director may approve any such alternate provided he finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of this chapter, and that the material or method offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this chapter in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.

        3.     The director shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claims that may be made regarding its use. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the intent of this chapter or evidence that any material or any construction does not conform to the requirements of this chapter, or in order to substantiate claims for alternate materials or methods of construction, the director may require tests as proof of compliance to be made at the expense of the owner or his agent by an approved agency.

        4.     Test methods shall be as specified by this chapter, for the material in question. If there are no appropriate test methods specified in this chapter, the director shall determine the test procedure.

        5.     Copies of the results of all such tests shall be retained for a period of not less than two years after the acceptance of the materials or methods.

        N.    Sanitary Facilities. Sanitary facilities shall be provided at the drill site during all drilling or redrilling operations and shall be in accordance with the standards of the Orange County Health Department.

        O.    Hours of Operation. All work in preparation of the site for drilling and all well servicing shall be conducted only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., except in case of emergency.

        P.     Lights. All lights shall be directed or shielded so as to confine direct rays to the drill site.

        Q.    Underground Installations. All wellhead equipment shall be installed in cellars and no portions of such equipment shall be projected above the surface of the surrounding ground.

        R.     Off-street Parking. An off-street parking area containing not less than five parking spaces, each of which shall be at least ten feet by twenty feet. shall be provided for each well being drilled and shall be surfaced and maintained in accordance with the requirements of the director. (Ord. 1385, 1990)

 

15.74.080 Abandonment procedure.
        It shall be the responsibility of the director to determine that the drill site and all facilities pertinent thereto have been restored to their original condition as nearly as practicable in conformity with the regulations of this chapter including the following requirements:

        A.    Standard.

        1.     It shall be the responsibility of the operator to comply with the abandonment provision of this chapter and he shall furnish the director the approval of the Division of Oil and Gas, Department of Natural Resources, confirming compliance with all abandonment proceedings under the state laws.

        2.     It shall be the responsibility of the operator to comply with the abandonment provision of this chapter and he shall furnish the director with a) a copy of the approval of Division of Oil and Gas, Department of Natural Resources, confirming compliance with all abandonment proceedings under the State law, and b) a notice of intention to abandon under the provisions of this section and stating the date such work will be commenced. Abandonment may then be commenced on or subsequent to the date so stated.

        3.     Abandonment shall be approved by the director after restoration of the drill site and the subsurface thereof has been accomplished in conformity with the following requirements:

        a.     The derrick and all appurtenant equipment thereto shall be removed from the drill site;

        b.     All tanks, towers and other surface installations shall be removed from the drill site;

        c.     All concrete, pipe, wood and other foreign materials shall be removed from the drill site to a depth of six feet below grade. unless part of a multiwell cellar then being used in connection with any other well for which a permit has been issued;

        d.     The oil well casing shall be cut off at a point six feet below sea level. Nothing shall be placed in the hole above the point of cutoff until the cutoff has been inspected by the director and found to be in compliance with all applicable provisions of law;

        e.     The top twenty-five feet of the remaining casing shall be filled with a cement plug to prevent gas fumes from escaping;

        f.      A steel cap of not less than the same thickness as the well casing shall be tack welded to the casing in a minimum of four places;

        g.     All holes and depressions shall be filled and packed with native earth. All oil, waste oil, refuse or waste material shall be removed from the drill site.

        B.     Conversion to Water Well. A well may be converted to a domestic or agricultural water well upon the approval of the director after

        1.     A request in writing by the landowner has been made to the director,

        2.     An original or certified copy of the approved conversion permit from the Division of Oil and Gas has been furnished the director,

        3.     All the provisions of the abandonment in subsection A3 have been complied with except that those appurtenances necessary in the opinion of the director for the operation of a water well may be retained. (Ord. 1385, 1990)

 

15.74.090 Called inspections.
        Except as provided in subsection B of this section, no drilling, redrilling, work or construction shall be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the written approval of the director.

        A.    Site Preparation.

        1.     The well location shall be clearly marked by a stake or other suitable means and identified as the “well location.”

        2.     The drill site shall be prepared as required in these regulations and shall be of such size so as to provide for the safe erection of the mast or derrick and all appurtenant structures thereto as indicated on the approved plot plan.

        3.     Any private road used for ingress and egress of equipment to the drill site shall be prepared as required by these regulations.

        4.     The proposed well shall be located in conformity with these regulations as to the distance from streets, outer boundaries, public buildings and dwellings.

        B.     Commencement of Drilling. The director shall be called and notified when the drilling derrick or mast has been erected in conformity with these regulations and all necessary equipment pertinent to the drilling operations thereof has been installed and is on the site. Drilling may proceed prior to inspection of the derrick or mast, provided that its design has been previously approved by the director. It will be the obligation of the director to inspect such facilities as to their conformity with these regulations as soon as reasonably practicable.

        C.     Release of Drilling Crew. The director shall be notified immediately in writing when the drilling crew is released and it shall then be his duty to inspect.

        D.    Completion of Drilling. Upon completion of drilling operations, an inspection request shall be called for.

        E.     Abandonment. An inspection shall be made subsequent to the approval of the abandonment notice and the director shall certify that the well has been abandoned in conformity with all regulations to a depth of six feet below grade. (Ord. 1385, 1990)

 

15.74.100 Notices required.
        A.    Service of Notice. Every operator of any oil well shall designate an agent who is a resident of the state, upon whom all orders and notices provided in this chapter may be served in person, or by registered or certified mail. Every operator so designating such agent shall within ten days notify the director, in writing, of any change in such agent or such mailing address unless operations within the city are discontinued. Service by registered or certified mail, or in person on the agent so designated, shall constitute service for all purposes of this chapter.

        B.     Transfer of Operator. The operator shall notify the director, in writing of the sale, assignment, transfer, conveyance or exchange by said operator of wells, property and equipment within ten days after such sale, assignment, transfer, conveyance or exchange. The notice shall contain the following:

        1.     The name and address of the person to whom such well and property was sold, assigned, transferred, conveyed or exchanged;

        2.     The name and location of the well;

        3.     The date of sale, assignment, transfer, conveyance or exchange.

        4.     The date when possession was relinquished by the former operator;

        5.     A description of the properties and equipment transferred. Every person who acquires any well property or equipment, whether by purchase, transfer, assignment, conveyance, exchange or otherwise shall within ten days after acquiring such well, property or equipment notify the director, in writing, of his ownership. The notice shall contain the following:

        a.     The name and address of the person from whom such well and property was acquired,

        b.     The name and location of the well,

        c.     The date of acquisition,

        d.     A description of the properties and equipment transferred,

        e.     The person designated for service of notice and his address.

        C.     Suspension of Drilling and Redrilling Operations. The operator of any well shall notify the director, in writing, of any temporary suspension of operations, pending a resumption of operations or abandonment. The director, for good cause, may approve temporary suspension of operations. Such notice shall be filed with the director within thirty days from and after release of drilling crew. Failure of the director to act within ten days shall constitute approval thereof. The operator shall notify the director, in writing, upon resumption of operations giving the date thereof.

        D.    Change in Drilling Contractor. The operator, before changing drilling or redrilling contractors, shall file with the director a written notice of the change, giving the name of the original contractor and the name of the proposed contractor, and such information as was originally required to meet the design and structural requirements of this chapter. Such notice shall be attached to and become a part of the original oil drilling or redrilling permit. (Ord. 1385, 1990)

 

15.74.110 Storage facilities.
        A.    Storage Capacity. Maximum tank capacity for producing oil well: if oil or other liquid storage facilities are established incidental to a producing well on a drill site, such storage facilities shall not exceed a total of two thousand barrels per well. There shall be no storage of material, equipment, machinery or vehicles which are not of immediate use for servicing of an installation on the drill site.

        B.     Design and Construction of Tanks. All tanks shall be constructed in detailed conformity with the current A.P.I. standards applicable thereto. All surfaces of permanent installations within the drill site shall be painted in a color(s) compatible with the surrounding uses.

        C.     Foundations and Supports. Tanks shall rest directly on the ground or on foundations, supports or pilings of concrete, masonry, steel, crushed rock or wood. Exposed pilings or steel supports shall be protected by fire-resistive materials to provide a fire-resistance rating of not less than two hours. Stairs, platforms and walkways shall be of metal, concrete or wood.

        D.    Spacing Between Tanks.

        1.     No tank for the storage of any flammable liquid shall be located closer than three feet of any other such tank.

        2.     For tanks above fifty thousand gallons individual capacity for the storage of any flammable liquid, except-crude petroleum, the distance between such tanks shall not be less than one-half the diameter of the smaller tank.

        3.     Tanks for the storage of crude petroleum having capacities not exceeding one hundred twenty-six thousand gallons (three thousand barrels)shall not be less than three feet apart. Tanks exceeding one hundred twenty-six thousand gallons (three thousand barrels) shall be not less than the diameter of the smaller tank apart.

        4.     The minimum separation between a liquefied petroleum gas container and any other tanks for the storage of any flammable liquids shall be twenty feet. Suitable means shall be taken to prevent the accumulation of flammable liquids under adjacent liquefied petroleum gas containers such as by diking, diversion curbs or grading. When flammable liquid storage tanks are diked, the liquefied petroleum gas containers shall be outside the diked area and at least ten feet away from the center line of the dikes. The foregoing provision shall not apply when liquefied petroleum gas containers of one hundred twenty-five gallons or less capacity are installed adjacent to Class III flammable liquid storage tanks of two hundred seventy-five gallons or less capacity.

        E.     Location of Tanks. Minimum distance between any outside above-ground tanks to the nearest building or line of adjoining property which may be built upon:

        1.     Flammable liquids other than those having boilover characteristics similar to crude petroleum:

 

Capacity of Tanks (gals.)

Class of Flammable Liquid

Minimum Distance (ft.)

0 to 275

III

0

276 to 750

III

5

0 to 750

I and III

10

721 to 12,000

III

10

751 to 12,000

I and II

15

12,001 to 24,000

I, II and III

15

24,001 to 30,000

I, II and III

20

30,001 to 50,000

I, II and 111

25

 

        2.     Crude petroleum and other liquids having boilover characteristics similar to crude petroleum and flammable liquid tanks with capacity in excess of fifty thousand gallons:

        Tanks with capacities in excess of fifty thousand gallons and all tanks for the storage of crude petroleum shall be located in accordance with the following provisions (applicable to gas-tight tanks including conservation type tanks constructed in compliance with these or equivalent standards):

        a.     Group A Tanks. Any gas-tight tank* constructed in compliance with these or equivalent standards and equipped either with:

        i.      An approved permanently attached extinguishing system; or

        ii.     An approved floating roof, which is to be used only for the storage of refined petroleum products or other flammable liquids not subject to boilover, shall be so located that the distance from the line of adjoining property which may be built upon shall be not less than the greatest dimension of diameter or height of the tank, except that such distance need not exceed one hundred twenty feet.

        b.     Group B Tanks. Any gas-tight tank* constructed in compliance with these or equivalent standards but not equipped either with:

        i.      An approved permanently attached extinguishing system; or

        ii.     An approved floating roof, which is to be used only for the storage of refined petroleum products or other flammable liquids not subject to boilover, shall be so located that the distance from the line of adjoining property which may be built upon shall be not less than one and one-half times the greatest dimension of diameter or height of the tank, except that such distance need not exceed one hundred seventy-five feet.

        c.     Group C Tanks. Any gas-tight tank* constructed in compliance with these or equivalent standards and equipped either with:

        i.      An approved permanently attached extinguishing system; or

        ii.     An approved floating roof, which is to be used for the storage of crude petroleum, shall be so located that the distance from the line of adjoining property which may be built upon shall be not less than twice the greatest dimension of diameter or height of the tank except that such distance shall be not less than twenty feet and need not exceed one hundred seventy-five feet.

        d.     Group D Tanks. Any gas-tight tank* constructed in compliance with these or equivalent standards not equipped either with:

        i.      An approved permanently attached extinguishing system; or

        ii.     An approved floating roof, which is to be used for the storage of crude petroleum, shall be so located that the distance from the line of adjoining property which may be built upon shall be not less than three times the greatest dimension of diameter or height of the tank except that such distance shall not be less than twenty feet and need not exceed three hundred fifty feet.

        Note: The term “approved attached extinguishing system,” as used in the foregoing description, may be interpreted to apply to:

        i.      A fixed foam or other recognized extinguishing system embodying a supply of the extinguishing medium; or

        ii.     A system employing a pipeline for conveying foam from a point outside the dike to the tank; or

        iii.    Portable Overshot Devices for Applying Foam Over the Rim of the Tank. Where reliance is placed on a pipeline for conveying foam, the pipeline shall be so installed and attached as to be an integral part of the tank. Where reliance is placed on a portable overshot device, the practicability of its use shall be demonstrated before approval. Approved foam-generating equipment of sufficient capacity should be available on the property, by response of a municipal or other public fire department, or otherwise readily available, and there should be on hand or otherwise readily available a sufficient supply of foam-producing materials as specified in the National Fire Protection Association Standards for Foam Extinguishing Systems, No. 11.

        iv.    Buildings Essential to the Operation of the Storage Facilities (Building Location). No building used for human occupancy, except buildings essential to the operation of the storage facilities, shall be erected within the distances set out in the tables above, from such storage tanks.

        *The term gas-tight tank includes so-called conservation type tanks.

        F.     Dikes, Diversion Walls and Catchment Basins.

        1.     Required. Tanks used for the storage of crude petroleum and other flammable liquids having similar boilover characteristics shall be diked, or provided with approved diversion walls and catchment basins, or combinations thereof.

        2.     Location. No catchment basin or diked impounding area shall be located closer to the outer boundary line, or to any building designed for human occupancy than the diameter or height (whichever is greater) of the largest tank served by such basin or area, nor shall any building designed for human occupancy be erected or placed closer than such distance to any catchment basin or diked impounding area.

        3.     Capacity. The net capacity of a catchment basin, diked impounding basin or any combination thereof shall be equal to the capacity of the largest tank, plus ten percent of the aggregate capacity of all other tanks served. In computing the required capacity of a catchment basin, diked impounding basin or combination thereof:

        a.     The volume of the largest tank up to the height of the dike shall be considered as part of the available capacity of a diked impounding basin;

        b.     No part of the volume of tanks other than the largest tank shall be considered as part of the available capacity;

        c.     The capacity of a separate catchment basin may be used to reduce the required capacity of a diked impounding basin provided drainage sufficient to prevent overflow of the dike and effective control of flow are provided;

        d.     The capacity of a single separate catchment basin may be applied to reduce the required capacity of each of the diked impounding basins draining into it.

        4.     Construction. Dikes shall be of earth, concrete or solid masonry designed to be liquid-tight and shall be maintained. Where piping passes through dikes, provision shall be made for movement without damage to the dike and to minimize leaks under emergency conditions. Earthen dikes shall be built and maintained at a minimum height of two feet, having sloping sides consistent with the angle of repose of the material used and be not less than two feet wide at the top. The distance between the inside toe of any dike and the shell of the tank shall be not less than five feet for tanks not more than thirty feet in diameter and ten feet for tanks in excess of thirty feet in diameter.

        a.     Spill Dikes. Where tanks within a common diked impounding basin may cause mutual exposure from spills, spill dikes shall be provided between tanks of ten thousand barrels or greater individual capacity. Groups of tanks of less than ten thousand barrels individual capacity and not in excess of fifteen thousand barrels aggregate capacity may be enclosed within a single spill dike. The height of such spill dike shall not exceed fifty percent of the height of the main or perimeter dikes.

        b.     Drainage. Drainage shall be provided at a consistent slope of not less than one percent away from tanks and fittings to a sump, drain box or other safe means of disposal located within the diked impounding area and at the greatest possible distance from the shell of the tank. Traps with not less than six inches of liquid seal shall be provided between the sumps, drain boxes or sewer openings within any impounding area and the sewers or drains intended for the disposal of spills. A valve, operable from outside -the-dike; shall be provided in the dike drain system and shall normally be kept closed.

        c.     Disposal. Approved provisions shall be made for disposing of water and of oil retained by dikes, impounding or catchment basins.

        G.    Suspension of Requirements. In particular installations, some or all of the requirements of subsections D, E and F of this section governing storage facilities may be suspended, in whole or in part, or less restrictive requirements may be imposed pending further order of the director, where such requirements are rendered unnecessary or unreasonable by reason of the then-existing special features, such as topography, nature of occupancy and proximity to buildings on adjoining property, the height and character of construction of such buildings, capacity and construction of the proposed tanks and the character of liquids to be stored, the degree of private fire protection to be provided and the facilities of the fire department to cope with flammable liquid fires.

        H.    Skim Ponds. Any open, accessible, surface or subsurface installation used for the disposal of permitted waste liquids shall be fenced in accordance with the preceding fencing provision.

        I.      Loading by Truck From Production Tank Sites.

        1.     Location. Tank vehicle loading racks, loading platforms or movable loading spouts or arms dispensing flammable liquids shall be separated from tanks, warehouses, other buildings, public streets and nearest line of property that may be built upon by a clear distance of not less than twenty-five feet. measured from the nearest position of any fill stem. Buildings for pumps or for shelter of loading personnel may be part of the loading rack or platform. No person shall load or unload, or permit the loading or unloading of a tank vehicle unless such vehicle is located outside of any public street right-of-way.

        2.     Loading and Unloading Operations. During the loading or unloading of a tank vehicle, a qualified person shall be at the loading or unloading controls. Provision shall be made for the safe disposal of oils released by overflow and from loading spouts or lines.

        J.      Maintenance of Tanks. All tank tops which are accessible by means of a ladder, stairs or otherwise shall be maintained in a safe manner. Such tops unless constructed and maintained in compliance with the applicable A.P.I. standards shall be made of a substantial material with no openings in excess of four inches in any dimension except for gauging hatches and similar openings which can be secured.

 

Table 15.74.110 E2 Crude Petroleum and Tanks With Capacities in Excess of 50,000 Gallons

 

 

Storage Facilities

 

Product Stored

Tank Facilities

Distance From Line of Adjoining Property Which May Be Built Upon Shall Be Not Less Than

Refined petroleum products or other flammable liquids not subject to boilover

Group A tanks: (1) an approved permanently attached extinguishing system or (2) an approved floating roof

Greatest dimension of diameter or height of tank, except that such distance need not exceed 120 feet

 

Group B tanks: not equipped with either of the above

One and one-half times the greatest dimension of diameter or height of tank except that such distance need not exceed 175 feet

Crude petroleum

Group C tanks: (1) an approved permanently attached extinguishing system or (2) an approved floating roof

Two times the greatest dimension of diameter or height of tank except that such distance shall not be less than 20 feet and need not exceed 175 feet

 

Group D tanks: not equipped with either of the above

Three times the greatest dimension of diameter or height of tank except that such distance shall not be less than 20 feet and need not exceed 300 feet

 

(Ord. 1385, 1990)

 

15.74.120 High pressure pipe systems.
        All piping systems to be operated at a pressure in excess of twenty percent of the minimum yield strength of the material with which the pipe is fabricated shall be designed, constructed, operated and maintained in accordance with the provisions of A.N.S.I. Standards B 31. (Ord. 1385, 1990)

 

15.74.130 Fire prevention—Sources of ignition.
        A.    Electrical Equipment. All electrical equipment shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of the National Electrical Code as amended and adopted by the city.

        B.     Internal-Combustion Engines, Storage Tanks, Fire Equipment and Open Flames. No internal-combustion engine, storage tanks, boiler-fired equipment or open flames except welding supervised by the production foreman, drilling foreman, drilling engineer, drilling supervisors or safety supervisors shall be located closer than twenty-five feet to a producing well nor closer than one hundred feet to a drilling well. Internal-combustion engines (and their fuel tanks) used in the drilling, production and servicing of oil wells are exempt from the above provisions. During drilling operations on a drill site of two acres or less in area where two or more wells are drilled and drilling and production equipment are located on such sites, the provisions in this subsection relating to distances of storage tanks may be altered at the discretion of the director after consideration of the special features, such as topographical conditions; nature of occupancy and proximity to buildings on adjoining property and height and character of construction of such building capacity and construction of proposed tanks and character of liquids to be stored; degree of private fire protection to be provided; and facilities of the fire department to cope with flammable liquid fires.

        C.     Muffling Exhaust. The engines used in connection with the drilling of any oil well, or in any production equipment of any oil well shall be equipped with an exhaust muffler to prevent excessive or unusual noise. Means shall be provided on all engines used during drilling operations to prevent the escape of flames, sparks, ignited carbon and soot.

        D.    Flammable Waste Gases and Vapors. Flammable waste gases or vapors escaping from a production drill site shall be burned or controlled to prevent hazardous concentrations reaching sources of ignition or otherwise endangering the area.

        1.     Flares. Approved means of ignition shall be provided whenever hydrocarbon gases are released to the air through flares.

        2.     Venting. Gases or vapors not burned may be discharged to the atmosphere at not less than twenty feet vertically above grade and not less than twenty-five feet horizontally from any source of ignition and at locations that do not create a hazard to the general area.

        E.     Waste Control of Drill Site.

        1.     No person shall permit or cause to be permitted the discharge of any liquid containing crude petroleum or its products into or upon any street, public highway, drainage canal or ditch, storm drain or flood-control channel.

        2.     No person shall permit or cause to be permitted any oil, waste oil, refuse or waste material to be on the surface of the ground. under, around or near any oil well, pump, boiler, oil storage tank or building except within an oil sump, tank, catchment basin or skimming pond. No new sumps or ponds shall be created without the written approval of the director of the city.

        3.     All land within twenty-five feet of any oil well, flammable liquid tank or other appurtenance to any such well shall be at all times kept free and clear of dry weeds, grass, rubbish or other combustible debris. When this distance is not sufficient to provide reasonable fire safety, a greater distance may be required which shall not exceed the height of the derrick or greatest dimension of the tank.

        F.     Smoking. No person shall smoke nor cause, permit or allow another person to smoke within fifty feet of any well, tank location or any area contaminated by oil or waste gas.

        G.    Fire Control Equipment. A minimum of two fire extinguishers shall be maintained at all oil well locations where drilling, servicing or repair work is being conducted. Each such extinguisher shall have a minimum classification of 20B as set forth in National Fire Protection Association No. 10, “Standard for the Installation of Portable Fire Extinguishers.” (Ord. 1385, 1990)

 

15.74.140 Enforcement.
        It shall be the duty of the director to enforce the provisions of this chapter. If at any time the director finds any operator is violating any of the provisions of this chapter, he may order immediate compliance. If immediate compliance is not obtained, the director shall order immediate cessation of operations. The operator shall immediately comply with the order of the director to cease and shall not resume any operations until written approval of the director is had. (Ord. 1385, 1990)

 

15.74.150 Appeals.
        A.    The city council shall have and exercise the power to hear and determine appeals where it is alleged there is error or abuse of discretion in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the director in the administration or enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter.

        B.     An appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. An appeal from any order, requirement, decision or determination by the director must set forth specifically wherein it is claimed there was an error or abuse of discretion by his action or where the decision is not supported by the evidence in the matter.

        C.     Any appeal not filed within ten working days from and after the date of the order, requirement, decision or determination complained of shall be dismissed by the city council.

        D.    Within five days from and after the filing of the appeal, the city clerk shall set the matter for hearing and give notice by mailing of the time, place and purpose thereof to appellant and to the director and any other party at interest who has requested in writing to be so notified and no other notice need be given.

        E.     Upon the date for the hearing, the city council shall hear the appeal, unless for cause the city council shall on that date continue the matter. No notice of continuance need be given if the order therefor be announced at the time for which the hearing was set.

        F.     Upon the hearing of such appeal, the city council may affirm, change or modify the ruling, decision or determination appealed from or in lieu thereof may make such other or additional determination as it shall deem proper in the premises subject to the same limitations as are placed upon the director by this chapter and by other provisions of law. (Ord. 1385, 1990)

 

15.74.160 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted, and shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1385, 1990)

Chapter 15.78 WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN FOR CERTAIN CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION PROJECTS WITHIN THE CITY OF LA HABRA
15.78.010 Short title.
        The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and designated as the “construction and demolition waste management” ordinance. (Ord. 1630 § 1, 2003)

 

15.78.015 Purposes of chapter.
        The purpose of this chapter is to reduce landfill waste by requiring an applicant for every “covered project” to divert a minimum of fifty percent of the construction and demolition debris resulting from that project in compliance with state and local statutory goals and policies and to create a mechanism to secure compliance with the stated diversion requirements. (Ord. 1630 § 1, 2003)

 

15.78.020 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

        “Applicant” means any individual, firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity whatsoever who applies to the city for any permit, as defined in this chapter, and who is, therefore, responsible for meeting the requirements of this chapter.

        “Completion” means the earliest of the following dates: the date a temporary certificate of occupancy is issued by the city for a project, the date a certificate of occupancy is issued by the city for a project, or the date the final city inspection approving the project is completed.

        “Construction” means the building or enlargement of any structure, or any portion thereof, and includes without limitation alterations or improvements to an existing structure.

        “Construction and demolition debris” means the excess or discarded materials, which are removed from a site during or after the construction or demolition of any structure, fence, wall, or paving.

        “Conversion rate” means the rate set forth in the standardized conversion rate table for use in estimating the volume or weight of construction and demolition debris, approved by the California Integrated Waste Management Board.

        “Covered project” means any project meeting the thresholds referenced in the summary.

        “Deconstruct” and “deconstruction” mean the careful and systematic dismantling of a structure in order to salvage materials for diversion.

        “Demolition” means the razing, tearing down or wrecking of any structure, wall, fence or paving, whether in whole or in part, whether interior or exterior.

        “Director” means the director of public works.

        “Diversion requirement” means the diversion of a minimum of fifty percent of the total construction and demolition debris generated by a project, or the lower percentage requirement granted by exception pursuant to Section 15.78.075.

        “Divert” and “diversion” means the reuse of construction and demolition debris to avoid disposal in a landfill.

        “Paving” means driveways, walkways, parking areas, streets and sidewalks.

        “Performance security” means cash, certified or cashiers’ check, certificate of deposit, a letter of credit or other security in a form approved by the director of public works.

        “Permit” means any building or demolition permit.

        “Project” means any proposal for new or changed use, or for new construction, alteration or enlargement of any structure, that requires a permit from the city of La Habra.

        “Recycling” and “reuse” mean the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating, and reconstituting construction and demolition debris that would otherwise be disposed of in a landfill for use as raw material for, new, reused, or reconstituted products which meet industry standards.

        “Structure” means anything constructed or erected that requires a location in the ground, including a building or swimming pool, but not including a fence or wall used as a fence, or driveways, or walkways.

        “Waste management plan” means an application packet approved by the director of public works for the purpose of reviewing project compliance of this chapter.

        “Waste management plan compliance official” means the administrator of the refuse division of the department of public works. (Ord. 1630 § 1, 2003)

 

15.78.025 Application of chapter to covered projects.
        A.    Unless otherwise exempt under Section 15.78.035, projects by the city or by any applicant meeting the following thresholds shall be considered covered projects, shall meet the diversion requirement and shall comply with all provisions of this chapter:

        1.     Residential additions of one thousand square feet or more of gross floor area;

        2.     Tenant improvements of three thousand square feet or more of gross floor area;

        3.     New structures of one thousand square feet or more of gross floor area;

        4.     Demolition of one thousand square feet or more of gross floor area; and

        5.     All city public works and city public construction projects, which are awarded pursuant to the competitive bidding procedure, established by Section 4.20.040 of this code.

        B.     Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be listed as a condition of approval on all building or demolition permits issued for a covered project. (Ord. 1630 § 1, 2003)

 

15.78.030 Required diversion rates.
        The applicant for a covered project shall divert a minimum of fifty percent of the construction and demolition debris resulting from the project. (Ord. 1630 § 1, 2003)

 

15.78.035 Projects exempt from this chapter.
        The following projects are exempt from the requirements of this chapter:

        A.    Immediate or emergency demolition required to protect the public health, safety or welfare, as determined by any public safety official or code compliance officer of the city given prior to demolition.

        B.     Projects in any single-family residential district, which consist solely of either an accessory structure or a swimming pool.

        C.     A project for which an exception, conditional use permit or design review approval has been obtained from the city prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

        D.    A project for which a valid building permit has been lawfully issued by the city prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

        E.     A project of city public works or city public construction for which the notice inviting bids has been published pursuant to Section 4.20.040 of this code prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 1630 § 1, 2003)

 

15.78.040 Waste management plan requirements.
        All applicants for covered projects shall complete and submit a waste management plan as part of the application packet for a permit issued for a covered project. The waste management plan shall include the following information, calculated with the conversion rate, and shall be attested by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, as true and correct for all stated facts and as a best estimate based on all information reasonably available about the project, where all of the facts cannot be ascertained:

        A.    The estimated volume or weight of construction and demolition debris, listed for each material;

        B.     The estimated volume or weight of construction and demolition debris that can be diverted listed for each material;

        C.     The estimated volume or weight of construction and demolition debris that will be landfilled as solid waste;

        D.    The identification of the vendor or facility that will collect or receive the construction or demolition debris or that will deconstruct the structure; and

        E.     The estimated date on which demolition or construction is to commence. (Ord. 1630 § 1, 2003)

 

15.78.045 Review of waste management plan.
        A.    Time for Review. A waste management plan shall be approved or denied no later than fifteen business days after a complete application is made. The approval may be based on imposed conditions reasonably necessary to meet the standards of this chapter.

        B.     Approval. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no permit shall be issued for any covered project unless and until the waste management plan has been approved, based upon the following findings by the waste management plan compliance official.

        1.     All of the information required by Section 15.78.040 has been provided;

        2.     The plan establishes a mechanism such that the diversion requirement shall be met; and

        3.     Denial. If the waste management plan compliance official denies the waste management plan, the grounds for denial shall be clearly stated, in writing. (Ord. 1630 § 1, 2003)

 

15.78.050 Waste management compliance reporting.
        A.    Final Report. No later than thirty days from the completion of a covered project, the applicant shall submit a compliance reporting form, under penalty of perjury, to the waste management compliance official. The form shall include the following information:

        1.     The dates demolition and construction actually commenced;

        2.     The actual volume or weight of construction and demolition debris, listed for each material;

        3.     The actual volume or weight of construction and demolition debris that was diverted listed for each material;

        4.     A specification of the method used to determine the volume and weights and a certification that the method used was the most accurate, commercially reasonable method available; and

        5.     Original receipts from all vendors and facilities, which collected or received construction and demolition debris, indicating actual weights and volumes received by each. (Ord. 1630 § 1, 2003)

 

15.78.055 Exception from compliance with this chapter.
        Prior to commencing demolition or construction, an applicant wishing relief from the requirements of this chapter may seek an exception, partial or complete, from the requirements of this chapter through the following process:

        A.    Initiation. This exception process shall be initiated by the filing of a complete exception application with the waste management plan compliance official. The waste management plan compliance official. The waste management plan compliance official shall determine the completeness of the exception application within five business days of the filing of the application.

        B.     Definition on Application. Following consideration of the exception application, the waste management plan compliance official shall either make the required findings and take action on the application; shall state why the findings cannot be made and deny the application. A decision on the application shall be rendered within ten business days following determination the application is complete.

        C.     Findings. All of the following findings must be made prior to the approval of an exception:

        1.     There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the project that does not apply generally to similar projects;

        2.     Granting the application will not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with limitations imposed on like projects; and

        3.     Cost to the applicant of strict compliance with this chapter is not the primary reason for granting the exception. (Ord. 1630 § 1, 2003)

 

15.78.060 Appeal.
        Any person or entity aggrieved by any decision or finding under the provisions of this chapter with respect to approving or to denying a waste management plan or to granting or denying an application for an exception from compliance with this chapter, may appeal such decision or finding. An appeal must be filed within three days after receipt of notice of any protested decision or finding by filing with the director of public works a letter of appeal briefly stating therein the basis for such appeal. A hearing shall be held on a date no more than ten days after receipt of the letter of appeal. Appellant shall be given at least five days notice of the time and place of the hearing. A hearing officer, appointed by the city manager, shall give the appellant, and any other interested party, a reasonable opportunity to be heard, in order to show cause why the decision or finding should not be upheld. In all such cases, the burden of proof shall be upon the appellant to show that there was no substantial evidence to support the decision or fining appealed. At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a final and conclusive determination. (Ord. 1630 § 1, 2003)

 

15.78.065 Violation of this chapter.
        It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter to do any of the following:

        A.    To willfully fail to comply with any provision of this chapter.

        B.     To provide false or misleading information in any plan, report or document required in this chapter.

        C.     To fail to meet the diversion requirement for any covered project. (Ord. 1630 § 1, 2003)

 

15.78.070 Prosecution of violations.
        A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be prosecuted as a misdemeanor or infraction at the option of the city prosecutor and as further set forth in Section 15.78.075 with respect to penalties and administrative proceedings. (Ord. 1630 § 1, 2003)

 

15.78.075 Penalties and administrative proceedings.
        A.    Misdemeanors. Any person who violates any provision of Section 15.78.065(A) or (B) is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by fine or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment.

        B.     Infractions. Any person who violates 15.78.065(C) or any other provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction and shall be punished by a fine. Each person convicted may be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day during any portion of which any violation is committed or permitted. For violations of Section 15.78.065(C), the violation shall be considered to commence on the date when demolition or construction first commenced. This date is presumed to begin on the commencement date provided by the applicant in the waste management plan.

        C.     In addition to the penalty provision of subsections (A) and (B) of this section, violations of this chapter may be subject to fines, including, but not limited to, civil penalties, administrative fees, and other related charges as established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1630 § 1, 2003)

 

15.78.080 Remedies not exclusive.
        To the maximum extent permitted by law, administrative remedies specified in this chapter are in addition to and do not supercede or limit any and all other remedies, civil or criminal. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. (Ord. 1630 § 1, 2003)

 

15.78.085 Severability.
        If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter, or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this chapter or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter irrespective of the fact that one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional or invalid or effective. To this end the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. (Ord. 1630 § 1, 2003)

Title 16 RESERVED

Title 17 SUBDIVISIONS
Chapter 17.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS AND REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 17.08 TENTATIVE MAPS
Chapter 17.12 PARCEL MAPS
Chapter 17.16 FINAL MAPS
Chapter 17.20 LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT
Chapter 17.24 REVERSIONS TO ACREAGE
Chapter 17.28 SURVEY DATA
Chapter 17.32 LOTS AND BLOCKS
Chapter 17.36 IMPROVEMENTS AND UTILITIES—GENERALLY
Chapter 17.40 STREETS AND ALLEYS
Chapter 17.44 UNDERGROUND UTILITIES

Chapter 17.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS AND REQUIREMENTS
17.04.010 Applicability—State law.
        Pursuant to Division 2 of Title 7, “Planning and Land Use,” of the Government Code of the state, referred to in this title as the Subdivision Map Act, as it exists as of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title or as it may thereafter be amended, the provisions of this title are supplemental to those of the Subdivision Map Act and shall apply to all divisions of land made after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title when such land is entirely, or partially, within the city. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.04.020 Definitions.
        Unless otherwise defined in this title, all words and phrases used in this title shall have the same meaning ascribed to them in the Subdivision Map Act or other state laws. The following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them:

        A.    “Subdivider” means a person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who proposes to divide, divides or causes to be divided real property into a subdivision for himself, herself, itself or others.

        B.     “Subdivision” means the division of any improved or unimproved land shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future. Property shall be considered as “contiguous units,” even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easements or railroad rights-of-way. “Subdivision” includes a condominium project, as defined in Section 1350 of the Civil Code, or a community apartment project, as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code. Any conveyance of land to a governmental agency, public entity or public utility shall not be considered a division of land for the purpose of computing the number of parcels. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.04.030 Planning commission duties.
        The planning commission is designated as the advisory agency referred to in the Subdivision Map Act and is charged with the duty of making investigations and reports on the designated improvement of proposed subdivisions and is directed to approve, conditionally approve or deny tentative maps prepared and filed according to the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act, and to require the kinds and nature and extent of the improvements to be installed in subdivisions. (Ord. 1208, 1983)

 

17.04.040 Compliance required—Lots of record.
        No person, firm, corporation, partnership or association shall offer to sell or lease, to contract to sell or lease, to sell or lease, or to finance any parcel or parcels of real property, or to commence construction of any building or structure for sale, lease or financing thereon, or to allow occupancy thereof, and no building permit, certificate of use and/or occupancy or other official evidence of authority for the use of the premises shall be valid, unless the lot, parcel or parcels in question are shown in the office of the county recorder as a part of one of the following:

        A.    A subdivision tract map, filed and approved in compliance with the Subdivision Map Act;

        B.     A lot or parcel created by the division, combination or reversion of a lot or lots in compliance with the Subdivision Map Act and/or local ordinances and which is shown on a parcel map or record of survey map; or

        C.     The lot or parcel is a legal lot as defined in Title 18 of this code. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.04.050 Conditional exceptions.
        Conditional exceptions to the regulations defined in this title may be authorized by the city council if exceptional or special circumstances apply to the property. Such special circumstances may include limited size, unusual shape, extreme topography, dominating drainage problems or restrictions resulting from prior existing recorded subdivisions of contiguous property. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.04.060 Building permit issuance.
        No building permit or other official evidence of authority for use of property or premises shall be issued for any lot or parcel of land which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and the provisions of this title. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.04.070 Environmental impact review.
        No parcel or tentative map filed pursuant to the provisions of this title shall be approved until an environmental impact analysis is prepared, processed and considered in accordance with the provisions of this title. The subdivider shall provide such additional data and information and deposit and pay such fees as may be required for the preparation and processing of environmental review documents. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.04.080 Grading and erosion control.
        Every map approved pursuant to this title shall be conditioned on compliance with the requirements for grading and erosion control, including the prevention of sedimentation or damage to off-site property, set forth in Chapter 15.44 of this code. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.04.090 Notice of hearings.
        Whenever a public hearing is held pursuant to this title, notice of the time and place of the hearing, and a general description of the location of the subdivision, shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation and be posted in three public places designated by the city council for posting of ordinances. (Ord. 939, 1976)

Chapter 17.08 TENTATIVE MAPS
17.08.010 Prefiling conference.
        After noting requirements it is desirable that the subdivider confer with the city planning department and city engineer before preparing the tentative map for submission. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.08.020 Contents.
        Minimum requirements for tentative maps, unless modified, include:

        A.    Tract number, if a subdivision as defined in the Subdivision Map Act;

        B.     Date, north point and scale;

        C.     Sufficient legal description of land to define boundaries of proposed division of land;

        D.    A key map indicating the location of the proposed division of land in relation to the surrounding area;

        E.     The name and address of the record owner, the subdivider and the civil engineer or licensed surveyor under whose direction the map was prepared, including the registration number of the engineer or surveyor;

        F.     The existing topography of the land proposed to be divided, using contour intervals of not more than five feet and of not more than two feet where the grade of the land is less than five percent. Contours of adjacent land shall also be shown whenever the surface features of such land affect the design and/or improvement of the proposed division. The tentative map shall contain a statement by the person preparing the map stating the source of contours shown on the map;

        G.    The approximate location and outline to scale of each building or structure on the property proposed for division. Buildings or structures on adjacent property shall also be shown if such buildings or structures affect the design of the proposed subdivision. Each building shown shall be identified by house number or other identifying feature, including a notation on each building or structure to be retained;

        H.    The approximate location of all areas subject to inundation or stormwater overflow and the location, width and direction of flow of each watercourse;

        I.      The approximate location of each area covered by trees with a statement of the nature of the cover and the kind and approximate location of all trees standing within the boundaries of proposed public rights-of-way;

        J.      The location, width, approximate grade and curb radii of all existing and proposed streets and highways within and adjacent to the proposed subdivision;

        K.    The width, purpose and approximate location of all existing and proposed easements or rights-of-way, whether public or private, within and adjacent to the proposed subdivision;

        L.     The approximate radius and arc length of each centerline curve;

        M.    The approximate lot layout and the approximate dimensions of each lot and of each building site. Engineering data shall show the approximate finished grading of each lot, the preliminary design of all grading, the elevation of proposed building pads, the top and toe of cut-and-fill slopes to scale, and the number of each; the proposed areas for public use; and the angle of intersecting streets or highways if such angle deviates from a right angle by more than four degrees;

        N.    The location of all cut-and-fill slopes or a separate grading plan;

        O.    Each street shown by its actual street name or by a temporary name or letter for purpose of identification until the proper name of such street is determined;

        P.     The name or names of any geologist or soils engineer whose services were required in the preparation of the design of the tentative map;

        Q.    A geologic soils report, as provided in Section 17.08.030. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.08.030 Geologic soils report.
        A.    Tentative maps shall include a geologic soils report prepared by a civil engineer who is registered by the state, based upon adequate test borings or excavations, unless the building department determines that, due to the knowledge such department has as to the soil qualities of the soil of such subdivision or lot, no preliminary analysis is necessary. If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soil problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, the person filing the tentative map shall submit a soils investigation of each lot in the subdivision, prepared by a civil engineer who is registered in this state, which shall recommend corrective action which is likely to prevent structural damage to each dwelling proposed to be constructed on the expansive soil. The building department shall approve the soils investigation if it determines that the recommended action is likely to prevent structural damage to each dwelling to be constructed and shall require that the approved recommended action be incorporated in the construction of each dwelling as a condition to the building permit. Appeal from such determination shall be to the board of building and fire code appeals.

        B.     If the director of planning finds that a written geological report is necessary to determine whether the property to be divided is subject to an existing or potential geological hazard, the person filing the tentative map shall submit such a report to the board of building and fire code appeals. The report shall be prepared by a registered engineering geologist. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.08.040 Dedications by deed.
        At its option, the planning commission may require all proposed dedications or offers of dedication to be made by deed. (Ord. 1208, 1983; Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.08.050 Waiver of requirements.
        The planning commission may waive any of the requirements of Sections 17.08.010, 17.08.020, 17.08.030 and 17.08.040 whenever it finds that the type of subdivision is such that compliance is unnecessary or that other circumstances justify the waiver. The planning commission may require such drawings, data or other information as are deemed necessary. (Ord. 1208, 1983; Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.08.060 Copies filed.
        Each proposed subdivision shall be submitted in map form and shall be in the number of copies and shall include the information as called for by the instructions issued by the city engineer. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.08.070 Tract number.
        The tentative map shall have a tract number assigned by the county. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.08.080 Time of filing.
        The tentative map shall be filed with the planning commission prior to final surveys and before grading and construction work within the proposed subdivision which might be affected by changes on this map. The planning commission will act only upon such tentative maps as have been filed with the commission on or before the meeting preceding the one at which action is recommended. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.08.090 Processing fee.
        Every person submitting a tentative map shall pay a processing fee in an amount prescribed by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.08.100 Report of city engineer.
        Prior to the consideration of a tentative map by the planning commission, the city engineer shall make a report to the commission as to any recommendations in connection with the map. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.08.110 Public hearing.
        The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the tentative maps, and notice thereof shall be given as provided in Section 66451.3 of the Subdivision Map Act. Any interested person may appear at such a hearing and shall be heard. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.08.120 Planning commission action.
        The planning commission shall consider a tentative map at the first regular meeting at which the tentative map is presented to it. Action on such tentative map in approving, conditionally approving or disapproving shall, unless an extension is requested in writing by the subdivider, be taken no later than thirty-five days following the meeting at which the tentative map is reported filed. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.08.130 Expiration—Extension.
        A.    Expiration. The approval or conditional approval of a tentative map shall expire twenty-four months from the date the map was approved or conditionally approved.

        B.     Extension. The person filing the tentative map may request an extension of the tentative map approval or conditional approval by written application to the planning commission, such application to be filed prior to the date the original approval or conditional approval is due to expire. The applicant shall state the reasons for requesting the extension. In granting an extension, new conditions may be imposed and existing conditions may be revised.

        C.     Time Limit on Extensions. An extension or extensions of tentative map approval or conditional approval shall not exceed an aggregate of three years.

        D.    Effect of Modification of Map. Modification of a tentative map after approval or conditional approval shall not extend the time limits imposed by this section. (Ord. 1208, 1983)

 

17.08.140 Failure to file parcel map.
        Failure to file a parcel map with the county recorder within ninety days from the approval or conditional approval of such map shall terminate all proceedings. Any subdivision of the same land shall require the filing of a new map. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.08.150 Appeals.
        The subdivider may appeal from any action of the planning commission with respect to a tentative map to the city 

Chapter 17.12 PARCEL MAPS
17.12.010 Required.
        A parcel map shall be filed and recorded in the office of the county recorder for any subdivision for which a tentative and final map is not required by the Subdivision Map Act except for subdivisions created by short-term leases (terminable by either party on not more than thirty days’ notice in writing) of a portion of an operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation defined as such by Section 230 of the Public Utilities Code; provided, however, that upon a showing made to the planning commission based upon substantial evidence that public policy necessitates such a map, this exception shall not apply. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.12.020 Tentative map.
        When a parcel map is required by this title, a tentative parcel map shall first be filed with the planning commission. The tentative map shall meet all requirements for tentative maps provided by the Subdivision Map Act and this title. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.12.030 Contents.
        The final parcel map shall contain all of the same information and data as required in a final tract map, and shall be prepared following the format as prescribed in the Subdivision Map Act. Appropriate certificates for signature by the city engineer, the county surveyor and the engineer or surveyor who prepared the map shall be provided, in a form as required by the city engineer and the Subdivision Map Act. The location and description of existing monuments or established lines, the setting of new points and monuments before or after map recordation, and the required survey data to be shown and provided, shall all be done in a similar manner to that required by a final tract map, and as required by the city engineer. Certificates for signatures by the city engineer and others required by law and this code shall be shown on the final parcel map, except that a certificate signed and acknowledged by all the parties having record title interest in the property to be divided by the parcel map is not required. The fact that a soils report was made as required in this title shall also be noted in the final map. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.12.040 Dedications and offers.
        Parcel maps shall meet all the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and of this title and shall show all dedications or offer of dedications thereon. The planning commission may require that such dedications or offer of dedications be made by deed in lieu of or in addition to appearing on the map. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.12.050 Improvements required.
        The same improvements are required for a parcel map as in the case of a final map. The construction of any of these improvements shall be required and accomplished in the manner prescribed in this title for a subdivision for which a final map is filed. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.12.060 Approval.
        The planning commission shall approve the parcel map, provided that curbs, gutters, sidewalks and paving are installed along all public street frontage of the property so divided and that sanitary sewer facilities and domestic water service are made to each lot created, that all lot sizes conform to provisions of the zoning regulations of the city and that such division will not adversely affect the subdivision of adjoining lands or adversely affect the master plan. (Ord. 939, 1976)

Chapter 17.16 FINAL MAPS
17.16.010 Preparation.
        After approval of the tentative map by the planning commission, the subdivider may cause a final map to be prepared in accordance with a completed survey of the subdivision and in substantial compliance with the approved tentative map and in full compliance with the Subdivision Map Act and the supplemental requirements of the city. (Ord. 1208, 1983)

 

17.16.020 Filing deadline.
        After receipt of the report of the planning commission approving or conditionally approving the tentative map, the subdivider may, within twenty-four months from the date of such approval, file a final map as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1208, 1983)

 

17.16.030 Filing extensions.
        A.    Upon written application filed with the city planning department within the twenty-four-month period following approval or conditional approval of a tentative subdivision tract map by the planning commission, and prior to its expiration, extensions beyond the twenty-four-month period may be approved by the planning commission. The sum of all extensions granted by the planning commission shall not exceed a total of thirty-six months. The secretary of the planning commission shall notify the applicant or subdivider of the respective actions of the planning commission.

        B.     If the planning commission denies the applicant’s or subdivider’s application for extension, the applicant or subdivider may appeal to the city council within ten days after the planning commission has denied the extension.

        C.     At the time the tentative tract map is extended or recommended for extension, the planning commission may require any new conditions it deems appropriate as a condition of the extension. (Ord. 1208, 1983)

 

17.16.040 Failure to file.
        If no final map for all or any of the land shown on the approved tentative map is recorded within the initial twenty-four-month approval period or within any subsequent extensions as provided in Section 17.16.030, then all proceedings shall terminate and no final tract map shall be filed or recorded without first processing a new tentative tract map. (Ord. 1208, 1983)

 

17.16.050 Filing—City council approval.
        Copies of the final map for checking shall be submitted in accordance with requirements of the city engineer. When the map is found to be correct, the necessary bond filed to guarantee installation of required improvements and the subdivider’s agreement filed, the final map will be presented to the city council for approval of the map and acceptance of the offer of dedication. Upon approval of the map by the city council, it will be certified by the city engineer and the city clerk and returned to the subdivider for recording. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.16.060 Filing fee.
        A filing fee to cover costs of checking shall be paid for each final map or maps of a subdivision in an amount prescribed by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.16.070 Soil investigation and report.
        A.    Prior to the submission of the final subdivision map, the subdivider shall file with the director of planning a preliminary soil report, prepared by a civil engineer who is registered by the state, based upon adequate test borings or excavations of every subdivision, as defined in Article 7, Chapter 4, Division 2, Title 7 of the government Code of the state. The preliminary soil report may be waived if the director of planning determines that, due to the knowledge of such department as to the soil qualities of the subdivision, no preliminary analysis is necessary.

        B.     If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soil problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, a soil investigation of each lot in the subdivision shall be prepared by a civil engineer who is registered by the state. The soil investigation shall recommend corrective action which is likely to prevent structural damage to each dwelling proposed to be constructed on the expansive soil. The report shall be filed with the director of building and safety.

        C.     The director of planning shall approve the soil investigation if the director determines that the recommended corrective action is likely to prevent structural damage to each dwelling to be constructed on each lot in the subdivision. Appeal from such determination shall be to the city council. The building permit shall be conditioned upon the incorporation of the approved recommended corrective action in the construction of each dwelling. (Ord. 1208, 1983; Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.16.080 Dedication for public use.
        A.    All streets, highways and parcels of land shown on the final map and intended for any public use shall be approved for dedication for public use.

        B.     Streets or portions of streets may be offered for future dedication where the immediate opening and improvement is not required, but where it is necessary to ensure that the city can later accept dedication when such streets are needed for further development of the area. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.16.090 Street improvements.
        The subdivider shall improve or agree to improve all land dedicated for streets, highways, public ways and easements as a condition precedent to acceptance and approval of the final map. Such improvements shall include such grading, surfacing, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, bridges, storm drains, sanitary sewers, street lighting, street signs, parkway tree planting and such other structures or improvements as may be required or deemed by the planning commission to be necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs. (Ord. 1208, 1983)

 

17.16.100 Improvements required.
        A.    The minimum improvements which the subdivider will be required to make, or enter into an agreement to make, in the subdivision prior to the acceptance and approval of the final map by the city council, shall be as follows:

        1.     Adequate domestic water lines with service to each lot and required fire hydrants;

        2.     Sewage collecting system with service to each lot;

        3.     Adequate drainage of the subdivision streets and areas;

        4.     Adequate grading and surfacing of streets, highways, ways and alleys;

        5.     Curbs, gutters, cross gutters and sidewalks;

        6.     Street name signs per city standards;

        7.     Necessary barricades and safety devices;

        8.     Street trees as designated or approved by the city;

        9.     Ornamental street lights;

        10.   Monuments;

        11.   Underground utilities, including gas, telephone, electrical, water and sewer services.

        B.     All such improvements shall conform to the standards and specifications established by the city council. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.16.110 Improvement standards.
        That certain document marked “Miscellaneous Standard Details,” as published by the city and approved by the city engineer as it exists as of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title and may change from time to time, is adopted and made a part of this title as if fully set forth in this title. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.16.120 Improvement plans.
        Plans, profiles and specifications of proposed improvements shall be furnished to the city engineer prior to the time of construction for the city engineer’s approval. Such plans and profiles shall show full details of the proposed improvements, which shall be according to the standards of the city. No construction or improvements shall be started until approval has been given by the city engineer. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.16.130 Improvement security—Required.
        Any improvement agreement, contract or act required or authorized by the Subdivision Map Act, for which security is required, shall be secured in the manner provided for in Section 66499 of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.16.140 Improvement security—Amount.
        A.    The improvement security shall be in the amount set forth or authorized in Section 66499.3 of the Subdivision Map Act. If the improvement security is other than a bond or bonds furnished by duly authorized corporate surety, an additional amount shall be included as determined by the planning commission as necessary to cover the cost and reasonable expenses and fees, including reasonable attorneys’ fees, which may be incurred by the city in successfully enforcing the obligation secured.

        B.     The improvement security shall also secure the faithful performance of any changes or alterations in the work to the extent that such changes or alterations do not exceed ten percent of the original estimated cost of the improvement. (Ord. 1208, 1983; Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.16.150 Improvement security—Release.
        The improvement security required under this chapter shall be released in the following manner:

        A.    Security given for faithful performance of any act or agreement shall be released upon the final completion and acceptance of the act or work subject to the provisions of subsection B of this section.

        B.     The city council may release a portion of the security in conjunction with the acceptance of the performance of the act or work as it progresses upon application therefor by the subdivider; provided, however, that no such release shall be for an amount less than fifty percent of the total improvement security given for faithful performance of the act or work and the security shall not be reduced to an amount less than fifteen percent of the total improvement security given for faithful performance until final completion and acceptance of the act or work. In no event shall the city council authorize a release of the improvement security which would reduce such security to an amount below that required to guarantee the completion of the act or work and any other obligation imposed by this title, the Subdivision Map Act or the improvement agreement.

        C.     No security given for the guaranty or warranty of work shall be released until the expiration of the period thereof. (Ord. 939, 1976)

Chapter 17.20 LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT
17.20.010 Defined.
        For the purpose of this title, a “lot line adjustment” is any division of land not requiring a subdivision tract map, as specified by the Subdivision Map Act, in which no more parcels are created by the division than existed prior to it, and which does not substantially change the size or shape of the parcel or parcels involved. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.20.020 Map required.
        When an owner or owners desire to adjust a lot line so as not to create a new lot as described in Section 66426 of the Government Code of the state, it shall be done by filing a lot line adjustment map with the city engineer and the county recorder after presentation to and approval by the planning commission. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.20.030 Approval.
        When a lot line map is filed with the planning commission requesting a lot line adjustment, the planning commission may approve such map after investigation and receipt of reports from other departments, if they find that the proposed lot line adjustment conforms to all of the following requirements:

        A.    Does not create an additional lot;

        B.     Does not reduce the area or width of any lot in any zone below the minimum area or width required in such zone;

        C.     Does not cut off any lot from any frontage on a public street or alley access to a public utility easement, or create a need for utility easements;

        D.    Does not cut off any lot from any utility service available immediately prior to the lot line adjustment;

        E.     Does not cause an existing building to be in violation of the zoning regulations of Title 18 of this code, the building code or state housing law by reason of its proximity to or encroachment on a proposed new lot line;

        F.     Does not create a new key lot in any zone;

        G.    That no new public street or easement or extension of any existing public street or easement will be required, nor will any public improvements. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.20.040 Recordation.
        If the planning commission/city council approves the lot line adjustment map as provided in this chapter, the planning commission secretary/city clerk or designee as determined by the city manager, shall certify such approval on the transparent original copy of the map. The person filing the lot line adjustment map shall obtain certified copies of the map from the city engineer. The person filing such lot line adjustment map shall record such map in the office of the county recorder as a lot line adjustment map certified by the city engineer. If the map is not approved by the planning commission it shall be handled in the same manner as a parcel map. (Ord. 1388 § 1, 1990; Ord. 939, 1976)

Chapter 17.24 REVERSIONS TO ACREAGE
17.24.010 Procedure.
        Subdivided property may be reverted to acreage pursuant to provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 939, 1976)

Chapter 17.28 SURVEY DATA
17.28.010 Survey standards generally.
        Surveys made for the preparation of maps for land divisions shall be made in accordance with the Land Surveyors’ Act, and the standard practices and principles of land surveying, under the supervision of a civil engineer or land surveyor licensed in the state. A traverse of the boundaries of the tract, or the lots or blocks therein, or along the centerlines or sidelines of the streets and easements shown, shall close within the tolerances and to the degree of accuracy as required by the city engineer. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.28.020 Easements and rights-of-way.
        The final map shall show:

        A.    The centerlines and side lines for all streets, highways and alleys, with their lengths and bearings, length, radii, tangent lengths and central angles, with radial bearings for all curves and segments;

        B.     The total width of each street and easement, with the width of any portion being dedicated and that of any existing portion in relation to centerline; and

        C.     The widths of rights-of-way for railroads, freeways, flood-control channels and all other easements. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.28.030 New monuments.
        A.    At the time of making the survey for the final map the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments to conform with the standards described in Section 8771 of the Business and Professions Code so that another engineer or surveyor may readily retrace the survey. Such monuments shall generally be placed at the corners and angle points of the exterior boundary of the subdivision, at beginnings and endings of curves, at centerline intersections of streets, alleys and public service easements, and at other points of control as required by the city engineer.

        B.     The engineer or surveyor shall also set the following additional monuments:

        1.     One-inch iron pipe at the rear corners of each lot or parcel;

        2.     One-inch iron pipe at the front corners of each lot or parcel or lead and tack in the sidewalk on the projected lot lines.

        C.     All monuments necessary to establish the exterior boundaries of the subdivision shall be set or referenced prior to recordation of the final map. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.28.040 Existing monuments—Other survey data.
        The final map shall clearly show all stakes, monuments, ties or other evidence found while making the survey to determine the tract boundaries. The corners or the adjoining lots, subdivisions and parcels shall be shown and identified, with ties thereto. Reference shall also be made to all subdivisions, records of surveys, parcel maps and other maps and data of record upon, adjoining or near the property being divided, combined or reverted to acreage. Other survey data and calculations, if required by the city engineer, shall be shown on the final map in accordance with the city engineer’s standards and policies. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.28.050 Established lines, points and boundaries.
        Whenever the city engineer or county surveyor has established the centerlines of streets, alleys or easements, or has located specific points or monuments, such data shall be considered in making the survey and all monuments and points found and used shall be indicated on the map with proper references made to field books, surveys, tie books or other maps or information of public record if the points were reset by ties, or if record points were not found, that fact shall be clearly noted and a note made of any new point set in its place. The final map shall also show and tie in the locations of any city boundaries crossing or adjoining the subdivision. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.28.060 Lot dimensions.
        Dimensions of lots shall be the net dimensions. Each lot shall be shown fully on a sheet. All lots containing three-fourths of an acre or more shall show net acreage, and when required by the city engineer, the gross acreage. Whenever acreages are shown for lots, blocks or for the total tract area, they shall be shown to the nearest thousandth of an acre, and when required by the city engineer, in square feet, to the nearest hundredth of a square foot. (Ord. 939, 1976)

Chapter 17.32 LOTS AND BLOCKS
17.32.010 Lots.
        A.    Area. Lot areas shall be such as will conform to requirements of the zoning regulations of the city.

        B.     Frontage. Lots having inadequate or no frontage upon a public street may be cause for disapproval of the subdivisions.

        C.     Width. Width of lots shall be such as will conform to standards of development as defined by any active or current official plan of the city; provided, that in all cases the minimum width of lots, measured at any point, shall be sixty feet. Lots fronting on a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum dimension of fifty feet at the building setback line. Odd-shaped lots shall be subject to individual determination by the planning commission.

        D.    Division by Political Boundaries. No parcel shall be so divided that a county, city or school district boundary line intersects any parcel resulting from the division. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.32.020 Blocks.
        The size, shape, length and width of blocks in subdivisions shall be subject to individual determination and approval by the city. (Ord. 939, 1976)

Chapter 17.36 IMPROVEMENTS AND UTILITIES—GENERALLY
Note
*       For provisions on improvement requirements for final map acceptance, including security for improvement completion, see § 17.16.080 et seq. of this code.

 

17.36.010 Easements—Location and width.
        Any necessary easements for use of municipal utilities, sewer or drainage shall be subject to determination by the city as to location and width. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.36.020 Easements—Search of title.
        Each subdivision or parcel map shall be accompanied by a search of title showing the names of all persons whose consent is necessary to convey title to road, street and other easements shown upon such map. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.36.030 Improvement costs and specifications.
        All sidewalks, curbs, gutters, pavements, sanitary sewer lines, water mains, culvert and drainage structures, street signs, street lighting, parkway tree planting and other required improvements in a subdivision shall be installed at the cost of the subdivider and shall conform to grades and specifications established or approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.36.040 Water supply.
        A.    Water shall be provided from the water system of the city. Water mains shall be constructed by the subdivider to serve each lot within the subdivided area and shall be of such size and design as required by the city engineer. All service connections shall be laid to the inside of curb prior to paving.

        B.     All water mains and required fire hydrants shall be installed and in service prior to the installation of any combustible construction on any building within a subdivision. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.36.050 Sanitary sewers.
        Sanitary sewers shall be provided to all subdivisions. Where a sewer line is constructed or laid within a street or highway the subdivider shall install service connections to each lot within the subdivided area. All sanitary sewer lines, appurtenances and service connections shall be constructed or laid prior to paving to the established grade and shall be of such size and design as required by the sanitary district involved. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.36.060 Supplemental size—Reimbursement.
        The subdivider may be required to install improvements for the benefit of the subdivision which may contain supplemental size, capacity or number for the benefit of property not within the subdivision as a condition precedent to the approval of a subdivision or parcel map, and thereafter to dedicate such improvements to the public. However, the subdivider shall be reimbursed for that portion of the cost of such improvements equal to the difference between the amount it would have cost the subdivider to install such improvements to serve the subdivision only and the actual cost of such improvements pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 939, 1976)

Chapter 17.40 STREETS AND ALLEYS
17.40.010 Conformance to plans and existing pattern.
        A subdivision plan shall conform to the official and master plan of streets. In the absence of an official and master plan, the street system in a proposed subdivision shall conform to the existing streets in the area adjoining the subdivision unless the proposed street pattern is otherwise approved by the city council. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.40.020 State highways.
        All state highways shall conform to the standards of the California Department of Transportation and where involved in any subdivision shall be subject to any additional standards or requirements of the city. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.40.030 Major thoroughfares.
        Major thoroughfares shall be no less than one hundred twenty feet wide. (Ord. 1208, 1983; Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.40.040 Primary thoroughfares.
        Primary thoroughfares shall be no less than one hundred feet wide. (Ord. 1208, 1983; Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.40.050 Secondary thoroughfares.
        Secondary thoroughfares shall be no less than eighty feet wide. (Ord. 1208, 1983; Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.40.060 Collector streets.
        Collector streets shall be no less than sixty feet wide. (Ord. 1208, 1983; Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.40.070 Local streets.
        Local streets shall be no less than fifty-two feet wide. (Ord. 1208, 1983; Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.40.080 Minor and cul-de-sac streets.
        Minor and cul-de-sac streets shall be no less than fifty feet wide nor more than five hundred feet in length, except where special conditions might justify a lesser width or greater length. The radius at the terminus of the cul-de-sac shall be subject to individual determination by the city. Stub streets or rights-of-way may be required to the edge of the subdivisions. (Ord. 1208, 1983; Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.40.090 Special local streets.
        Special local streets, where parkways, grade separations, hills or other dominant factors are involved, shall be subject to determination by the city. (Ord. 1208, 1983; Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.40.100 Curves, intersections and improvements.
        Radius of curvature, intersection angles and layout of all improvements shall be in accordance with standards established by the city council or, where no such standards have been adopted, the arrangement shall be subject to approval by the city engineer and the city council. (Ord. 1208, 1983; Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.40.110 Access rights.
        A.    Where a subdivision abuts a street designated as a major highway, primary arterial highway or secondary arterial highway as shown on the current city master plan of arterial highways, the subdivider shall be required to dedicate, in addition to the full required width of such highway, the access rights onto such highway except for dedicated street or alley intersections.

        B.     Where such dedication of access rights would cause undue hardship, the city council may grant a variance to this requirement. (Ord. 1208, 1983; Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.40.120 Alleys—Commercial and residential lots.
        Alleys with a minimum width of twenty-five feet may be required at the rear of lots classified for and to be used for commercial or multifamily purposes. If adequate off-street parking areas to serve such property are securely reserved for such purpose and are shown upon the map and approved by the city, the requirements for alleys may be modified. Alleys elsewhere shall be optional, but if offered shall be subject to approval by the city both as to width and location. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.40.130 Alleys—Industrial property.
        All alleys at the rear of industrial property shall be subject to determination by the city as to design, location and width. (Ord. 939, 1976)

Chapter 17.44 UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
17.44.010 Required.
        Pursuant to the requirements of this chapter, whenever any tentative tract or parcel map or map for the reversion of lots to acreage is filed or whenever a use or building permit is requested for the development or redevelopment of new or relocated buildings or structures, or for the addition of floor space equal to or in excess of two hundred square feet is added to an existing building or structure in any zone except R-1, or whenever a new electrical service is installed in an existing building in any zone except R-1, or whenever a residential building or use is converted to any purpose or use other than that which existed at the time of conversion, then all electrical, telephone, community antenna television and similar service wires or cables which provide direct service to the property being developed shall, within the exterior boundary lines of such property, be installed underground. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.44.020 Aboveground appurtenances.
        For the purposes of this chapter, appurtenances and associated equipment, such as but not limited to surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, may be placed above ground. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.44.030 Compliance responsibility.
        The developer or owner is responsible for complying with the requirements of this chapter and shall provide all necessary facilities on their premises so as to receive such services from the supplying utility or utilities subject to the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the State Public Utilities Commission. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.44.040 Waiver, modification, delay.
        Where practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships inconsistent with the purposes of this chapter result from its literal interpretation or enforcement, the planning commission may waive, modify or delay the application of any undergrounding requirement upon written request by a building site owner. Such request shall be filed with the planning commission and shall contain any and all facts which are offered in support. (Ord. 939, 1976)

 

17.44.050 Deposit for delayed installation.
        If the planning commission’s action is to delay the installation of required underground utilities, it may require the building site owner to file with the city a cash deposit and record a covenant sufficient to provide for the future installation of the underground features which are to be delayed. The amount of the cash deposit shall be determined by the building director. (Ord. 939, 1976)

Title 18 ZONING*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 1827 and 1828. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


Article I. General
Article II. Zone Standards
Article III. Special Zones
Article IV. Administrative

Article I. General*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 1827. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


Chapter 18.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS
18.02.010 Title.
This title shall be known as the “Land Use Zoning Ordinance of the City.” (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.02.020 Purpose.
An official land use zoning ordinance for the city is adopted and established to serve the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare and to provide the economic and social advantages resulting from an orderly planned use of land resources, and to encourage, guide and provide a definite plan for the future growth and development of the city. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

Chapter 18.04 DEFINITIONS
18.04.010 Rules of construction.
In this chapter, when not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the singular number include the plural number and words in the plural number include the singular number and the masculine includes the feminine. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.04.020 Generally.
For the purposes of this title, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this chapter. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.04.030 Terms defined.
“Accessory building” means a detached subordinate building, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the main building or to the main use of the land and which is located on the same lot with the main building or use. Such accessory building shall not be used as a separate dwelling unit.

“Accessory use” means a use naturally and normally incidental to, subordinate to and devoted exclusively to the main use of the premises.

“Alley” means a public way not over twenty feet in width permanently reserved as a secondary means of access to abutting property.

“Apartment hotel” means a building or portion thereof designed for or containing both individual guestrooms or suites of rooms and dwelling units.

“Apartment house” means a building or portion thereof, designed for or occupied by three or more families living independently of each other.

“Automotive reconditioning” means a business primarily serving automobile dealers. It is engaged in detail work, such as cleaning, waxing and polishing, upholstering, touchup painting and minor body repairing to improve the condition of an automobile for sale.

“Automobile” means and includes passenger automobiles of every description, trucks, racing cars, off-road vehicles, dune buggies, horseless carriages, motorized golf carts, motor homes, motorbikes and recreational vehicles.

“Automobile service/repair” means a retail place of business serving vehicles. It provides services directly related to the operation and maintenance of the vehicle. All services must be performed entirely within a closed building and includes such services as follows: battery service, hand washing, waxing and polishing of automobiles, the sale and repair of tires (excluding recapping), cleaning and flushing of radiators, lubrication of automobiles, wheel balancing, testing, adjustment and replacement of carburetors, coils, condensers, distributor caps, fan belts, filters, generators, points, rotors, spark plugs, voltage regulators, water hoses and wiring and brake service limited to servicing and replacement of brake cylinders and brake shoes. No machine work, body work or paint spraying is permitted outside of an enclosed building. Internal motor or drive train repairs may be performed only when they are incidental to other repairs being performed and they may not be done as a regular repair service.

“Automobile service station” means a retail place of business serving vehicles. It is primarily engaged in the sale of motor fuels and lubricants, but it also provides incidental services directly related to the operation and maintenance of the vehicle. These incidental services include battery service, hand washing, waxing and polishing of automobiles, the sale and repair of tires (excluding recapping) and the clean-ing and flushing of radiators (excluding steam cleaning and radiator repair). If performed entirely within an enclosed building, such services as lubrication of automobiles, wheel balancing, testing, adjustment and replacement of carburetors, coils, condensers, distributor caps, fan belts, filters, generators, points, rotors, spark plugs, voltage regulators, water hoses, wiring and brake service limited to servicing and replacement of brake cylinders and brake shoes are permitted. No machine work, body work or paint spraying is permitted. Internal motor or drive train repairs may be performed only when they are incidental to other repairs being performed and they may not be done as a regular repair service. Brake drum turning and the necessary machine work required to facilitate automotive brake repair and reconditioning is permitted if done within an enclosed building.

“Boardinghouse” and “rooming house” mean a residence, dwelling or portion thereof, other than a hotel, which is used to accommodate with or without individual or group cooking facilities, for compensation, three or more individuals under separate rental, lease, or sublease agreements, either written or oral, whether or not the owner resides therein. The word “compensation” includes compensation in money, services or other things of value. This term shall not include a residential care facility, as defined in this chapter, serving six or fewer residents.

“Building” means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the housing or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.

“Building height” means the vertical distance from the average finished ground level of the site to the highest point of the structure.

“Building site” means the ground area of a building or group of buildings together with all open spaces as required by this chapter.

“Carport” means a permanent roofed structure with not more than two enclosed sides used or intended to be used for automobile shelter and storage.

“Change of occupancy” means a discontinuance of an existing use and substitution therefore of a use of a different kind or class.

“Club” means an association of persons, whether incorporated or unincorporated, for some common purpose, but not including groups organized primarily to render a service carried on as a business.

“Commercial coach” means a vehicle, with or without motive power, designed and equipped for human occupancy for industrial, professional or commercial purposes.

“Commercial recreation” means any use or development either public or private providing amusement, pleasure or sport, which is operated or carried on primarily for financial gain.

 

“Commercial repair” means and includes any repair, construction or assembly process conducted or performed for consideration, either monetary or in kind. Examples of this include, but are not limited to, lawn mower repair, engine and transmission rebuilding, boat repair, and trailer repair.

“Corner lot” means a lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets having an angle of intersection of not more than one hundred thirty-five degrees.

“Day nursery (including preschool and nursery schools)” means any group of buildings, building or portion thereof, used primarily for the daytime care of six or more children at any location.

“Drive-in restaurant” or “drive-in” means any premises or place of business where beverages, foods or refreshments are served to patrons for consumption on the premises at tables or stands, in open or unenclosed areas, or for sale to or consumption by persons in any vehicle stopped, standing or parked in or upon the premises of such drive-in restaurant or drive-in, or in or upon any street, alley, lane, parking area or real property immediately adjacent to or adjoining any street or public right-of-way abutting such premises. If at least fifty percent of the premises is designed for, constructed for or used for the purposes enumerated herein, then such place of business shall be deemed to be a drive-in restaurant or a drive-in.

“Dwelling” means a building or portion thereof designed for or occupied for residential purposes, including one-family, two-family and multiple family dwellings, but not including hotels, boardinghouses, lodginghouses and trailers.

“Dwelling unit” means a group of interconnected rooms located within an attached or detached building forming a single and independent habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating for the exclusive occupancy by one family and not having more than one kitchen. All rooms comprising a dwelling unit shall have access through an interior door to other parts of the dwelling unit. All exterior exits shall be accessible to all rooms within the dwelling.

“Educational institution” means an institution of learning giving general academic instruction equivalent to the standards prescribed by the State Board of Education; including day care, preschool, private tutoring or learning facility.

“Family” means a collective body of two or more persons doing their own cooking and living together as a separate housekeeping unit in relationship based upon birth, marriage, adoption or other such like domestic bond.

“Food-to-go restaurant” means any premises or retail place of business where beverages, foods or refreshments are prepared, processed or treated for retail sale on the premises, and not to be consumed on the premises where sold. If at least fifty percent of the premises is designed for, constructed for or used for the purposes enumerated herein, then such place of business shall be deemed to be a food-to-go restaurant.

“Floor area ratio” means the ratio between gross floor area of all buildings on a lot and the total area of the lot. For the purposes of this definition “gross floor area” means the amount of leasable floor area of the structure. Exception: Mezzanines, as described by the Uniform Building Code, shall not be considered as floor area.

“Front lot line” means the property line dividing a lot from a street. On a corner lot only one street line shall be considered as a front line and the shorter street frontage shall be considered the front lot line.

 

“Front yard” means a yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot.

“Grade” means the lowest point of elevation of the graded surface of the ground, paving or sidewalk within the area between the building and the property line or, when the property line is more than five feet from the building, between the building and a line five feet from the building.

“Group dwelling” means a combination or arrangement of dwellings on one building site.

“Half story” means a story with at least two of its opposite sides situated in a sloping roof, the floor area of which does not exceed two-thirds of the floor area immediately below it.

“Home occupation” means an accessory use of a dwelling unit conducted by the occupant of the dwelling unit for gainful employment involving the manufacture, provision or sale of goods and/or services.

“Hospital” means any building or portion thereof used for the accommodation and medical care of sick, injured or infirm persons, and including sanitariums.

“Hotel” means any structure or any portion of any structure which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, for time periods limited to thirty consecutive days or less, and includes but is not limited to, any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, but not used as the legal residence or principal dwelling place of the occupant(s), except for one or more caretaker/manager residential unit(s) which conform to the requirements for multiple family residential units in this title. “Hotel” does not mean any convalescent home or facility, home for the aged, hospital, jail, or military installation.

“Interior lot” means a lot other than a corner lot.

“Key lot” means the first interior lot to the rear of a reversed corner lot, whether or not separated by an alley.

“Lot” means a parcel of real property as shown with a separate and distinct number or letter on a plot recorded or filed with the recorder of the county under procedures established by the city and state, or, a parcel of real property abutting upon at least one public street and held under separate ownership prior to the effective date of this title.

“Lot area” means the total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot.

“Marijuana related use and activity” includes dispensing, cultivation, manufacture, processing, storing, testing, labeling, relabeling, packaging, repackaging, transporting, delivery, distribution, provision, or sale, or any combination thereof, of marijuana, except as set forth in California Business and Professions Code Section 19319, related to qualifying patients. “Marijuana-related use and activity” also has the same meaning as “commercial cannabis activity” set forth in California Business and Professions Section 19300.5(j).

“Motel”—See “Hotel.”

“Multiple-family dwelling” means a building, or portion thereof, designed for occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other, and containing three or more dwelling units.

“Nonconforming building” means a building or structure or portion thereof conflicting with the provisions of this title applicable to the zone in which it is situated.

“Nonconforming use” means the use of a structure or premises conflicting with the provisions of this title.

“Occupied” means and includes arranged, designed, built, altered, converted, rented or leased, or intended to be occupied.

“Off-premises” on an alcoholic beverage license means the license privilege is for alcoholic beverages to be sold in original, unopened packages for consumption off the premises where sold.

“One-family dwelling” means a detached building designed exclusively for occupancy by one family and containing one dwelling unit.

“On-premises” on an alcoholic beverage license means the license privilege is for alcoholic beverages sold on the premises to be consumed on the premises where sold.

“Parolee” means an individual who has been released from a prison term prior to its expiration and who is subject to regular monitoring by a law enforcement officer for a set period of time. It shall include all of the following:

1.     An individual who was convicted of a federal crime, was sentenced to a United States federal prison, and received conditional and revocable release in the community under the supervision of a federal parole officer;

2.     An individual who is serving a period of supervised community custody, as defined in California Penal Code Section 3000, following a term of imprisonment in a state prison, and is under the jurisdiction of the California Department of Correction, Parole and Community Services Division;

3.     An adult or juvenile individual who was sentenced to a term in the California Youth Authority and received conditional and revocable release in the community under the supervision of a Youth Authority parole officer; and

4.     An individual who meets the above equivalent criteria in another state.

“Person” means any individual, firm, copartnership, joint adventure, association, club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, organization, syndicate, city, county, municipality, district or other political subdivision, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

“Private garage” means an enclosed building or portion of a building in which motor vehicles used by the occupants or tenants of the main building or buildings on the premises are stored or kept.

“Public garage” means an enclosed building or portion of a building, open to the public in which motor vehicles are stored or kept, either for a fee or as a courtesy.

“Rear lot line” means the line opposite the front lot line.

“Rear yard” means a yard extending across the full width of the lot between the most rear main building and the rear lot line. The depth of the required rear yard shall be measured horizontally from the nearest part of a main building toward the nearest part of the rear lot line.

“Recycling center” means a facility that accepts recyclable materials from the public as either a donation, redemption or for sale. A recycling facility may consist of mobile recycling containers, kiosk type units, bulk vending machines, automated and unattended recycling machines (also known as reverse vending machines), or unattended containers placed for the donation of recyclable materials.

“Residential care facility” means any facility, place, or building that is maintained and operated to provide non-medical residential care, day treatment, adult day care, or foster family agency services for children, adults, or children and adults, including, but not limited to, the physically handicapped, mentally impaired, incompetent persons, and abused or neglected children, and includes the following, as defined by the California Community Care Facilities Act (California Health and Safety Code Section 1500, et seq.): “residential facility,” “adult day program,” “therapeutic day services facility,” “foster family agency,” “foster family home,” “small family home,” “social rehabilitation facility,” “community treatment facility,” “full-service adoption agency,” “non-custodial adoption agency,” “transitional shelter care facility,” and “transitional housing placement facility.” The term “residential care facility” does not include “congregate housing,” “domestic violence shelters,” “homeless shelters,” “senior hotels,” single room occupancy,” or “transitional housing projects” which are defined in and shall be governed by Chapter 18.30 of this code. The term “residential care facility” shall also include the follow-ing health facilities, as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 1250: an intermediate care facility/developmentally disabled habilitative, an intermediate care facility/developmentally disabled-nursing, or a congregate living health facility, as well as the following: residential care facilities for persons with chronic life-threatening illnesses, as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 1568.0831; residential care facilities for the elderly, as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 1569.85; alcoholism or drug abuse recovery or treatment facility, as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 11834.23; pediatric day health and respite care facilities, as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 1761.4; and any state-authorized, certified, or licensed family care homes, foster homes, or group homes serving mentally disordered or otherwise handicapped persons or dependent and neglected children, as set forth in California Welfare and Institutions Code Section 5116. The term “residential care facility” shall include any other facilities which are deemed by any other applicable law to be a residential use of property and required by law to be treated the same as other single-family residences for local zoning purposes. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary above, the term “residential care facility” is limited to those facilities, places or buildings that are both subject to regulation by the state of California and actually licensed by the state of California. No facility, place or building that may otherwise be regulated by the state of California, but which is not actually licensed by the state of California, shall be deemed a “residential care facility” for purposes of this chapter.

“Reversed corner lot” means a corner lot the side street line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its rear.

“Secondary dwelling unit” means any residential dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities on the same parcel where one and only one, legal single-family residence exists and includes the permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.

“Setback” means the minimum required distance from a structure to a property line on the subject lot. When required for landscaping purposes, setback means the distance from a street front property line to the depth of required landscape area.

“Side lot line” means any lot lines other than front lot lines or rear lot lines.

“Side yard” means a yard between the main building and the side lot line extending from the rear line of the required front yard, or the front lot line where no front yard is required, to the rear yard the width of which side yard shall be measured horizontally from, and at right angles to, the nearest point of a side lot line towards the nearest part of a main building.

“Storage garage” means an enclosed building or a portion of a building in which motor vehicles are stored.

“Story” means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it.

 

“Street” means a public thoroughfare other than an alley which affords the principal means of access to abutting property.

“Structure” means anything constructed or erected, which requires location on the ground or attached to something having a location on the ground, but not including fences or walls used as fences less than six feet in height.

“Trailerhouse” means any unit designed for or used for living or sleeping purposes and which is equipped with wheels or other similar devices used for the purpose of transporting the unit from place to place, whether by motive power or by other means.

“Trailer park or camp” means any area or premises where two or more house trailers are located and used as living or sleeping quarters.

“Through lot” means a lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets.

“Two-family dwelling” means a building designed exclusively for occupancy by two families living independently of each other, and containing two dwelling units.

“Use” means the purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged or intended, or for which either is or may be occupied or maintained.

“Vending machine” means any devise that dispenses product(s) for monetary reimbursement.

“Yard” means an open space on a lot, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Covered patios, gazebos, cabanas, and shade structures, provided they are not enclosed and comply with the required setbacks may occupy up to twenty-five percent of the required usable yard area. (Ord. 1786 § 2, 2017; Ord. 1776 § 2, 2017; Ord. 1775 § 2, 2016; Ord. 1748 § 3, 2013; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

Chapter 18.06 ZONES ESTABLISHED—ZONING MAP BOUNDARIES AND LAND USES
18.06.010 Establishment of zones.
In order to classify, regulate, restrict and segregate the uses of land and buildings; to regulate and restrict the height and bulk of buildings; to regulate the area of yards and other open spaces about buildings; and to regulate the density of population, the following classes of land use zones are established to be known as per Table 18.06.010.1.

 

Table 18.06.010.1

 

R-1a

One-family zone

R-1b

One-family zone

R-1c

One-family zone

R-2

Two-family zone

R-3

Limited multiple-family zone

R-4

Multiple-family dwelling zone

R-5

Multiple-family dwelling zone

R-6

Multiple-family dwelling zone

R-7

Multiple-family dwelling zone

MHP

Mobile home park zone

C-R

Commercial and high-density zone

C-P

Commercial and professional office zone

C-1

Limited commercial zone

C-2

Commercial zone

C-2s

Community shopping center zone

C-2sH

Community shopping center high density zone

C-3

General commercial zone

C-U

Civic utility zone

PC-I

Planned commercial-industrial zone

M-1

Light manufacturing zone

P

Automobile parking zone

D

Architectural design zone

PUD

Planned unit development overlay zone

OS

Open space zone

SP-1

La Habra Boulevard specific plan

ES

Emergency shelter overlay zone

MX

Mixed-use overlay zone

 

(Ord. 1805 § 3, 2019; Ord. 1803 § 3, 2019; Ord. 1750 § 3, 2014; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.06.020 Zoning map adopted.
The zones designated in Section 18.06.010 and the boundaries of such zones are shown upon the map designated as the “official land use zoning map of the city,” and such map and all the notations, references and other information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this title as if the matters and information set forth by such map were all fully described herein. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.06.030 Boundaries—Applicable rules when boundaries uncertain.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any zone shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:

A.    Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following street and alley lines or lot lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.

B.     In subdivided property or where a zone boundary divides a lot, the location of such boundary, unless the location is indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map.

C.     In case any uncertainty exists, the planning commission shall determine the location of boundaries.

D.    Where any public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to abutting property shall apply to such vacated or abandoned street or alley.

E.     Where any private right-of-way or easement of any railroad, railway, canal, transportation or public utility company is vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to abutting property shall apply to such vacated or abandoned property.

F.     All property in the city not otherwise classified, and all property hereafter annexed and not zoned upon annexation, is classified as R-1a zone. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.06.040 Land uses.
A.    Land uses shall be permitted, conditionally permitted, or not permitted as identified in Table 18.06.040.A, Land Use Matrix. Any uses which are not specifically listed are prohibited unless, pursuant to a review by the planning commission, the commission makes a determination that the proposed use is substantially similar to another permitted or conditionally permitted use.

B.     Use Determination. Any use approved by the planning commission shall be subject to all the requirements of the zone in which the use is located. Denial of any requested use may be appealed to the city council within ten working days of the planning commission’s action as per Chapter 18.66.

 

Table 18.06.040.A—Land Use Matrix

 

Permitted = P

Conditional Use Permit = CUP

Not Permitted = -

Special Event Permit = S

R-1a

R-1b

R-1c

R-2

R-3

R-4

R-5

R-6

R-7

MHP

C-R

C-P

C-1

C-2s

C-2sH

C-2

C-3

OS

PC-I

M-1

SP-1

RESIDENTIAL

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A one-family dwelling or a single-family mobile home which complies with the provisions of Chapter 18.68

P

P

P

P

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

A two-family dwelling or 2 one-family dwellings

P

P

P

-

P

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Multiple-family dwellings, apartment houses, group dwellings, condominiums and cluster housing

-

P

P

-

P

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Multiple-family residential structures greater than 2 ½ stories or 35 feet

-

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

Boarding and rooming houses (3 or more individuals)

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Fraternity houses, sorority houses, and dormitories

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

CUP

Hotels/motels (provided not more than 20% of the units contain kitchen/kitchenettes)

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

-

CUP

Residential care facilities (serving 6 or fewer)

P

P

P

P

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

CUP

Small family day care home (per California Health and Safety Code Section 1597.45(b))

P

P

P

P

P

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Special needs housing

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

Sports courts (residential) with lights (tennis, basketball, handball, etc.)

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

Transitional/special needs housing

P

P

P

P

P

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

COMMERCIAL—RECREATIONAL

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Adult cabaret

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

-

CUP

-

Batting cages

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

-

Bowling alleys

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

-

Commercial recreation

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

Pool halls and billiard halls

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

Health clubs/spa

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

Golf courses

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

Golf driving ranges (indoor or outdoor)

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

 

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

Tennis courts (commercial)

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

P

P

P

-

Theaters, cinemas, and auditoriums (public assembly)

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

COMMERCIAL—INSTITUTIONAL

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Art galleries, exhibit halls (commercial and industrial)

-

-

-

-

-

P

P

P

P

P

-

CUP

-

CUP

Educational institutions including private schools, elementary, middle, and high schools, colleges, and universities, daycare, tutoring

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

Commercial schools (dance studios, martial arts, music and vocal instruction, etc.)

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

Institutions of a philanthropic or eleemosynary nature

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

Lodges, clubs and fraternal organizations

-

-

-

CUP

P

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

CUP

Libraries, museums and public buildings

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

Churches, or other places used for religious worship

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

COMMERCIAL—MEDICAL

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Animal hospital/veterinary clinic

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

Clinic/urgent care facility (medical offices with outpatient treatment; no overnight stays)

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

Convalescent hospitals

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

Hospitals/medical centers

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

Doctor/dentist office

-

-

-

-

-

P

P

P

P

P

-

P

P

P

Medical laboratories (not part of a medical office)

-

-

-

-

-

P

P

P

P

P

-

P

P

P

COMMERCIAL—OFFICES

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Administrative, medical and professional offices

-

-

-

-

P

P

P

P

P

P

-

P

CUP

P

General business offices

-

-

-

-

-

P

P

P

P

P

-

P

CUP

CUP

COMMERCIAL—RETAIL

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Bakeries with less than 10 employees on premises

-

-

-

-

-

P

P

P

P

P

-

P

P

P

Banks (with or without ATM machines)

-

-

-

-

-

P

P

P

P

P

-

P

CUP

P

Coin-operated laundries

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

CUP

General retail

-

-

-

-

-

-

P

P

P

P

-

P

CUP

P

Motor vehicle sales and services (as defined in the California Vehicle Code)

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

Retail nursery (garden center)

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

Retail stores selling pre-owned merchandise

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

-

CUP

Smoking lounges

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

Temporary commercial enterprises and seasonal sales lots

-

-

-

-

-

-

S

S

S

S

-

S

S

S

COMMERCIAL—SERVICES

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Automobile service/repair

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

P

CUP

Check cashing or payday advance

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

-

CUP

Commercial repair

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

P

CUP

Car wash, coin-operated and automated

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

P

CUP

Day spa

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

Dry cleaning, pressing and laundry businesses

-

-

-

-

-

P

P

P

P

P

-

P

CUP

P

Automobile service stations

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

Fortunetelling establishments

-

-

-

-

-

P

P

P

P

P

-

P

CUP

P

Funeral parlors/mortuaries

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

Restaurants

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

Upholstery shops (excluding furniture refinishing)

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

P

CUP

INDUSTRIAL

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Hazardous waste facility

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

-

Industrial park (multiple or mix of services and warehousing)

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

P

P

-

Manufacturing/heavy industrial (any process that creates toxins, odors, byproducts or processing of any byproducts)

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Manufacturing/light industrial

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

P

P

-

Mini-warehouse/self-storage

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

CUP

CUP

-

Storage yards

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

P

-

Vehicle impound/tow yards

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

-

Vehicle storage lots, including recreational vehicles

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

CUP

-

Warehouse

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

P

P

-

Wholesaling uses

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

P

P

-

Wrecking yard

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPECIALTY USES

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Alcoholic beverage sales and services

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

Cemeteries, columbarium, crematories and mausoleums

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

-

Dog kennels

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

Mobile home sales areas (modular housing)

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

-

-

CUP

-

Model homes sales offices

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Natural resources development

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

Outdoor sales (including vending machines)

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

-

CUP

Outdoor sales—Temporary (small event)

-

-

-

-

-

S

S

S

S

S

-

S

S

S

Outdoor sales—Temporary (large event)

-

-

-

-

-

S

S

S

S

S

-

S

S

S

Parks, playgrounds and community buildings

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

Public utility or public service structures and uses

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

Radio and television transmitters

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

Recycling centers

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

CUP

-

Recycling centers—Reverse vending machine (indoors)

-

-

-

-

-

P

P

P

P

P

-

P

P

P

Remediation systems

CUP

CUP

 

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

Showrooms

-

-

 

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

Tattoo parlors

-

-

 

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

Wireless communication facilities

CUP

CUP

 

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

(Ord. 1803 § 3, 2019; Ord. 1750 § 3, 2014; Ord. 1748 § 3, 2013; Ord. 1744 § 2, 2013; Ord. 1727 § 3, 2011; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.06.050 General prohibitions.
Except as hereinafter provided in this title, the following provisions shall apply:

A.    No building shall be erected, and no existing building shall be moved, altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land, building or premises be used, designed or intended to be used for any purpose or in any manner other than a use listed in this title or amendments hereto as permitted in the zones in which such land, building or premises is located.

B.     No building shall be erected nor any existing building be moved, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed in height the limit established by this title or amendments hereto for the zone in which such building is located.

C.     No building shall be erected nor shall any existing building be moved, altered, enlarged or rebuilt, nor shall any open spaces surrounding any building be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity with the building site requirements and the area and yard regulations established by this title or amendments hereto for the zone in which such building is located.

D.    No yard or other open space provided about any building for the purpose of complying with the regulations of this title, or amendments hereto, shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building or structure. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

Chapter 18.08 GENERAL REGULATIONS
18.08.010 Building code and title to be construed together—Building code to have precedence.
The Uniform Building Code which is now or which may hereafter be adopted by the city, insofar as it may conflict with this chapter, is not repealed, and the provisions of the building code shall take precedence over this title and be in full force and effect. The provisions of both this title and the building code, if possible, shall be construed together to give effect to both, including all provisions of a more restrictive nature. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.08.020 Title subject to interpretations and exceptions of certain provisions.
The regulations specified in this title shall be subject to the interpretations and exceptions set forth in Sections 18.08.030 through 18.08.090. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.08.030 Conflicting regulations.
Where any provision of this title imposes more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by the provisions of any other law or ordinance, then the provisions of this title shall govern. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.08.040 Only enumerated uses permitted.
A.    The express enumeration and authorization in this title of a particular class of building, structure, premises or use in a designated zone shall be deemed a prohibition of such building, structure, premises or use in all zones of more or less restrictive classification, except as otherwise specified.

B.     Only uses that are enumerated in the Zoning Code are permitted, as well as uses determined by the planning commission and city council by resolution to be consistent with permitted uses in the Zoning Code pursuant to Section 18.08.050. The La Habra Zoning Code is a permissive zoning code, and the express prohibition of certain uses shall not be interpreted to mean that other, nonenumerated uses are permitted. (Ord. 1746 § 2, 2013)

 

18.08.050 Additional permitted uses.
Uses other than those specifically mentioned in this title as uses permitted in each of the zones may be permitted therein; provided, however, such uses are similar to those mentioned and are in the opinion of the planning commission and city council, as evidenced by a resolution in writing, not more obnoxious or detrimental to the welfare of the community than the permitted uses specifically mentioned in the respective zones. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.08.060 Additional excluded uses.
Uses other than those specifically mentioned in this title as uses excluded from any zone may be excluded therefrom; provided, that such uses are in the opinion of the planning commission and city council, as evidenced by a resolution in writing, not less obnoxious or detrimental to the welfare of the community than the excluded uses specifically mentioned in any zone. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.08.070 Nonconforming buildings and uses.
The following regulations shall apply to all nonconforming buildings and structures or parts thereof and uses existing at the effective date of the ordinances codified in this title.

A.    Any such nonconforming building or structure may be continued and maintained provided that there is no increase or enlargement in usable floor area or intensification of the building/structure as determined by the director of community development.

B.     Any site or parcel which is nonconforming to the development standards as established in this title, unless becoming nonconforming as a result of public improvement requirements, may be continued and maintained provided that there is no increase or enlargement in usable floor area or intensification of use of the site as determined by the director of community development. However, any site subject to discretionary review by the planning commission or city council shall be brought into compliance with all current code standards that apply to the extent physically possible as determined by the planning commission.

C.     Any such nonconforming use may be maintained and continued; provided, that there is no increase or enlargement of the area, space or volume, occupied or devoted to such nonconforming use, except as otherwise provided in this title.

D.    Any part of a building, structure or land occupied by such a nonconforming use which is changed to or replaced by a use conforming to the provisions of this title shall not thereafter be used or occupied by a nonconforming use.

E.     Any part of a building, structure or land occupied by such a nonconforming use, which use is abandoned, shall not again be used or occupied for a nonconforming use. Any part of a building, structure or land occupied by such a nonconforming use which use is disconnected for a period of one year or more, shall not again be used or occupied for a nonconforming use.

F.     If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a building may be changed to another nonconforming use of a more restrictive classification.

 

G.    In all “R” zones, every nonconforming building or structure which was designed, arranged or intended for a use not permitted in the R zones, shall be completely removed, or altered and converted to a conforming building, structure and use when such buildings or structures have reached, or may hereafter reach, the age of forty years, computed from the date the building was erected; provided, however, that this regulation shall not become operative until ten years from the effective date of Section 16.05 of Ordinance 195.

H.    Any sign, billboard, commercial advertising structure or statuary which is lawfully existing and maintained at the time this title becomes effective may be continued, although such use does not conform with the provisions hereof; provided, however, that no structural alterations are made thereto; and provided further, that all such nonconforming signs, billboards, commercial advertising structures or statuary, and their supporting members, shall be completely removed from the premises not later than one year from the effective date of Section 16.05 of Ord. 195.

I.      The foregoing provisions of this section shall also apply to buildings, structures, land or uses which hereafter become nonconforming due to any reclassifications of zones under this title or any subsequent change in the regulations of this title; provided, however, that where a period of years is specified in this section for the removal of nonconforming buildings, structures or uses, the period shall be computed from the date of such reclassification or change. (Ord. 1730 § 1, 2011; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.08.080 Buildings under construction.
Any building or structure for which a building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of any change to this title may be completed and used in accordance with the plans, specifications and permits on which the building permit was granted, if construction is commenced within sixty days after the issuance of the permit and diligently prosecuted to completion. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.08.090 Reconstruction of damaged nonconforming buildings.
Nothing in this title shall prevent the reconstruction, repairing or rebuilding and continued use of any nonconforming building or structure partially damaged by fire, collapse, explosion or acts of God, subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, wherein the expense of such reconstruction does not exceed fifty percent of the fair market value of the building or structure at the time such damage occurred. All such reconstruction shall be performed under one building permit, started within a period of one year from date of damage and diligently prosecuted to completion. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.08.100 Closing of automobile service station.
In the event that a service station is closed and not operated for a period of one hundred eighty consecutive days, the director of planning and community development shall notify the property owner and the oil company last occupying the site that the conditional use permit shall become null and void unless application for an extension of time is made to the planning commission within thirty days. The planning commission shall review any requests for extension as provided in Section 18.66.090. If no extension of time is requested, or the planning commission denies an extension of time for the conditional use permit, the director of planning and community development shall require the removal of all pumps, tanks, pump islands, signs, canopies and structures under the provisions of Chapter 18.08 of this code and Part 2, Title 19, Chapter 2, Code of

Civil Procedure, state of California, Section 731, et seq. If the service station site is utilized for a use other than gasoline sales, all tanks and pumps shall be removed. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.08.110 Prohibiting land uses that contravene state or federal law.
No land, building, structure or premises shall be used, designed, moved, altered, added to, enlarged, or intended to be used for any purpose or in any manner other than a use listed in this title, or amendments thereto, as permitted in the district in which such land, building, structure or premises is located; and no land, building, structure, or premises shall be permitted to be used for any purpose prohibited by federal, state, or local law or that would be in conflict with the Constitution and laws of California or the United States. (Ord. 1746 § 1, 2013)

 

18.08.120 Administrative remedy—Deviation from development standards.
A.    The director of community development may grant a deviation from any development standard within any zone if it is determined that such deviation improves the project design and does not exceed ten percent of the standard.

B.     Application. Applications for administrative remedy, deviation of development standards shall be made in writing to the director of community development through the administrative adjustment application process. The fee for such action shall be that established within the city of La Habra master fee schedule.

C.     Time Limit. The administrative adjustment shall expire and become null and void within twelve months after date of approval if not utilized.

D.    Extensions. A request for an extension shall be made in writing to the director of community development prior to the expiration of the administrative adjustment. A deviation of development standard administrative adjustment may be extended for one additional year.

E.     Limitations. A deviation may not be granted if the deviation would result in any changes to classification of land use or density.

F.     Decisions and Appeals. The director shall issue a written determination within thirty days of receipt of a completed deviation of development standard administrative adjustment application. Within fourteen working days of the date the director issues a written determination, any person aggrieved or affected by the decision may appeal such determination in writing to the planning commission or to the city council, as applicable. (Ord. 1727 § 3, 2011)

 

18.08.130 Discretionary permits applications—Expiration.
Any application for a discretionary permit, such as design review, conditional use permit, tentative map, zone variance, planned unit development, etc., shall become null and void within six months after date of the project having been deemed initially incomplete. An extension of six months may be approved by the director of community and economic development upon the submittal of a continuance request fee, as per the fee schedule, to cover the costs of extending the application. (Ord. 1748 § 3, 2013)

 

Chapter 18.10 REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS IN HOUSING TO DISABLED INDIVIDUALS
18.10.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter, pursuant to Fair Housing Laws, to provide individuals with disabilities reasonable accommodation in the application of the city’s rules, policies, practices and procedures, as necessary to ensure equal access to housing. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a process for individuals with disabilities to make requests for, and be provided, reasonable accommodation from the various land use, zoning, or building laws, rules, policies, practices and/or procedures of the city, where warranted. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.10.020 Definitions.
A.    Applicant. A person, business, or organization making a written request to city for reasonable accommodation in the strict application of land use or zoning provisions of this title.

B.     City. The city of La Habra.

C.     Code. The La Habra Municipal Code.

D.    Department. The community development department of the city.

E.     Director. The community development director of the city.

F.     Disabled or Handicapped Person. An individual who has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of that person’s major life activities; anyone who is regarded as having such impairment; or anyone who has a record of having such an impairment, but not including an individual’s current, illegal use of a controlled substance.

G.    Fair Housing Laws. The “Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988” (42 U.S.C. Section 3601, et seq.), including reasonable accommodation required by 42 U.S.C. Section 3604(f)(3)(B), and the “California Fair Employment and Housing Act” (California Government Code Section 12900, et seq.), including reasonable accommodation required specifically by California Government Code Sections 12927(c)(1) and 12955(1), as any of these statutory provisions now exist or may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

18.10.030 Notice to the public of availability of accommodation process.
The department shall prominently display in the public areas of the planning and building and safety department at city hall a notice advising those with disabilities or their representatives that they may request a reasonable accommodation in accordance with the procedures established in this chapter. City employees shall direct individuals to the display whenever they are requested to do so or reasonably believe that individuals with disabilities or their representatives may be entitled to a reasonable accommodation. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.10.040 Requesting reasonable accommodation.
A.    In order to make specific housing available to an individual with a disability, a disabled person or representative may request reasonable accommodation, pursuant to this chapter, relating to the application of various land use, zoning, or building laws, rules, policies, practices and/or procedures of the city.

B.     If an individual or representative needs assistance in making a request for reasonable accommodation, or appealing a determination regarding reasonable accommodation, the department will endeavor to provide the assistance necessary to ensure that the process is accessible to the applicant or representative. The applicant may be represented at all stages of the proceeding by a person designated by the applicant as his or her representative.

C.     A request for reasonable accommodation in laws, rules, policies, practices and/or procedures must be filed on an application form provided by the department and shall include the following information:

1.     A description of how the property will be used by the disabled individual(s);

2.     The basis for the claim that the Fair Housing Laws apply to the individual(s) and evidence supporting the claim, which may be in the form of a letter from a medical doctor or other licensed healthcare professional, a handicapped license, or other appropriate evidence; and

3.     The specific reason the requested accommodation is necessary to make particular housing available to the disabled individual(s).

D.    A filing fee in an amount as determined from time to time by resolution of the city council, but not to exceed the reasonable estimated costs to the city in processing the application. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.10.050 Decision on application.
A.    The director shall have the authority to consider and act on requests for reasonable accommodation. The director shall issue a written determination within thirty days of the date of receipt of a completed application and may (1) grant the accommodation request, (2) grant the accommodation request subject to specified nondiscriminatory conditions, (3) deny the request, or (4) may refer the matter to the planning commission, which shall render a decision on the application in the same manner as it considers an appeal. All written determinations shall give notice of the right to appeal and the right to request reasonable accommodation on the appeals process, if necessary. The notice of determination shall be sent to the applicant by first class mail.

B.     If necessary to reach a determination on the request for reasonable accommodation, the director may request further information from the applicant consistent with this chapter, specifying in detail what information is required. In the event a request for further information is made, the thirty-day period to is-

sue a written determination shall be stayed until the applicant reasonably responds to the request. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.10.060 Required findings.
The following findings must be made in order to approve a request for reasonable accommodation:

A.    The housing, which is the subject of the request for reasonable accommodation, will be used by an individual protected under the Fair Housing Laws.

B.     The request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make specific housing available to one or more individuals protected under the Fair Housing Laws.

C.     The requested reasonable accommodation will not impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city.

D.    The requested accommodation will not require a fundamental alteration of the zoning or building laws, policies and/or procedures of the city. If, based upon all of the evidence presented to the director, the above findings may reasonably be made, the director shall grant the requested reasonable accommodation. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.10.070 Appeals.
A.    Within thirty days of the date the director issues a written determination, any person aggrieved or affected by a decision on an application requesting the accommodation may appeal such determination in writing to the planning commission or to the city council, as applicable.

B.     All appeals shall contain a statement of the grounds for the appeal.

C.     No such appeal shall be accepted unless there is, paid contemporaneously with the filing of such letter, a filing and processing fee in a sum to be set by resolution of the city council. Upon receipt of a timely filed appeal, together with the filing and processing fee, the secretary of the planning commission or the city clerk shall set the matter for a de novo hearing before the planning commission or city council, as applicable, at its next most convenient meeting.

D.    Appeals shall be to the planning commission, or the city council as applicable, which shall hear the matter and render a determination as soon as reasonably practicable, but in no event later than sixty days after an appeal has been filed, or after an application has been referred to it by the director. All determinations shall address and be based upon the same findings required to be made in the original determination from which the appeal is taken.

E.     An applicant may request reasonable accommodation in the procedure by which an appeal will be conducted.

F.     Any determination by the planning commission or city council on an application or appeal shall be by a de novo hearing.

G.    An applicant requesting the accommodation may appeal an adverse determination or any conditions or limitations imposed by the director to the planning commission and the planning commission’s decision to the city council, in accordance with this section. In the case of an appeal of the director’s decision to the planning commission or the planning commission’s decision to the city council, the planning commission and city council decisions shall be final. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

18.10.080 Waiver of time periods.
Notwithstanding any provisions in this chapter regarding the occurrence of any action within a specified period of time, the applicant may request additional time beyond that provided for in this chapter or may request a continuance regarding any decision or consideration by the city of the pending appeal. Extensions of time sought by applicants shall not be considered delay on the part of the city, shall not constitute failure by the city to provide for prompt decisions on applications and shall not be a violation of any required time period set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

 

Chapter 18.12 SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
18.12.010 Location of dwelling.
Every dwelling, commercial, manufacturing or industrial building shall be on a lot having frontage upon a dedicated street. Exception: No building permits shall be issued on any lot not having frontage on a dedicated street until the applicant has applied for and secured a zone variance as per Chapter 18.76. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.12.020 Height of building.
No penthouses or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment; towers, steeples, roof signs or other structures shall exceed the height limit provided in this title as per Table 18.12.020.1. Radio and television masts, flagpoles, chimneys and smokestacks may extend not more than thirty feet above the height limit provided in this title; provided, however, that the same may be safely erected and maintained at such height in view of the surrounding conditions and circumstances.

 

 

Table 18.12.020.1

BUILDING HEIGHT ZONE SUMMARY1

 

 

Maximum Building Height

Zone

Stories

Feet

R-1a

2 ½

35

R-1b

2 ½

35

R-1c

2 ½

35

R-2

2 ½

35

R-3

2 ½

35

R-4

4

50

R-5

4

40

R-6

4

40

R-7

5

50

MHP

2 ½

35

C-P

2 ½

35

C-R2

4

50

C-1

2 ½

35

C-2

4

50

C-2S

4

50

C-3

6

75

C-U3

—

—

M-1

6

75

Accessory buildings

2

35

 

1            Summary for information purposes only. Refer to specific zone requirements for code provisions.

2            Additional height provided by conditional use in C-R zone.

3            Same as adjacent zones.

 

(Ord. 1803 § 3, 2019; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.12.030 Accessory buildings.
The following regulations shall apply to the location of accessory buildings unless otherwise provided in this chapter:

A.    No accessory buildings in the any residential zones may exceed two stories, or thirty-five feet in height.

B.     No accessory buildings in the any residential zone shall be located at a distance less than sixty percent of the depth of the lot from the front property line, or ninety feet whichever is less.

C.     On a corner lot, no detached accessory buildings in any residential zone shall be located at a distance less than ten feet from the side street line. On a corner lot no detached garage in any residential zone shall be located at a distance less than twenty feet from the side street line when the garage door faces the street.

D.    No accessory buildings in any residential zones, if two stories in height, shall be located nearer than five feet to any interior property line.

E.     No accessory buildings on the rear twenty-five feet of a reversed corner lot in any residential zones shall be located nearer to the side lot line on the street side of such reversed corner lot than the front yard depth required on the key lot in the rear.

F.     A private garage in the R-1 and R-2 zones of not to exceed six hundred square feet may be a part of the main building if the garage and the main building have a common wall of not less than five feet in length, or if connected by a roof of not less than five feet in width. Such attached garage may extend into the required rear yard for a distance of not more than fifteen feet.

G.    A private garage may be connected to a single-family residence with an unenclosed breezeway, and in such cases, the garage need not be considered part of the main building for purposes of maintaining the required rear yard provided, that the garage is not closer than ten feet from the main building. (Ord. 1803 § 3, 2019; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.12.040 Through lots.
On through lots, either line separating such lot from a public thoroughfare may be designated by the owner as the front lot line. In such cases, the minimum rear yard shall be the average of the yards on lots next adjoining. If such lots next adjoining are undeveloped, the minimum rear yard shall conform to the front yard setback for the zone in which the property is located. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.12.050 Yard encroachments.
The area of the required front yard setback, except for required driveways and walks, shall be landscaped and maintained with evergreen or similar plant and lawn material at all times and shall otherwise be open and unobstructed. It is unlawful for any person to utilize the required front yard setback or the side yard on the street side of a corner lot for the permanent storage of motor vehicles, trailers, airplanes, boats, parts of any of the foregoing or similar items. Any yard setback that is required by this title, shall be not less in depth or width than the minimum dimension specified for any part, and they shall be at every point open and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as follows:

A.    Cornices, canopies, carports, eaves or other similar architectural features not providing additional floor space within the building may extend into a required front, side or rear yard not to exceed two feet six inches.

B.     Open, unenclosed, uncovered porches, platforms or landing places which do not extend above the level of the first floor of the building, may extend into any front, side or rear yard not more than six feet; provided, however, that an open work railing not more than thirty inches in height may be installed or constructed on any such porch, platform or landing place.

C.     Detached accessory buildings may occupy side and rear yards as provided in Section 18.12.030.

D.    A patio roof may extend into a required rear yard setback no more than fifteen feet; provided, however, the patio is unenclosed on no less than two sides. For purposes of this subsection, an “enclosure” shall be a wall of solid material either transparent or opaque except that a wall of a height of three feet or less shall not be considered to constitute an enclosure.

E.     An addition for habitable purposes into an existing single-family structure may encroach a maximum of fifteen feet into the required rear yard setback, subject to the following provisions:

1.     For the purposes of this chapter, an existing single-family structure shall be one for which the certificate of occupancy was issued at least one year prior to the approval of any encroachment allowed by this chapter.

2.     Any addition allowed by this chapter shall be deemed by the planning department of the city to be similar to and compatible with the architecture of the existing structure with particular reference to the roof line, the roof covering and the exterior wall surface.

3.     A minimum of one thousand square feet of usable yard area as defined in this section shall be provided.

4.     A minimum setback of ten feet from the rear property line shall be maintained.

F.     Any motor vehicle, trailer, boat or similar items and parts may be temporarily placed on the required landscaped front yard setback for purposes of maintenance, repairs and similar activity for a period not exceeding a total of four consecutive hours and not less than twenty-four hours shall elapse between the last placement period and any subsequent placement period. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this subsection shall be guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.12.060 Usable yard space.
A.    Dwelling units in any zone shall be provided with usable yard space as follows: At least one thousand square feet for one through four dwelling units plus two hundred fifty square feet for additional dwelling units or as otherwise provided in this title. Such usable yard area shall have no dimension less than fifteen feet, except that not more than twenty-five percent of the required usable yard area may have a minimum dimension of twelve feet. This area may be provided at any location on the lot except in the required front yard or in a required side yard abutting a street. Such space may be divided into not more than two separate sub areas.

B.     The usable yard area required by this section shall not be used for parking, driveways, automobile turning areas or accessory buildings. The maximum gradient for usable yard area shall be five percent. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.12.070 Fences, walls and hedges.
A.    In all residential zones no fence, wall or hedge located in the rear or side yards shall exceed a height limit of six feet. Exception: Where the rear or side yard directly abuts a minimum of a four-lane highway, an eight-foot-high block wall may be constructed along or within ten feet of the rear or side property line. This exception shall not apply if a drive approach exits within these setback areas. The maximum height of the wall shall be measured from the highest grade at the walls location. Regardless of wall or fence height or location, all graffiti shall be removed within seventy-two hours of its discovery. All damaged walls or fences shall be repaired within seven days of its damage or as approved by the chief planner.

B.     In all residential zones no fence, wall or hedge located in the required front yard shall exceed a height of three feet.

C.     In all residential zones no fence, wall or hedge located along the street side of a reversed corner lot between the street and the established setback line on the key lot, to the rear, shall exceed a height of three feet.

 

Exception: Where the key lot to the rear is located at a higher elevation than the reversed corner lot, such fence, wall or hedge on the lower reversed corner lot may be increased in height in equal proportion to the increase in elevation of the key lot to the rear, but shall in no case exceed a height of six feet. Such fence, wall or hedge shall not exceed a height of three feet in the required front yard of the reversed corner lot.

D.    In all residential zones no barbed wire shall be used or maintained in or about the construction of a fence, wall or hedge along the front, side or rear lines of any lot, or within three feet of the lines, and no sharp wire or points shall project at the top of the fence or wall six feet or less in height. (Ord. 1803 § 3, 2019; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.12.080 Required walls.
Any person developing or improving land, which adjoins property, classified for a higher use, or any person constructing a building on land adjoining property classified for a higher use shall also construct or cause to be constructed a solid masonry wall in accordance with the following provisions:

A.    In all multifamily zone, a solid masonry wall six feet in height shall be provided between all off-street automobile parking areas located therein and all adjoining property classified for single-family uses, except that such wall, from the front property line to a depth equal to the required front yard on the abutting R classified property, shall be three feet in height.

For purposes of this section, off-street automobile parking areas shall include private driveways and all other private ingress and egress areas in connection therewith.

B.     In all C and M classified zones, a solid masonry wall six feet in height shall be provided between all such C and M classified property and all abutting property classified for R uses, except that such wall, from the front property line to a depth equal to the required front yard on the abutting R classified property, shall be three feet in height.

C.     Where a wall as required by this title is constructed between properties having different grade levels, the height of such wall shall be established as follows:

1.     Where the property classified for the heavier use is located on the lower grade level, the required wall height shall be measured from the finished grade of the lower property at the wall location, provided, that the wall shall extend not less than four above the finished grade of the higher property. In lieu of such three-foot wall extension, an approved type fence or barrier may be constructed.

2.     Where the property classified for the heavier use is located on the higher grade level the required wall height shall be measured from the finished grade of the higher property at the wall location; provided, that such a wall does not exceed an overall height of ten feet measured from the finished grade at a lower level. Where such difference in grade levels would require a wall having an overall height greater than ten feet at least two walls shall be constructed forming a terrace or approved slope between the top of the lower wall and the base of the higher wall.

D.    The foregoing provisions of this section shall apply only to property developed or improved after the effective date of this amendment (effective date September 2, 1960) and to property where a building construction project has commenced after the effective date of this amendment. (Ord. 1803 § 3, 2019; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.12.090 House trailers, trailers, boats and airplanes.
A.    The occupancy of a house trailer, whether on wheels or a foundation, for living purposes, either temporary or permanent, other than in regularly established trailer parks, is declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited.

The phrase “house trailer” as used in the first paragraph of this subsection includes any motor vehicle, boat or other device used for living or sleeping purposes.

Exception: House trailers may be occupied for living purposes on a temporary basis outside of a regularly established trailer park for a period of time not to exceed twelve months upon the granting of a conditional use permit as set forth in this title. Such conditional use permit may be granted only if the house trailer is incidental to the primary use of the property and is to be used in conjunction with the primary approved use. Approval of such a conditional use permit is subject to site plan review by the planning commission. Such site plan shall show that the placement of the housetrailer complies with all zoning code requirements, is compatible with all existing development on the parcel and will not have a detrimental effect upon surrounding properties. No house trailer may be occupied outside of a regularly established trailer park in any residential zone.

B.     No person shall leave or park any house trailer, travel trailer, mobile home, airplane, boat or mounted or unmounted camper upon any public street or highway between the hours of one a.m. and six a.m. of any day, or at any time upon any public property, except by special permission from the police department to allow for the loading or unloading, but not to exceed forty-eight hours.

C.     No portion of any required front yard or side yard on the street side of a corner lot shall be used for the permanent storage of motor vehicles, trailers, airplanes, boats, parts of any of the foregoing, garbage or trash receptacles, or building materials, except building materials for use on the premises stored thereon during the time a valid permit is in effect for construction on the premises.

“Permanent storage,” as used in this section, means parking for a period of seventy-two or more consecutive hours in the required front yard or side yard, and not less than forty-eight hours shall elapse between the last storage period and any subsequent storage period. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.12.100 Automobile service station—Development.
All future development of automobile service stations shall be in compliance with minimum site development standards for service stations as adopted by the planning commission and city council. The minimum site development requirements shall not become operative for an existing station for ten years from the effective date of this section, unless such station is remodeled or enlarged. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.12.110 Automobile service station—Operation.
A.    The display of tires and automotive supplies shall be restricted to within five feet of the central business office, on the pump island or in an accessory building.

B.     No vehicles shall be parked or stored upon the premises except vehicles being serviced, vehicles of employees, or service vehicles used in the operation of the station.

C.     Sale of items not clearly incidental to the automotive industry shall not be permitted outside of a building except when dispensed from a dispenser abutting the building.

D.    An adequate trash area shall be provided. Such area shall be equipped with trash receptacles with lids that are kept closed.

E.     Vending machines shall not block sidewalks or passageways.

F.     Lease or rental of vehicles or equipment shall be under conditional use permit only. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.12.120 Exceptions to provisions of Sections 18.12.100 and 18.12.110.
If strict interpretation of the requirements of the ordinance codified herein creates undue hardship, application for variance may be made pursuant to Chapter 18.74. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.12.130 Trash storage facilities.
A.    All refuse shall be stored within trash containers, which meet city standards. Except when temporarily placed for pickup, all such containers shall be located and screened so as not to be in public view.

B.     All nonresidential uses, as well as mobile home parks and group quarters in commercial and industrial zones shall provide trash enclosures for the purpose of screening the trash container(s) from public view, maintaining any loose debris within the enclosure, providing a permanent location for the container(s) that will not encroach upon driveways, parking, pedestrian, and emergency access areas. Exemption: Temporary uses shall not be required to provide an enclosure. All trash enclosures shall conform to the following standards:

1.     All required trash enclosures shall accommodate, at a minimum, a three-yard refuse bin and a ninety-six-gallon refuse/recycling cart. The minimum city standard shall be fifteen feet long by six feet wide.

Anyone proposing a size different than the city standard must submit data on waste generation amounts and the reasons why a different size enclosure is appropriate. The director of public works, shall have the authority to approve trash enclosures of other sizes.

2.     All required trash enclosures shall be constructed of masonry block or concrete tilt-up and shall be designed to be architecturally compatible with the buildings on the site.

3.     Structural and architectural features shall be subject to approval by the planning and building departments.

4.     Enclosures for compactors located outside of any building shall be constructed to be architecturally compatible with the buildings on site and shall be subject to approval by the planning and building departments.

5.     The placement of the enclosures shall be in a manner which provides adequate space for pickup of both trash and recyclables.

C.     More than one enclosure may be required, based on the size of the parcel and/or intensity of use, as determined by the director of public works.

 

D.    All trash enclosures and adjacent paving shall be maintained in good condition at all times.

E.     Upon written acceptance from the franchised agent for trash disposal, the requirement for a trash enclosure may be waived by the director of public works for a trash compactor, provided that the storage of the compactor and all trash shall be kept within the building and that the type and amount of trash will not create a public nuisance. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.12.140 Outdoor seating area.
An outdoor seating area is permitted for approved food facilities within commercial and industrial zones subject to the following restrictions:

A.    The outdoor dining area shall not exceed a maximum size of two hundred fifty square feet. The proposed dining area is to be protected from motor vehicles.

B.     Patron tables and other outdoor dining area components shall be located on the same site as the restaurant, on private property. All components of the outdoor dining area are to be portable. No advertising is permitted on the outdoor dining components (tables, umbrellas, etc.).

C.     The hours and days of operation of the outdoor dining area shall be identified and noted in the administrative adjustment permit application.

D.    Required landscape areas are not to be removed.

E.     Proposed dining area components shall be arranged so as to comply with California Code Title 24, Accessibility.

F.     No outside music or live entertainment is to be provided.

G.    Appropriate outdoor lighting shall be provided for the dining area.

H.    The dining area shall be kept clean at all times.

I.      A waste receptacle that can be used by the public and employees shall be provided.

J.      The applicant shall not convert required on-site parking spaces into dining area. No additional parking is required for the added outdoor dining area.

K.    Dining areas are to be located away from residential areas.

L.     No alcoholic service is permitted in the outdoor dining area without approval of a conditional use permit from the planning commission.

M.    A site plan showing location of the dining area and its layout, along with an administrative adjustment permit application form and fee shall be submitted to the director of community development for approval. The director of community development may append conditions to the permit to minimize impacts to the adjacent businesses and property owners. Permits approved may be suspended and revoked by the director of community development due to noncompliance with the restrictions or conditions placed on the administrative adjustment permit.

N.    Denial, suspension or revocation of an administrative adjustment permit by the director of community development, may be appealed to the planning commission. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

18.12.150 Accessory dwelling units.
A.    Purpose, Definitions, Occupancy.

1.     Purpose. The city of La Habra finds and declares that accessory dwelling units are an important form of housing that contributes to the character and diversity of housing opportunities. Accessory dwelling units provide affordable housing for family members, students, elderly, in-home health care providers, the disabled and others, at below market rental rates within existing neighborhoods. The city intends to encourage accessory dwelling units and, impose standards on such units that will enable homeowners to create accessory dwelling units that will be compatible, as much as possible, with their neighborhoods. An additional purpose of this section is to comply with Sections 65852.2 and 65852.22 of the California Government Code relative to accessory dwelling units and junior accessory dwelling units.

2.     Definitions.

a.     The terms “accessory dwelling unit,” “public transit,” “passageway” and “tandem parking” all have the same meanings as those stated in Government Code Section 65852.2 as that section may be amended from time to time.

b.     The term “housing organization” shall have the same meanings as those stated in Government Code Section 65589.5(k)(2), as that section may be amended from time to time.

c.     “Junior accessory dwelling unit” shall have same meaning as that stated in Government Code Section 65852.22(h)(1) as that section may be amended from time to time.

3.     Occupancy. Accessory dwelling units may be rented separate from the primary residence, but may not be sold or otherwise conveyed separate from the primary residence.

B.     Application for Accessory Dwelling Unit Permit.

1.     Accessory dwelling units are permitted in all zones within the city where single-family or multifamily residential units are permitted, subject to the owner first obtaining a building permit. Any application for an accessory dwelling unit that meets the unit size standards and development standards contained in subsection C or D of this section, or is the type of accessory dwelling unit described in subsection E of this section, shall be approved ministerially by the city by applying the standards herein and without a public hearing.

2.     An application for an accessory dwelling unit building permit shall be made by the owner of the parcel on which the primary unit sits and shall be filed with the city on a city-approved application form and subject to the established fee.

3.     Applications for accessory dwelling units shall conform to the requirements for and obtain a building permit as determined by the city building official. In addition, the application shall include the following documents, which shall be reviewed and approved by the director of community development or designee:

a.     Plot Plan (drawn to scale). Dimensions of the perimeter of the parcel on which the accessory dwelling unit will be located. Indicate the location and dimensioned setbacks, and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures on the site. Provide dimensions of all easements, right-of-way(s), building envelopes, parking and paved areas.

b.     Floor Plans. Complete floor plans of both existing and proposed conditions shall be provided. Each room shall be dimensioned and resulting floor area calculation included. The use of each room shall be labeled. The size and location of all doors, closets, walls and cooking facilities shall be clearly depicted.

c.     Elevations. North, south, east, and west elevations that show all exterior structure dimensions, all architectural projections, and all openings for both the existing residence and the proposed accessory dwelling unit.

C.     Unit Size Standards. All accessory dwelling units shall not exceed the size standards listed below for attached or detached units or garages.

1.     Attached Units in Single-Family Dwellings. The maximum floor area of an attached accessory dwelling unit on a single-family lot shall be either:

a.     Eight hundred fifty square feet for an accessory dwelling unit that is a studio or one-bedroom unit; or

b.     One thousand square feet for an accessory dwelling unit that has two or more bedrooms.

2.     Detached Units on Single-Family Dwelling Lots:

a.     A detached unit shall not exceed one thousand two hundred square feet of living area.

b.     A single-car carport may be attached to the detached accessory dwelling unit.

3.     ADUs on Multi-family Dwelling Lots. The maximum floor area of an attached or detached accessory dwelling unit on a multifamily dwelling lot shall be either:

a.     Eight hundred fifty square feet for an accessory dwelling unit that is a studio or one-bedroom unit; or

b.     One thousand square feet for an accessory dwelling unit that has two or more bedrooms.

4.     Setback Requirements.

a.     No setbacks are required for those portions of accessory dwelling units that are created by converting existing living area or existing accessory structures to new accessory dwelling units or constructing new accessory dwelling units in the same location and to the same dimensions as an existing structure.

b.     For all other accessory dwelling units, there must be a minimum of four feet of setbacks from side and rear lot lines and comply with all applicable front yard setbacks.

c.     The minimum required distance between a detached accessory dwelling unit and the primary dwelling unit, and all other structures, including garages, on the property, shall be ten feet.

D.    Development Standards. Any permit for an accessory dwelling unit shall be subject to the development standards listed below.

1.     Legal lot/residence. An accessory dwelling unit shall only be allowed on a lot within the city that contains a legal, single-family or multifamily residence as an existing or proposed primary unit on a lot.

2.     Number of accessory dwelling units per lot. For lots with proposed or existing single-family residences, no more than one attached or detached accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted on the lot.

a.     Notwithstanding the above, a lot with a single-family residence may have one junior accessory dwelling unit and one detached accessory dwelling unit.

b.     For lots with existing multifamily residential dwellings:

i.      No more than twenty-five percent of the number of the existing units, but at least one unit, shall be permitted as accessory dwelling units constructed within the non-livable space of the existing building provided that applicable building codes are met; or

ii.     No more than two detached accessory dwelling units, provided that no such unit shall be more than sixteen feet in height, and have a minimum of four-foot side and rear yard setbacks. The maximum square footage of detached accessory dwelling units on lots with existing multifamily residential dwellings shall comply with the limits set forth in subsection C of this section.

3.     Building Code Compliance. All new accessory dwelling units must satisfy the requirements of Title 15 of the Municipal Code (“Buildings and Construction”) and any other applicable provisions of the California Building Standards Code. However, fire sprinklers shall not be required if they are not required for the primary residence.

4.     Fees and Charges.

a.     City/public utilities.

i.      All accessory dwelling units must be connected to public utilities, including water, electric, and sewer services. For example, accessory dwelling units and junior accessory dwelling units that are proposed to be installed on a property with only septic tanks are prohibited.

ii.     Except as provided in subsection (4)(a)(iii) below, the city may require the installation of a new or separate utility connection between the accessory dwelling unit and the utility. The connection fee or capacity charge shall be proportionate to the burden of the proposed accessory dwelling unit based on either its square feet or number of drainage fixture unit values.

iii.    No separate connection between the accessory dwelling unit and the utility shall be required for units created within a single-family dwelling, unless the accessory dwelling unit is being constructed in connection with a new single-family dwelling.

iv.    Regardless of where it is located, for the purposes of calculating utility connection fees or capacity charges, accessory dwelling units shall not be considered a new residential use unless the accessory dwelling unit was constructed with a new single-family dwelling.

b.     Building Fees. Fees for building permits shall be waived, for an accessory dwelling unit, if a covenant in a form acceptable to the city attorney is recorded on the property requiring the accessory unit to be occupied exclusively for persons that qualify as very low-income. Very low-income is defined as fifty percent or below of average medium income, for Orange County, adjusted for family size.

c.     Impact Fees.

i.      For accessory dwelling units of seven hundred fifty square feet or larger, all impact fees applicable to accessory dwelling unit’s construction shall be paid to the city in amounts proportional to the size of the accessory dwelling unit relative to the square footage of the primary dwelling unit.

ii.     For accessory dwelling units seven hundred forty-nine square feet or smaller, no impact fees shall be charged, unless otherwise allowed by state law.

iii.    For purposes of this subsection, “impact fee” has the same meaning as specified in Government Code Section 66000(b) and also includes in-lieu park fees as specified in Government Code Section 66477.

5.     Parking.

a.     The city shall require the owner to provide one parking space unless the accessory dwelling unit has no bedrooms (e.g., a studio), in which case no space is required. The required parking space may be provided as:

i.      Tandem parking on an existing driveway in a manner that does not encroach onto a public sidewalk; or

ii.     Within a setback area or as tandem parking in locations determined feasible by the city for such use. Locations will be determined infeasible based upon specific site or regional topographical or fire and life safety conditions, or that it is not permitted anywhere else in the city.

b.     Notwithstanding the foregoing, no parking space shall be required for an accessory dwelling unit if:

i.      It is located within one-half mile walking distance of public transit;

ii.     It is located within an architecturally and historically significant district;

iii.    It is part of a proposed or existing primary residence or accessory structure;

iv.    When on-street parking permits are required, but not offered to, the occupant of the accessory dwelling unit; or

v.     Where there is a car share vehicle located within one block of the accessory dwelling unit.

c.     When a garage, carport, or covered parking structure is demolished in conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit or converted to an accessory dwelling unit, the off-street parking spaces do not have to be replaced.

6.     Recorded Covenants. Before obtaining a permit for an accessory dwelling unit, the property owner shall file with the county recorder a declaration or agreement of restrictions, which has been approved by the city attorney as to its form and content, describing restrictions that allows for and the continued use of the accessory dwelling as follows:

a.     The accessory dwelling unit shall not be sold separately from the primary residence;

b.     The accessory second unit is restricted to the maximum size allowed per the development standards set forth in this section;

c.     Starting in January 1, 2025, the accessory dwelling unit shall be considered legal only as long as either the primary residence or the accessory dwelling unit is occupied by the owner of record; and

 

d.     The restrictions shall be binding upon any successor in ownership of the property, and lack of compliance shall result in legal action against the property owner for noncompliance with the requirements for an accessory dwelling unit.

7.     Conversion of Existing Primary Unit. An existing primary dwelling may be converted to an accessory dwelling unit if it complies with all applicable requirements of this section. If so, a new, larger primary residence may be constructed.

8.     Design Requirements for New Units. All new accessory dwelling units must comply with the following design requirements:

a.     The exterior materials, colors, roof pitch and architecture shall be similar to and compatible with those of the primary unit.

b.     Accessory dwelling units shall not exceed the height level of the tallest existing structure on the parcel or as required in the base zoning district, whichever is less.

c.     Lighting shall not spill on to neighboring lots.

9.     Accessibility Standards. New construction of any ground level accessory dwelling unit shall be designed and constructed to allow for disability/accessibility standards. Plans shall demonstrate future entrance capability and actual construction shall include adequate door and hallway widths, maneuvering space in kitchens and bathrooms, and structural reinforcements for grab bars.

10.   Passageway. No passageway shall be required in conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit.

11.   Waiver of Standards. One or more of the development standards identified in this subsection D or in subsection C, above, can be modified or waived by the director of community and economic development or designee (“director”) if: (a) a covenant is recorded on the property requiring the accessory dwelling unit to be occupied by persons that qualify as low-income as identified in the city of La Habra Housing Element and approved by the director when such modification or waiver is in the determination of the director necessary to provide low-income housing; and (b) the director determines that the value of the incentive offered does not exceed the value to the public of the recorded covenant.

E.     Exceptions.

1.     Accessory dwelling units shall be approved for the following types of accessory dwelling units, regardless of whether the applicant meets the development standards contained in this title.

a.     For lots with single-family dwellings, one of the following:

i.      One interior accessory dwelling unit or one junior accessory dwelling unit per lot constructed within an existing or proposed single-family or “accessory structure” as that term is defined in Government Code Section 65852.2, including the construction of up to a one hundred fifty square foot expansion beyond the same physical dimensions as the existing accessory dwelling structure to accommodate ingress and egress. The accessory dwelling unit or junior accessory dwelling unit must have exterior access and side and rear setbacks sufficient for fire safety. If the unit is a junior accessory dwelling unit, it must also comply with the requirements of subsection G below; or

ii.     One new, detached accessory dwelling unit with a minimum four-foot side and rear setbacks, up to eight hundred square feet and no more than sixteen feet high on a lot with an existing or proposed single-family dwelling. A junior accessory dwelling unit may also be built within the existing or proposed dwelling of such residence in connection with the accessory dwelling unit.

b.     On a lot with an existing multifamily dwelling:

i.      Accessory dwelling units may be constructed in areas that are not used as livable space within an existing multifamily dwelling structure (i.e., storage rooms, boiler rooms, passageways, attics, basements, or garages), provided the spaces meet state building standards for dwellings. The number of interior accessory dwelling units permitted on the lot shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the current number of units of the multifamily complex on the lot and at least one such unit shall be allowed. Units constructed pursuant to this subsection shall not exceed eight hundred  square feet in floor area; and

ii.     Up to two detached accessory dwelling units may be constructed, provided they are no taller than sixteen feet, and they have at least four feet of side and rear yard setbacks. Units constructed pursuant to this subsection shall not exceed eight hundred square feet in floor area.

2.     Accessory dwelling units approved under this subsection E shall not be rented for a term of less than thirty  days.

3.     Accessory dwelling units or junior accessory dwelling units approved under this subsection E shall not be required to correct legal nonconforming zoning conditions.

F.     General Plan Consistency. In adopting these standards, the city recognizes that the approval of dwelling units may, in some instances, result in dwelling densities exceeding the maximum densities prescribed by the general plan. The city finds that this occurrence is consistent with the general plan, as allowed under state planning and zoning law applicable to accessory dwelling units, and that the amendment furthers the goals, objectives, and policies of the general plan housing element.

G.    Junior Accessory Dwelling Units.

1.     Purposes. This section provides standards for the establishment of junior accessory dwelling units. Junior accessory dwelling units will typically be smaller than an accessory dwelling unit, will be constructed within the walls of an existing or proposed single family residence and requires owner occupancy in the single family residence where the unit is located.

2.     Size. A junior accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed five hundred square feet in size.

3.     Owner Occupancy. The owner of a parcel proposed for a junior accessory dwelling unit shall occupy as a primary residence either the primary dwelling or the junior accessory dwelling. Owner-occupancy is not required if the owner is a governmental agency, land trust, or housing organization.

4.     Sale Prohibited. A junior accessory dwelling unit shall not be sold independently of the primary dwelling on the parcel.

5.     Short Term Rentals. The junior accessory dwelling unit shall not be rented for periods of less than thirty days.

6.     Location of Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit. A junior accessory dwelling unit shall be created within the existing walls of an existing primary dwelling.

7.     Kitchen Requirements. The junior accessory dwelling unit shall include an efficiency kitchen, including a food preparation counter and storage cabinets that are of reasonable size in relation to the size of the junior accessory dwelling unit.

8.     Parking. No additional parking is required beyond that required at the time the existing primary dwelling was constructed.

9.     Fire Protection; Utility Service. For the purposes of any fire or life protection ordinance or regulation or for the purposes of providing service for water, sewer, or power, a junior accessory dwelling unit shall not be considered a separate or new unit, unless the junior accessory dwelling unit was constructed in conjunction with a new single-family dwelling. No separate connection between the junior accessory dwelling unit and the utility shall be required for units created within a single-family dwelling, unless the junior accessory dwelling unit is being constructed in connection with a new single-family dwelling.

10.   Deed Restriction. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for a junior accessory dwelling unit, the owner shall record a deed restriction in a form approved by the city that includes a prohibition on the sale of the junior accessory dwelling unit separate from the sale of the single-family residence, requires owner-occupancy consistent with subsection (G)(3) above, does not permit rentals for periods thirty days or shorter, and restricts the size and attributes of the junior dwelling unit to those that conform with this section. (Ord. 1813 § 4, 2019; Ord. 1792 § 2, 2018; Ord. 1777 § 3, 2017; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.12.160 Boarding or rooming houses.
A.    All boarding or rooming houses shall obtain approval of a conditional use permit prior to establishing such use within the city and shall pay to the city the regular fees associated with such permit.

B.     All boarding or rooming houses shall comply with the parking requirements applicable to rooming houses, as set forth in Section 18.14.030 of this code, prior to establishing such use within the city.

C.     No boarding or rooming houses shall be within five hundred feet of any other boarding or rooming house. The distance requirement herein shall be measured from property line to property line, along a straight line extended between the two points.

D.    No more than one federal, state or youth authority parolee shall be allowed to live in a boarding or rooming house at any one time.

E.     The conditional use application submitted for any boarding or rooming house shall provide information, including identifying information such as the full name and age of the parolee and the proposed time of residency at the boarding or rooming house, regarding any proposed boarders or roomers who will be, at the time of proposed residency in the boarding or rooming house, federal, state or youth authority parolees. Such information shall be updated with the city by the owner or landlord of the residence as to each lessee or renter upon the signing, entering into, or otherwise commencing any rental or lease agreement, arrangement or accommodation within three business days.

F.     All boarding or rooming houses shall require boarders or roomers to sign an agreement that provides that a conviction for any criminal violation, not including infractions and minor traffic violations, during residency in the boarding or rooming house, is grounds for termination of the residency or tenancy of that boarder or roomer, whether the rental, lease, or sublease agreement is written or oral.

G.    Boarding or rooming houses shall be in compliance with all requirements of the city’s zoning code at all times, as well as any other applicable provisions of this code, including obtaining any other permits or licenses, such as building permits or a business license, required before establishing, expanding or maintaining the use.

H.    Any violation of any local, state or federal laws by boarders or roomers while on the premises shall be grounds for revocation of the boarding or rooming conditional use permit, including but not limited to any violations of this section, California Penal Code Section 3003.5 or Chapter 9.66 of this code, where the property owner contributed to or did not take all reasonable steps to protect against or prevent the violation.

I.      No boarding or rooming house shall be maintained as a nuisance.

J.      Boarding or rooming houses existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall be made to comply with the provisions of this section within six months of the effective date of the ordinance, except as to existing leases or rental agreements with respect to subsection E of this section, which subsection shall be complied with as soon as the termination, expiration, renewal or modification of any existing leases or rental agreements. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.12.170 Smoking lounges.
A.    Definition. “Smoking lounge” means a business establishment that is dedicated, in whole or in part, to the smoking of tobacco, including, but not limited to, establishments known variously as cigar lounges, hookah cafés, tobacco clubs or tobacco bars.

B.     Permit Requirements. Smoking lounge is a use permitted by a conditional use permit within the C-1 (limited commercial zone), C-2S (community shopping center zone), C-2 (commercial zone), C-3 (general commercial zone), SP-1 (La Habra Boulevard specific plan), and PC-I (planned commercial-industrial) zones.

C.     Location Restrictions.

1.     The tenant space shall not be located within two hundred feet of any residential zone boundary within the city.

2.     The tenant space shall be a minimum distance of one thousand feet from any educational institution as defined in Section 18.04.260 within the city.

D.    Operational Restrictions.

1.     The business shall be owner-operated or otherwise exempt from the prohibition of smoking in the workplace set forth in California Labor Code Section 6404.5.

2.     No alcoholic beverages shall be sold or consumed on the business premises within any area where the smoking of tobacco or other substances is allowed, including any outdoor seating area. Should food service be proposed, the owner-operator shall comply with California Labor Code Section 6404.5.

3.     No person under eighteen years of age shall be permitted within any of the business premises where the smoking of tobacco or other substances is allowed.

4.     No live entertainment, including, but not limited to singers, DJs, dancers, and comedians, shall be permitted within the business except as authorized pursuant to Chapter 5.32 (Entertainment, Amusement and Dance Permits).

5.     All business related activities shall be conducted wholly within a building, with the exception of outdoor seating areas approved as part of the conditional use permit. Operation of outdoor barbeques or braziers or lighting coals shall not be permitted.

6.     No admittance fee, cover charge, or requirement of any charge or minimum payment as a condition of entry shall be permitted.

 

7.     Uniformed security guards shall be provided, as deemed necessary by the chief of police.

8.     No window coverings shall prevent visibility of the interior of the tenant space from outside the premises during operating hours. Any proposed window tint shall be approved in advance by the director of community development.

9.     The interior of the business shall be maintained and adequately illuminated to make the conduct of patrons within the premises readily discernable to persons of normal visual acuity.

10.   Adequate ventilation shall be provided for the heating of coals in accordance with all requirements imposed by the chief building official and fire chief, or as otherwise required by state or federal law.

11.   Parking shall be provided using the standard for restaurant with bar (twelve spaces per one thousand GFA).

12.   The business shall conform to all other city, state, and federal laws.

E.     Application Requirements.

1.     Application for a conditional use permit shall be filed in accordance with Chapter 18.66 (Conditional Use Permits);

2.     The exact nature and location of the activity for which the conditional use permit is requested and an estimate of the numbers of patrons of the establishment;

3.     A security plan for control of customers;

4.     A plan for control of noise affecting nearby premises;

5.     The business plan including the hours of operation of the establishment;

6.     Such other information pertaining to public health and safety as may be required by director of community development to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.12.180 Arcades.
A.    Definitions.

1.     “Amusement device” means a mechanical, electrical, electronic or video device simulating the playing of sporting games or other games; pinball machines; billiard and pool tables; and other similar devices and equipment that require participation by the player. This definition does not include “adult arcade booths” as defined in Section 18.56.010.

2.     “Arcade” means any premises other than an “adult arcade” as defined in Section 18.56.010 which is open to the public and which contains four or more amusement devices, or any premises wherein not less than twenty-five percent of the public floor area is devoted to amusement devices, whether or not the devices constitute the primary use or accessory use of the premises.

B.     Hours of Operation. During the school year, it is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen years to operate electronic or mechanical game machines on any commercial premises in the city before three p.m. Monday through Friday, or after eleven p.m. Sunday through Thursday, excluding school holidays. It is also unlawful for any person to permit or allow persons under eighteen years of age to operate the machines during these hours on the commercial premises owned by them or under their control. Violation of this section shall be punishable as an infraction and in addition thereto may constitute grounds for revocation of any conditional use permit issued with respect to the premises. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

Chapter 18.14 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
18.14.010 Purpose.
These regulations are intended to achieve the following:

A.    To provide accessible, attractive, secure, properly lighted, well-maintained and screened parking facilities.

B.     To reduce traffic congestion and hazards.

C.     To assure maneuverability of emergency vehicles.

D.    To provide appropriately designed parking facilities in proportion to the needs generated by varying types of land uses. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.14.020 Applicability.
For each dwelling, multiple dwelling, business or industrial establishment or other structure erected after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title, there shall be provided and maintained off-street parking facilities to accommodate the motor vehicles used by the occupants, customers, clientele and employees of such dwelling, multiple dwelling, business or industrial establishment or other structure. The aggregate amount of parking space for each type of use shall be not less than that stated in this chapter. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.14.030 Definitions.
In addition to the definitions contained in this code, the following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this chapter, be defined as follows, unless it is clearly apparent from the context that another meaning is intended. Should any of the definitions be in conflict with the current provisions of this code, these definitions shall prevail:

“Accessible parking space” means a parking space provided for use by persons as described in the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and the requirements established by the state of California.

“Accessory apartment/secondary dwelling unit” means any residential dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities on the same parcel where one and only one, legal single-family residence exists and includes the permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation in compliance with the development standards established in Section 18.24.070(G).

“Automotive parking areas” are parking areas for use of motor vehicles for the owner(s), employees and customers of the allowed land use. “Automotive parking areas” as used in this title are not for the display of vehicle for sale or for the storage of vehicles.

“Billiard/pool halls” means any premises in which there are two or more pool or billiard tables used for the purpose of playing pool or billiards or other game, for which a compensation of any kind is paid to the owner, proprietor, manager, lessee or possessor thereof. A premises in which there are no more than two coin-operated pool or billiard tables, which is used in conjunction with some other business, shall not be a pool or billiard parlor for the purpose of this chapter.

“Boardinghouse” and “rooming house” mean a residence, dwelling or portion thereof, other than a hotel, which is used to accommodate with or without individual or group cooking facilities, for compensation, three or more individuals under separate rental, lease, or sublease agreements, either written or oral, whether or not the owner resides therein. The word “compensation” includes compensation in money, services or other things of value. This term shall not include a residential care facility, as defined in this chapter, serving six or fewer residents.

“Carport” means a permanent roofed structure with not more than two enclosed sides used or intended to be used for automobile shelter and storage.

“Commercial use” means any use which includes as a part of its operation sales of merchandise, goods or services to the general public, except those uses which are conducted on residential property by the residential property owner, such as garage sales, lawn sales, yard sales, etcetera.

“Congregate housing” means a residential facility with shared common living areas, restricted by an agreement approved by the city for occupancy by low and very low-income households, providing services which may include meals, housekeeping, child care, and other services as well as common areas for residents of the facility.

“Domestic violence shelter” means a residential facility which provides temporary accommodations to persons and/or families who have been the victims of domestic violence. Such a facility may provide meals, child care, counseling, and other services. The term “temporary accommodations” means that a person or family will be allowed to reside at the shelter for a time period not to exceed six months.

“Garage” means an enclosed building or portion of a building in which motor vehicles used by the occupants or tenants of the main building or buildings on the premises are stored or kept.

“Gross floor area (GFA)” means the floor area within the perimeter of the exterior walls of the building. It is the sum of the gross areas of all floors including levels below grade.

“Gross leasable area (GLA)” means the area within the inside perimeter of the exterior walls of the building under consideration, exclusive of vent shafts and courts, corridors, stairways, closets, the thickness of interior walls, columns or other features.

“Homeless shelter” means a residential facility which provides temporary accommodations to homeless persons and/or families and which meet standards for shelters contained in Title 25 California Administrative Code, Part 1, Chapter F, Subchapter 12, Section 7972. The facility may provide, or contract with recognized community organizations to provide, emergency or temporary shelter, and may also provide meals, child care, counseling, and other services. Such facility may have individual rooms, but is not developed with individual dwelling units, with the exception of manager units. The term “temporary accommodations” means that a person or family will be allowed to reside at the shelter for a time period not to exceed six months.

“Hotel” means any structure or any portion of any structure which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, for time periods limited to thirty consecutive days or less, and includes but is not limited to, any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, but not used as the legal residence or principal dwelling place of the occupant(s), except for one or more caretaker/manager residential unit(s) which conform to the requirements for multiple family residential units in this title. “Hotel” does not mean any convalescent home or facility, home for the aged, hospital, jail, or military installation.

“ksf” means one thousand square feet.

“Landscape setback” means the front yard or side street setback required by this title to be landscaped.

“Motor vehicles” means a motor driven device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway.

Motel. See “Hotel.”

“Recreational vehicles” means a vehicle, boat, vessel or other type of portable structure, with or without a mode of power, and without permanent foundation, which can be towed, hauled, sailed, flown or driven, and is designed, used, or maintained primarily for recreational purposes, such as, but not limited to, travel trailers, tent trailers, camping trailers, motor homes, buses converted to recreational or other noncommercial uses, vans, trucks with camper shells, campers, motorcycles, off-road vehicles, aircraft, boats or other vessels.

“Required side yard” means a yard between the main building and the side lot line extending from the rear line of the required front yard, or the front lot line where no front yard is required, to the rear yard the width of which side yard shall be measured horizontally from, and at right angles to, the nearest point of a side lot line towards the nearest part of a main building.

“Seat” as used in this section means eighteen lineal inches of seating space when arranged in bleachers, benches or pews. For uses with no permanent seats, a seat is equal to seven square feet of floor area.

“Senior hotel” means a cluster of guest units with shared common living areas, restricted for occupancy by persons who are sixty-two years of age or older, providing services which may provide meals, housekeeping and other services.

“Senior housing” means age-restricted multiunit housings with covenants in place to assure that the units will remain age-restrictive for the life of the property.

“Shared parking” means the use of parking space by vehicles generated by two or more individual land uses without conflict. The ability to share parking is based on two conditions: (1) Variation in times of use; and (2) relationship among the land uses that result in visiting multiple land uses on the same auto trip.

“Single-room occupancy housing” means a cluster of guest units within a residential hotel providing sleeping and living facilities restricted by an agreement approved by the city for occupancy by low and very low-income individuals, designed for occupancy for periods of one month or longer.

“Temporary commercial enterprise” means any activity involving commercial use of property located within the city which continues for a period of forty-five days or less.

“Traffic index (TI)” is a single number used to express the total weight expected to be borne through tires onto the roadway surface during the design lifetime of the pavement.

 

“Transitional housing” means a residential facility that provides accommodations to low and very low-income persons and families for periods of up to two years, and which also may provide meals, child care, counseling, and other services, as well as common areas for residents of the facility. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.14.040 General requirements.
A.    A required landscape setback abutting a street shall not be used for off-street parking.

B.     The required usable yard area shall not be used for parking, driveways, or automobile turning areas. Any yard area in excess of the minimum usable yard area requirement may be used for parking, access to parking or loading.

C.     Each required parking space shall be located on the same lot or within five hundred feet of the subject use. When the required off-street parking space is provided on a separate lot from the main building(s) the parties involved with shall provide an agreement for such joint use by a legal instrument approved by the city attorney as to form and content.

D.    The area of the required front yard setback in all zones, except for required driveways and walks, shall be landscaped with evergreen or similar plant and lawn materials and maintained to provide a consistent greenbelt along all residential neighborhoods. At no time shall any portion of the required landscaped front yard setback be used for the parking or storage of any vehicle of any kind or for any vehicle parts.

E.     In any case where a parking calculation as required by this code results in a partial space, one complete parking space shall be provided.

F.     Parking studies required by this chapter shall be prepared by a California licensed civil or traffic engineer and as approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.14.050 Limitations on use.
A.    Each parking space required by this chapter shall be unobstructed and available for vehicle parking at all times.

B.     The parking of motor vehicles shall be without monetary charge when such parking is required in conjunction with uses permitted by this title except as approved by the planning commission through a conditional use permit.

C.     The parking facilities required by this chapter shall be used only for the temporary parking of vehicles used in conjunction with the uses they serve. Such parking facilities shall not be used for any other purpose.

D.    Required parking spaces in all multifamily zones shall be utilized solely for parking of operational motor vehicles belonging to the tenants of the development and their guests. (Ord. 1803 § 3, 2019; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.14.060 Number of spaces required.
A.    Residential.

1.     Single-Family. For every single-family dwelling there shall be provided and maintained on the same lot or parcel of land at least two parking spaces for each dwelling unit. Each such parking

        space shall be located in a private garage. Each garage shall have a minimum inside dimension of not less than twenty feet wide and twenty feet long.

a.     For each mobile home/modular housing unit within a mobile home park there shall be two parking spaces located within the park. If said spaces are located on the mobile home space area tandem parking may be utilized.

2.     Secondary Dwelling Unit. A secondary dwelling unit as defined in this title shall provide one off-street parking space in addition to the required parking for the existing dwelling unit. This additional parking space may be covered or uncovered and shall meet all parking space locations, dimensions, and surfacing requirements of this chapter.

3.     Multiple Family. For each multiple family dwelling unit there shall be provided the following minimum parking spaces for each unit:

 

Table 18.14.060.A.3

 

Type of Unit

Minimum Parking Spaces Required

Bachelor unit

1 space

One-bedroom unit

2 spaces

Two-bedroom unit

2 1/2 spaces

Three-bedroom unit

3 spaces

Each additional bedroom

1 space

Senior housing unit (condominiums/apartments)

1 space

 

a.     The required parking for a bachelor unit shall be provided in a garage. All other units shall have two parking spaces within a garage. The additional required parking spaces per unit need not be located in a garage, but must be located on an approved, paved area on the same lot or parcel and must be equally convenient to all dwelling units.

b.     In no case may a garage be constructed within twenty feet of any public street right-of-way when the garage door faces the street.

c.     A carport, as defined in this chapter, may not face or open onto a public street and shall be located to the rear of all main buildings. On a corner lot, the side of the carport facing the side street shall be enclosed. The side of a carport facing an alley need not be enclosed.

d.     Any multiple family developments shall include additional parking equal to one-half space per dwelling unit for the use of guests. Such parking shall be uncovered and shall be conveniently located for vehicular access from the street and pedestrian access to the units. Where the accumulated parking totals includes a half of a space, one complete space shall be provided.

4.     Special Needs Housing. For each dwelling unit there shall be provided the following minimum parking spaces:

 

 

Table 18.14.060.A.4

 

Type of Unit

Minimum Parking Spaces Required

Congregate housing, domestic violence shelter and transitional housing

2 spaces per facility plus 1/2 space per bedroom and 1/4 space per bedroom for guest parking

Homeless shelter

1/4 space for every bed

Senior hotel

1/4 space per unit plus 1/4 space per unit for guest parking

Single-room occupancy housing (SROs)

1 space per unit plus 1/4 space per unit for guest parking

 

5.     Commercial Lodging. For each facility there shall be provided the following minimum parking spaces:

 

Table 18.14.060.A.5

 

Type of Unit

Minimum Parking Spaces Required

Motels and hotels

1.25 spaces per guest room, plus 10 per ksf restaurant/lounge, plus 30 per ksf meeting/banquet room

Rooming houses, lodging houses, clubs, fraternity and sorority houses and dormitories

Parking study required

 

B.     Commercial.

1.     Recreational. For each facility there shall be provided the following minimum parking spaces:

 

Table 18.14.060.B.1

 

Use

Minimum Parking Spaces Required

Adult cabaret

Parking study required

Batting cages

4 per batting station

Bowling alleys

4 spaces per lane

Billiard/pool halls

4 per table

Cinemas

Single Screen: 0.5 per seat; 2 to 5 screens: 0.33 per seat; 5 to 10 screens: 0.3 per seat; over 10 screens: 0.27 per seat

Health clubs/spa

10 ksf GFA

Golf courses

Parking study required

Golf driving range

1 per driving tee

Tennis courts

3.6 per court

Theaters (live performance)

0.4 per seat

General auditorium (public assembly)

0.25 per person permitted capacity

 

 

2.     Institutional. For each facility there shall be provided the following minimum parking spaces:

 

Table 18.14.060.B.2

 

Use

Minimum Parking Spaces Required

High schools, college and universities

Parking study required

Commercial schools

0.35 per student, per session

Day care center

0.20 per person (licensed capacity)

Elementary and middle schools

0.20 per student

General auditorium (public assembly)

0.25 per person permitted capacity

Lodge/fraternal organization

Parking study required

Library

4.5 per ksf GFA

Museum

Parking study required

Religious institutions

0.45 per seat in worship area

 

a.     For religious institutions the parking rate is a blended rate for all of the uses on the site based on the number of seats within the area of worship. Any deviation from this requirement may be considered and approved by the planning commission as part of the conditional use permit upon the completion and approval of a parking study.

3.     Medical. For each facility there shall be provided the following minimum parking spaces:

 

Table 18.14.060.B.3

 

Use

Minimum Parking Spaces Required

Animal hospital/veterinary clinic

4 per ksf GFA

Clinic/urgent care facility
(medical offices with outpatient treatment; no overnight stays)

5.5 per ksf GFA

Convalescent hospital and nursing homes

1 per guest room

Hospital/medical center

Parking study required

Doctor/dentist office

4 per ksf <15,000 s.f. GFA; parking study required for offices >15,000 s.f.

 

4.     Office. For each facility there shall be provided the following minimum parking spaces:

 

Table 18.14.060.B.4

 

Use

Minimum Parking Spaces Required

General business office

3.3 per ksf GFA

 

5.     Retail. For each facility there shall be provided the following minimum parking spaces:

 

 

Table 18.14.060.B.5

 

Use

Minimum Parking Spaces Required

Coin operated laundries

1 per 2 machines

Grocery (freestanding)

4 per ksf GFA

Integrated retail commercial center
(at least five storefronts)

3.3 per ksf GFA

Motor vehicle sales and services

2.7 per ksf GFA interior sales and office area, plus 1.5 ksf GFA storage/display area, plus 2 per service bay

Nursery (garden center)

4 per ksf GFA plus 1/2 per ksf outdoor sales area

Retail and general commercial
(4 storefronts or less)

4 per ksf GFA

Temporary commercial enterprises and seasonal commercial sales lots
(as defined in Section 5.04.610(a) and (b))

Minimum of 4 spaces plus 4 per ksf GFA of display area

 

6.     Services. For each facility there shall be provided the following minimum parking spaces:

 

Table 18.14.060.B.6

 

Use

Minimum Parking Spaces Required

Auto service/repair

2 per bay plus 2.7 per ksf office

Car wash (self serve)

1 space per bay

Car wash (automated)

2 spaces per facility

Car wash (full service)

Parking study required

Gasoline/service station

2 spaces

gasoline/service station with convenience market

2 spaces plus 4 per ksf GFA

Restaurant—with bar

12 per ksf GFA

Restaurant—no bar

10 per ksf GFA

Restaurant—with drive thru

8 per ksf GFA

Restaurant—food to go (no seating)

4 per ksf GFA

 

C.     Industrial Uses. For each facility there shall be provided the following minimum parking spaces:

 

Table 18.14.060.C

 

Use

Minimum Parking Spaces Required

Industrial park
(multiple or mix of services and warehousing)

2 per ksf GFA

Manufacturing/light industrial

1.5 per ksf GFA

Warehouse

1 per ksf GFA

Mini-warehouse/self storage

0.1 per ksf GFA

D.    Shared Parking.

1.     Mixed Occupancies. In the case of mixed occupancies, the total requirement for off-street parking shall be the sum of the requirements for the various uses computed separately. However, the total number of parking spaces may be reduced upon:

a.     Approval of a conditional use permit by the Planning Commission.

b.     A reduction of up to ten percent may be approved by the director of community development.

In all cases, a parking study shall be prepared by a California licensed civil or traffic engineer and approved by the city engineer.

2.     Joint Uses. The planning commission may, upon application by the owner or lessee of any property of a conditional use permit, authorize the joint use of parking facilities by the following uses or activities:

a.     The parking facilities required by this chapter for a use which is nonresidential and is primarily a daytime use may be provided by the parking facilities of a use which is primarily a nighttime and/or Sunday use and vice versa, provided such reciprocal parking shall be subject to conditions set forth in subsection (D)(2)(b) of this section.

b.     Conditions Required for Joint Use.

i.      The outer boundaries of the properties upon which the uses are proposed, to which the application relates, shall be located within five hundred feet of each other unless shuttle service is provided between the sites.

ii.     The applicants shall show that there is no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours of the uses for which the joint use of off-street parking facilities is proposed.

iii.    The parties involved shall provide an agreement for such joint use by a legal instrument approved by the city attorney as to form and content.

E.     Nonconforming Uses and Sites.

1.     All sites that are nonconforming with regards to the number of parking spaces, upon adoption of this code, shall be upgraded to current code standards upon any increase in the area of the structure(s) or upon any change in use which is more intensive than the current use.

2.     All parking areas that are nonconforming with regard to space sizes, upon adoption of this code, shall be upgraded to current code standards upon any increase in the floor area of the structure(s) or upon any change in use which is more intensive than the current use.

F.     Exceptions.

1.     Commercially Zoned Lots. Where the depth of a lot measures one hundred fifty feet or less, measured from the front lot line to the rear lot line, and has a width of sixty feet or less, and where the lot existed prior to passage of the provisions codified in this section, at least three parking spaces shall be provided per one thousand square feet of floor space or fraction thereof.

2.     Upgrades for Accessibility Requirements. Any site that is required to upgrade to the most current accessibility requirements shall not be penalized for any reduction in parking caused by the new regulations. Said site shall become legal nonconforming. No additional parking will be required

        until such time as the building is enlarged or the land use changes to a more intensive use. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.14.070 Design standards.
A.    General Requirements.

1.     Compact spaces are not permitted.

2.     Each entrance and exit to a parking lot shall be constructed and maintained so that any vehicle entering or leaving the parking lot shall be clearly visible at a distance of not less than ten feet to a person approaching such entrance or exit on any pedestrian walk or foot path.

3.     Exits (except to alleys) from parking lots shall be clearly posted with “Stop” signs. Appropriate bumper guards, wheel stops, entrance and exit signs and directional signs shall be maintained where needed as determined by the city engineer.

4.     When gates are provided at the entrances and exits to any approved parking area or driveway they shall be placed a minimum of twenty feet from the property line. The gates shall not open onto or encroach into this required twenty-foot setback area.

5.     Any two car garage legally constructed prior to January 1, 2008, shall be exempt from the minimum size standards established in subsection B of this section and shall not be required to be upgraded as part of any addition to, or remodeling of, any single-family dwelling on the same lot or parcel when said addition is less than fifty percent of the floor area of the existing dwelling.

6.     Minor deviations from parking space design standards may be approved by the director of community development when a physical constraint or hardship exists through an administrative adjustment.

B.     Carport and Garage Design.

1.     All garages and carports shall have Portland cement concrete floors.

2.     Residential garages shall have a minimum interior dimension of twenty feet by twenty feet. Any single-car garage shall have a minimum interior dimension shall be ten feet by twenty feet. No obstruction to the parking of vehicles shall be allowed within the required area.

3.     Garage/carports shall be designed to reflect the architecture style of the dwellings by using similar materials and roof pitches. Garages and carports within multiple family developments shall be distributed evenly throughout the project site.

C.     Parking and Maneuvering for Single-family and Two-family Residential Developments. Parking and maneuvering areas in single-family residential and two-family zones for all vehicles shall be limited to the space within a carport or garage plus a paved driveway between such garage or carport and the street from which it is served, not exceeding the width of the garage.

1.     Driveway width shall have a minimum dimension of ten feet when the garage is located less than one hundred fifty feet from the street.

2.     Driveway Extensions. Driveways may extend into the required side setback within the front yard upon approval of an administrative adjustment by the director of community development. The following findings must be made before an adjustment can be made:

 

a.     That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the property involved that do not apply generally to the property or class of use in the same zone.

b.     That the granting of such administrative adjustment will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in such zone or vicinity in which the property is located.

c.     That such administrative adjustment is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant possessed by other property in the same zone and vicinity.

3.     No extensions are allowed in the street side setback area.

4.     Required back-out space. See Table 18.14.070.C.4:

 

18.14.070.C.4

 



5.     Circular Drives. A house with a lot width of at least one hundred feet of width along the front property line. No circular drive will be approved without the approval of the city engineer for two driveway approaches.

6.     All front yard areas other than those permitted to be paved by this section, shall be landscaped.

7.     Parking on any portion of a front yard, other than the permitted paved parking areas is prohibited.

8.     The paved area of the front yard of any single-family development shall not exceed forty percent.

D.    Parking Lot Design.

1.     Design and Location.

a.     There shall be adequate vehicular access to off-street parking facilities from a dedicated and improved street, service road or alley. The design of the access shall be approved by the city engineer.

b.     An unobstructed twenty-foot drive throat shall be provided at all entrances and exits from approved parking areas to any public street or alley. This area may not be used as backing area for any parking space.

c.     Each parking space required by this chapter shall not be less than nine feet in width or eighteen feet in length of unobstructed pavement area.

d.     The maximum grade of any parking surface and its adjacent back up area shall be no more than five percent in any direction.

e.     The maximum grade of any driveway within a parking lot shall not exceed twelve percent.

f.      All parking areas, except for single-family residences, shall be designed so that no parking space requires the backing of a vehicle into a public street or across a public sidewalk.

g.     All two-way drive aisles, except required fire lanes, shall have a minimum width of twenty-five feet with a thirty-two-foot centerline radius turn at the end of the aisles. Larger widths may be required by the fire code depending on the actual building design. Fire lane widths shall comply with the requirements of the Los Angeles County fire department.

h.     Dead end drive aisles longer than forty-five feet shall provide a hammerhead at the end of the aisle. Said hammerhead shall not encroach into any required landscape setback area.

i.      Parallel parking spaces shall have a dimension of nine feet by twenty-four feet.

j.      All angled parking spaces shall be designed in such a manner as to maintain a nine-foot by eighteen-foot rectangular parking area without encroaching into the drive aisle.

k.     Adequate shopping cart collection and storage areas shall be provided for all retail users that provide cart service to their customers. Said cart collection area shall be architecturally compatible with the main building and screened with landscaping material as approved by the director of community development.

 








 

2.     Drainage. Parking lots shall be graded so as to drain surface water runoff to a public right-of-way, in conformance with the requirement of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) and as approved by the city engineer.

3.     Landscaping. Each parking lot shall be landscaped in accordance with the following standards:

a.     The landscape area shall be equal to the sum of seven percent of the area of the parking lot in addition to the required front and side street landscape setback areas of the parcel.

i.      A landscaped area having a minimum width of fifteen feet shall be provided along the total length of the street frontage and ten feet in width on the side street of corner lots, exclusive of the drive approaches and driveways shall separate parking areas from the public right-of-way. The landscaping in this area shall include earthen berms as approved by the director of community development.

ii.     No landscaping located within the required front setback or the required side yard setback abutting a street shall exceed three feet in height except for trees required by this chapter or other plantings approved by the director of community development.

iii.    Trees shall be provided within the required parking lot landscaped area a quantity equal to one for every ten parking spaces. The trees to be provided shall be a minimum size of twenty-four inch box and shall be of a type approved by the director of community development.

iv.    Within the landscaped area along the street frontage shall be one tree for every twenty feet of the total street frontage, excluding drive approaches and driveways. The trees to be provided shall be a minimum size of twenty-four-inch box and shall be of a type approved by the director of community development.

v.     Tree wells within parking lots, also referred to as diamond planters or half-diamond planters, may be permitted in parking lots at the head of parking stalls and may encroach into the parking stall space. The tree well dimension shall be three feet by three feet.

 

Table 18.14.070.D.3.a.v

   

Figure 1 – Diamond planter.               Figure 2 – Half-diamond planter

 

vi.    Parking areas adjacent to a public sidewalk or public right-of-way shall be screened with a thirty-six-inch high solid hedge of live plant material to be placed at the rear of the required landscape setback.

b.     Landscaping Area Protection. All areas established for landscaping shall be protected on those sides adjacent to vehicular parking with a solid Portland cement concrete curb, six inches in height and a minimum of six inches in depth, or other suitable protection as approved by the director of community development, for the length of the landscaped area adjacent to subject parking. Individual wheel stops shall not be used as a substitute for subject curb.

c.     Irrigation. An underground sprinkler system shall be installed to provide adequate water supply to all landscaping. Subject sprinkler system shall be installed so as to direct spray away from public sidewalks. Drainage from landscaping irrigation shall not be directed across any adjacent private property.

4.     Lighting. Parking areas shall have lighting capable of providing adequate illumination for security and safety. The minimum requirement is one foot-candle, maintained across the surface of the parking area. Lighting standards shall be energy-efficient and in scale with the height and use of the structure. Any illumination, including security lighting, shall not spill over on to any adjacent properties. In general, lamps should not be visible from any adjoining property. Light standards may not be placed in any required landscape setback area.

5.     Screening. In the development of any parking lot on a parcel adjacent to any residential zone a solid masonry wall six feet in height shall be provided; however, the wall from the front property line to a depth equal to the required front yard shall be three feet in height. Such wall shall be maintained in good condition at all times.

6.     Striping. All parking spaces shall be striped in accordance with city standards and shall be clearly and visibly striped and shall be maintained in this condition at all times.

7.     Signage. Signage within parking lots shall not interfere with proper visibility for traffic and pedestrian safety. All parking lot directional signage shall be subject to review and approval by the city engineer.

8.     Security. Security cameras and monitoring systems shall be installed in all parking lots with more than ten parking spaces. All cameras and monitoring systems shall be reviewed and approved by the chief of police or designee.

9.     Surfacing Standards. All off-street automobile parking areas, including automobile sales lots, service stations and other drive-in establishments, shall be fully hard-surfaced with approved-type asphaltic concrete, or any other recognized street surfacing material. Exception: carports, garages and parking areas on electrical substation property.

a.     The design of all parking areas shall use a minimum structural section of three inches of asphalt concrete on six inches of Class A aggregate base course. Alternatively, a design may be prepared by a licensed professional engineer using a minimum Traffic Index (TI) of 4.5 for parking spaces, 5.0 for drive aisles between parking spaces, 5.5 for driveways and truck service areas, and submitted for review and approval by the city engineer.

b.     All parking areas shall be maintained in good condition at all times.

10.   Wheel Stops. A Portland cement concrete wheel stop shall be placed at the head of any parking space which is adjacent to a sidewalk or pedestrian walkway to prevent overhang of any part of the vehicle on the walkway. (Ord. 1803 § 3, 2019; Ord. 1748 § 3, 2013; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.14.080 Accessible parking requirements.
Accessible parking requirements are established by the state of California. The parking standards contained in this section are identical to those established by the state at the time of the adoption of this code. Changes in the state’s accessible parking requirements may preempt the affected requirements in this section.

A.    Accessible parking for residential uses shall be provided at the rate of one space for each dwelling unit that is designed for occupancy for the disabled.

B.     Accessible parking spaces shall be provided for all uses other than residential at the following rate:

 

Table 18.14.080.B

 

Total Number of Spaces Provided

Number of Accessible Spaces Required

1-25

1

26-50

2

51-75

3

76-100

4

101-150

5

151-200

6

201-300

7

301-400

8

401-500

9

501-1,000

*

1,001 and over

**

 

*    Two percent of total

**  Twenty plus one for each 100, or fraction over 1,001

 

C.     Accessible parking spaces shall be designed in a manner consistent with the standard as illustrated below:

 

Table 18.14.080.C

 



D.    When less than five spaces are provided, at structures and uses subject to these regulations, one space shall be seventeen feet wide and striped to provide a nine-foot parking area and an eight-foot loading and unloading area. However, there shall be no requirement that the space be reserved exclusively or identified for accessible use only.

E.     Accessible parking spaces required by this section shall count towards fulfilling off-street parking requirements. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

Chapter 18.16 WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING AND WATER CONSERVATION
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ords. 1727 and 1748.

 

18.16.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the city’s Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance is to establish an alternative model acceptable under Governor Brown’s April 1, 2015 Drought Executive Order (B-19-25) as being at least as effective as the State Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance in the context of conditions in the city in order to:

Promote the benefits of consistent landscape ordinances with neighboring local and regional agencies;

Promote the values and benefits of landscapes while recognizing the need to invest water and other resources as efficiently as possible;

Establish a structure for planning, designing, installing, and maintaining and managing water efficient landscapes in new construction and rehabilitated projects;

Establish provisions for water management practices and water waste prevention for existing landscapes;

Use water efficiently without waste by setting a maximum applied water allowance as an upper limit for water use and reduce water use to the lowest practical amount; and

Encourage the use of economic incentives that promote the efficient use of water, such as implementing a budget-based tiered-rate structure, providing rebate incentives and offering educational programs. (Ord. 1766 § 2, 2016)

 

18.16.020 Definitions.
The following definitions are applicable to this chapter:

“Aggregate landscape areas” pertains to the areas undergoing development as one project or for production home neighborhoods or other situations where multiple parcels are undergoing development as one project, but will eventually be individually owned.

“Applied water” means the portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape.

“Artificial turf” means man-made, synthetic material which simulates the appearance of live, organic turf, grass, sod, or lawn. Artificial turf shall be of a type known as cut pile infill manufactured from polypropylene, polyethylene, or a combination of the two materials.

 

“Budget-based tiered-rate structure” means tiered or block rates for irrigation accounts charged by the retail water agency in which the block definition for each customer is derived from lot size or irrigated area and the evapotranspiration requirements of landscaping.

“Community aesthetics evaluation” refers to an evaluation that, while not subject to a permit, plan check or design review, may be performed to ensure the aesthetic standards of the community and irrigation efficiency intent is maintained.

“Desertscape” means landscaping applications designed to exist in water scarce environments.

“Ecological restoration project” means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem.

“Estimated applied water use” means the average annual total amount of water estimated to be necessary to keep plants in a healthy state, calculated as provided in the Guidelines. It is based on the reference evapotranspiration rate, the size of the landscape area, plant water use factors, and the relative irrigation efficiency of the irrigation system.

“ET adjustment factor” or “ETAF” is equal to the plant factor divided by the irrigation efficiency factor for a landscape project, as described in the Guidelines. The ETAF is calculated in the context of local reference evapotranspiration, using site-specific plant factors and irrigation efficiency factors that influence the amount of water that needs to be applied to the specific landscaped area.

A combined plant mix with a site-wide average plant factor of 0.5 (indicating a moderate water need) and average irrigation efficiency of 0.71 produces an ET adjustment factor of (0.7) = (0.5/0.71), which is the standard of water use efficiency generally required by this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance and the Guidelines, except that the ETAF for a special landscape area shall not exceed 1.0.

“Guidelines” refers to the Guidelines for Implementation of the Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance, as adopted by the city, which describes procedures, calculations, and requirements for landscape projects subject to this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance.

“Hardscapes” means any durable material or feature (pervious and non-pervious) installed in or around a landscaped area, such as pavements or walls. Pools and other water features are considered part of the landscaped area and not considered hardscapes for purposes of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance.

“Irrigation efficiency” means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The irrigation efficiency for purposes of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance are 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip systems.

“Landscaped area” means all the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water allowance and estimated applied water use calculations. The landscaped area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or non-pervious hardscapes, and other non-irrigated areas designated for non-development (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation).

“Landscape contractor” means a person licensed by the state of California to construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of landscape systems.

“Landscape documentation package” means the documents required to be provided to the city for review and approval of landscape design projects, as described in the Guidelines.

 

“Landscape project” means total area of landscape in a project, as provided in the definition of “landscaped area,” meeting the requirements under Section 18.16.030 of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance.

“Local agency” means a city or county, including a charter city or charter county, that is authorized to implement, administer, and/or enforce any of the provisions of the Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance. The local agency may be responsible for the enforcement or delegation of enforcement of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance including, but not limited to, design review, plan check, issuance of permits, and inspection of a landscape project.

“Local water purveyor” means any entity, including a public agency, city, county, or private water company that provides retail water service.

“Maximum applied water allowance” or “MAWA” means the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area as specified in Section 2.2 of the Guidelines. It is based upon the area’s reference evapotranspiration, the ET adjustment factor, and the size of the landscaped area. The estimated applied water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. MAWA = (ETo) (0.62) [(ETAF x LA) + ((1-ETAF) x SLA)]

“Mined-land reclamation projects” means any surface mining operation with a reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975.

“New construction” means, for the purposes of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance, a new building with a landscape or other new landscape such as a park, playground, or greenbelt without an associated building.

“Non-pervious” means any surface or natural material that does not allow for the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil.

“Permit” means an authorizing document issued by local agencies for new construction or rehabilitated landscape.

“Pervious” means any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil.

“Plant factor” or “plant water use factor” is a factor, when multiplied by ETo, that estimates the amount of water needed by plants. For purposes of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance, the plant factor range for very low water use plants is 0 to 0.1; the plant factor range for low water use plants is 0 to 0.3; the plant factor range for moderate water use plants is 0.4 to 0.6; and the plant factor range for high water use plants is 0.7 to 1.0. Plant factors cited in this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance are derived from the publication “Water Use Classification of Landscape Species.” Plant factors may also be obtained from horticultural researchers from academic institutions or professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR).

“Recycled water” or “reclaimed water” means treated or recycled waste water of a quality suitable for non-potable uses such as landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human consumption.

“Reference evapotranspiration” or “ETo” means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is given expressed in inches per day, month, or year as represented in Appendix A of the Guidelines, and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four- to seven-inch tall, cool-season grass that is well watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the maximum applied water allowances.

 

“Rehabilitated landscape” means any re-landscaping project that meets the applicability criteria of Section 18.16.030, where the modified landscape area is greater than two thousand five hundred square feet.

“Smart irrigation controller” means an automatic irrigation controller utilizing either evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data with non-volatile memory that shall be required for irrigation scheduling in all irrigation systems, recommending U.S. EPA WaterSense labeled devices as applicable.

“Special landscape area” means an area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens, areas irrigated with recycled water, water features using recycled water, and recreational areas dedicated to active play such as parks, sports fields, golf courses, and where turf provides a playing surface.

“Turf” means a ground cover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, Perennial ryegrass, Red fescue, and Tall fescue are cool-season grasses. Bermudagrass, Kikuyugrass, Seashore Paspalum, St. Augustinegrass, Zoysiagrass, and Buffalo grass are warm-season grasses.

“Valve” means a device used to control the flow of water in an irrigation system.

“Water feature” means a design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls, fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools (where water is artificially supplied). The surface area of water features is included in the high water use hydrozone of the landscaped area. Constructed wetlands used for on-site wastewater treatment, habitat protection or storm water best management practices that are not irrigated and used solely for water treatment or storm water retention are not water features and, therefore, are not subject to the water budget calculation.

“Xeriscape” refers to landscaping and gardening which reduces or eliminates the need for supplemental irrigation. It is promoted in areas that do not have easily accessible supplies of fresh water, and is gaining acceptance in other areas as climate patterns shift. (Ord. 1766 § 2, 2016)

 

18.16.030 Applicability.
A.    Beginning February 1, 2016, and consistent with Executive Order No. B-29-15, this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance shall apply to the following landscape projects:

1.     New landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than five hundred square feet, requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check or design review;

2.     Rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscaped area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred square feet, requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check or design review;

3.     New or rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area of two thousand five hundred square feet or less may comply with the performance requirements of this chapter or conform to the prescriptive measures contained in Appendix A of the Guidelines;

4.     New or rehabilitated projects using treated or untreated graywater or rainwater capture on site, any lot or parcels within the project that has less than two thousand five hundred square feet of landscape area and meets the lot or parcel’s landscape water requirement (estimated total water use) entirely with the treated or untreated graywater or through stored rainwater capture on site is subject only to Appendix A of the Guidelines.

B.     The landscape water use standards of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance shall apply to:

1.     All landscaped areas, whether installed prior to or after January 1, 2010; and

2.     All landscaped areas installed after February 1, 2016 to which Section 18.16.030 is applicable.

C.     This chapter does not apply to:

1.     Registered local, state or federal historical sites;

2.     Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system;

3.     Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; or

4.     Plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public. (Ord. 1766 § 2, 2016)

 

18.16.040 Implementation procedures.
A.    Prior to installation, a landscape documentation package shall be submitted to the city for review and approval of all landscape projects subject to the provisions of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance. Any landscape documentation package submitted to the city shall comply with the provisions of the Guidelines.

B.     The landscape documentation package shall include a certification by a professional (i.e., architect, landscape architect, professional engineer, landscape contractor, nurseryperson, etc.) appropriately licensed in the state of California stating that the landscape design and water use calculations have been prepared by or under the supervision of the licensed professional and are certified to be in compliance with the provisions of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance and the Guidelines.

1.     Landscape and irrigation plans shall be submitted to the city for review and approval with appropriate water use calculations. Water use calculations shall be consistent with calculations contained in the Guidelines and shall be provided to the local water purveyor, as appropriate, under procedures determined by the city.

2.     Verification of compliance of the landscape installation with the approved plans shall be obtained through a certification of completion in conjunction with a certificate of use and occupancy or permit final process, as provided in the Guidelines. (Ord. 1766 § 2, 2016)

 

18.16.050 Landscape water use standards.
A.    For applicable landscape installation or rehabilitation projects subject to Section 18.16.030 of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance, the estimated applied water use allowed for the landscaped area shall not exceed the MAWA calculated using an ET adjustment factor of 0.7, except for special landscaped areas where the MAWA is calculated using an ET adjustment factor of 1.0; or the design of the landscaped area shall otherwise be shown to be equivalently water-efficient in a manner acceptable to the city, as provided in the Guidelines.

B.     Irrigation of all landscaped areas shall be conducted in a manner conforming to the rules and requirements, and shall be subject to penalties and incentives for water conservation and water waste prevention as determined and implemented by the local water purveyor or as mutually agreed by local water purveyor and the local agency. (Ord. 1766 § 2, 2016)

 

18.16.060 General requirements.
A.    Landscaping Requirements—Commercial, Industrial and Multifamily Residential Zones. Landscaping shall be required for all commercial, industrial and multifamily residential zones. Each property shall be landscaped in accordance with the following standards.

1.     Landscaping Area Protection. All areas established for landscaping shall be protected on those sides adjacent to vehicular parking with a solid Portland cement concrete curb, six inches in height and a minimum of four inches in depth, or other suitable protection as approved by the director of community and economic development, for the length of the landscaped area adjacent to subject parking. Individual wheel stops shall not be used as a substitute for subject curb.

2.     Landscaping Area. The amount of landscaping provided shall be equal to the sum of seven percent of the area of the parking lot in addition to the front and side street setback areas of the parcel and the parkways (if applicable). No landscaping area shall be less than thirty inches in width exclusive of protective curbing.

3.     Height of Landscaping. No landscaping located within the required front setback or the required side or rear yard setback abutting a street shall exceed three feet in height except for trees required by this chapter or other planting approved by the director of community and economic development.

4.     Types of Materials. Within the landscaped area along the street frontage shall be one tree for every twenty feet of the total street frontage, excluding drive approaches and driveways. There shall also be provided within the total landscaped area additional trees in a quantity equal to one for every ten parking spaces. The trees to be provided shall be a minimum size of twenty-four-inch box and shall be of a type approved by the director of community and economic development.

B.     Landscaping Requirements—Single-Family Residential Zones. Landscaping shall be required for all single-family residential zones. The director of community and economic development, at his or her discretion, may require the submittal of precise landscape and irrigation plans for properties with unique circumstances or topography. Each property shall be landscaped in accordance with the following standards:

1.     The area of the required front yard setback and street side setback on a corner lot, except for required driveways, and walks shall be landscaped with evergreen or similar plant or lawn materials and maintained to provide a consistent greenbelt along all residential neighborhoods. At no time shall any portion of the required landscaped front yard setback be used for the parking or storage of any vehicle of any kind or any vehicle parts or similar item except as provided in Section 18.10.050 of this title.

2.     A minimum of ninety percent of the parkway area shall be planted with living plant materials with the remaining ten percent to allow for decorative materials. Any design for the parkway which does not meet this criterion shall be subject to review and approval by the director of community and economic development.

3.     All “desertscape” or “xeriscape” landscape applications within single-family residential zones shall be designed by a licensed landscape architect and approved by the director of community and economic development.

C.     Artificial Turf. The use of artificial turf is permitted in all zones.

 

1.     Appearance. Artificial turf shall simulate the appearance of live turf, grass, sod or lawn and shall have a fescue look with a brown thatch layer (dual tone turf). Artificial turf type and installation shall meet manufacturer’s specifications and shall comply with the minimum following standards:

a.     Type. Be of a type known as cut pile infill manufactured from polyethylene or polypropylene with a minimum blade height of one inch and a maximum blade height of one and three-quarter inches, and shall have a face weight of forty ounces or better.

b.     Backing. Be affixed to a permeable backing.

c.     Warranty. Have a minimum ten-year “No Fade” warranty.

d.     Flammability. Have a minimum flammability rating in conformance with or exceeding ASTM D2859 and US Federal Flammability Standard DOC FF 1-70 ratings.

e.     Subgrade. Be installed over a subgrade prepared to provide proper drainage of water. This subgrade shall consist of an evenly graded mass of compacted, porous crushed rock aggregate material and an underground drainage piping system, as needed to prevent water pooling.

f.      Anchoring. Be anchored over the entire coverage area with seven inch spikes every eighteen inches. Be anchored at all edges with seven inch spikes every four to six inches.

g.     Seams. All seams shall not be visible and shall be joined in a tight and secure manner and anchored with seven inch spikes every two to three inches.

h.     Infill. An infill medium of clean sand or coated sand shall be required to provide ballast and maintain the turf fibers in an upright position.

i.      Borders. Artificial turf shall be separated from planter areas containing live plant materials with a concrete mow strip, bender board, or similar material to prevent the intrusion of living plant material into the artificial turf area.

j.      Slope. The maximum slope permitted for the installation of artificial turf shall be no greater than five percent.

2.     Permits Required Prior to Installation. Materials specifications and plans shall be provided to the chief building official and/or public works director for review and approval of permits prior to the installation of the artificial turf. The plan submittal shall comply with Section 18.16.050 and include the following additional information:

a.     A landscape plan showing the area of artificial turf, area of living plant material, and separation material between these areas.

b.     A dimensioned cross section of the artificial turf area that details the proposed materials and installation method, including subgrade, drainage, base or leveling layer, and infill. The subgrade plan shall be prepared by a licensed civil engineer or soils engineer to ensure proper drainage.

c.     Edge material and detail for treatment of seams.

d.     Material description and specifications including manufacturer, installer (with contact information), and warranty information.

 

3.     Maintenance. Artificial turf shall be maintained in a clean and attractive manner and in conformance with Section 18.74.040(A)(7). (Ord. 1766 § 2, 2016)

 

18.16.070 Landscape maintenance.
All landscaped areas and irrigation systems shall be maintained in good condition at all times and in accordance with the approved landscape, irrigation and maintenance plans.

A.    All trees shall be allowed to reach their mature height. Over-pruning of required trees is not permitted. Required trees which are stunted or damaged due to improper pruning or maintenance may, at the discretion of the director of community and economic development, be required to be replaced with mature trees.

B.     Water conservation measures shall be enforced at all times. Property owners and their landscape maintenance employees shall be aware of the current stage of the water conservation ordinance and observe same:

1.     Stage 1 — Voluntary compliance. “Water watch”;

2.     Stage 2 — Mandatory compliance. “Water alert”;

3.     Stage 3 — Mandatory compliance. “Water warning”;

4.     Stage 4 — Mandatory compliance. “Water emergency.” (Ord. 1766 § 2, 2016)

 

 

Chapter 18.18 MOBILE HOME INSTALLATION
18.18.010 Compliance of installation.
Each mobile home installed on a building site in any single-family residential zone shall comply with all site and development standards applicable to the zone and the additional requirements set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.18.020 Compatibility certificate—Required.
No mobile home shall be installed on any lot located in a single-family residential zone without the approval of a certificate of site compatibility. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.18.030 Compatibility certificate—Application.
An application for a certificate of site compatibility shall be submitted to the planning department on forms to be provided by the department together with an application fee in an amount determined by resolution of the city council from time to time. It shall include the following information in addition to that required by the director of planning:

A.    A site plan of the building site drawn to scale showing the exact location of the mobile home and all accessory structures with dimensions and setbacks specified;

B.     A vicinity plan showing location of buildings on all adjacent properties, including properties across the street from the subject building site;

C.     A grading plan showing proposed grading of the building site and retaining walls;

D.    A plan showing the proposed water and sewer facilities, screening, fencing, driveway location and proposed foundation details;

E.     Photographs of the subject mobile home and of the structures on adjacent properties;

F.     Adequate evidence that the mobile home as installed is certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974;

G.    A written description of the roofing and siding materials and the amount and location of roof overhang. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.18.040 Compatibility certificate—Approval requirements.
The planning commission shall approve the application by resolution, subject to such conditions as it deems necessary to ensure that the lot will be compatible for mobile home use, if it finds and determines that:

A.    The mobile home is certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Act of 1974;

 

B.     The mobile home will be installed on a foundation system which complies with the requirements or the regulations promulgated pursuant to the provisions of Section 18551 of the Health and Safety Code;

C.     The mobile home complies with all developmental standards applicable to the zone in which the lot is situated;

D.    The architectural treatment of the mobile home shall be of material customarily used in conventionally built housing;

E.     The architectural treatment of the mobile home is generally compatible with that of surrounding properties and structures;

F.     The proposed structure or mobile home, with any conditions to be imposed, is in harmony with the various elements in the general plan and is not economically or aesthetically detrimental to the existing previously approved structures or mobile homes in the surrounding area. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.18.050 Appeal.
The applicant, the city council or any member thereof, or any party aggrieved by the decision of the planning commission may appeal the decision to the city council by filing a notice of appeal to the council. The council shall hold a public hearing on the matter and render its decision within thirty days thereafter. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

 

Chapter 18.20 TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT
18.20.010 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the definitions for the following terms shall apply:

“Alternative transportation mode” means any mode of travel that serves as an alternative to the single occupant vehicle. This includes all forms of ride-sharing such as carpooling or vanpooling, as well as public transit, bicycling or walking.

“Applicable development” means any development project that is determined to meet or exceed the employment threshold using the criteria contained in Section 18.20.040 of this chapter.

“Developer” means the builder who is responsible for the planning, design and construction of an applicable development project. A developer may be responsible for implementing provisions of this chapter as determined by the property owner.

“Employee” means any person employed by a firm, person(s), business, educational institution, non-profit agency or corporation, government agency or other entity which employs two hundred fifty or more persons at a single worksite.

“Employer” means any person(s), firm, business, educational institution, government agency, non-profit agency or corporation, or other entity which employs two hundred fifty or more persons at a single worksite, and may either be a property owner or tenant of an applicable development project.

“Employment generation factors” refers to factors developed for use by the jurisdiction for projecting the potential employment of any proposed development project.

“Facility(s)” means the total of all buildings, structures and grounds that encompass a worksite, at either single or multiple locations, and that comprises or is associated with an applicable development project.

“Level of service (LOS)” means a measure of the operational quality of a road or intersection ranging from LOS A (best) to LOS F (worst). As required by CMP legislation, the LOS standard for the CMP Highway System must be at “E” or at the existing LOS, whichever is further from LOS “A,” for any intersection or roadway segment.

“Mixed-use development” means new development projects that combine any one of these land uses with another: residential, office, commercial, light industrial, and business park.

 

“New development project” means any nonresidential project being processed where some level of discretionary action by a decision-making body is required.

“Peak period” means those hours of the business day between six a.m. and ten a.m. inclusive, Monday through Friday.

“Property owner” means the legal owner of the applicable development project who serves as the lessor to an employer or tenant. The property owner shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of this chapter either directly or by delegating such responsibility as appropriate to an employer or tenant.

“Site development plan/permit” means plan approval/planned unit development precise plan that is subject to public hearing before the planning commission and/or city council as more fully described in Chapters 18.46 and 18.52 of the La Habra Zoning Code.

“Tenant” means the lessee of facility space at an applicable development project who also serves as an employer. A tenant may be responsible for implementing the provisions of this chapter as determined by the property owner.

“Transportation demand management (TDM)” means the implementation of programs, plans or policies designed to encourage changes in individual travel behavior. TDM can include an emphasis on alternative travel modes to the single occupant vehicle (SOV) such as carpools, vanpools and transit; reduction or elimination of the number of vehicle trips, or shifts in the time vehicle commutes to other than the peak-period.

“Worksite” means a building, or group of buildings, located within the jurisdiction which are in actual physical contact or separated solely by a private or public roadway or other private or public right-of-way, and which are owned or operated by the same employer (or by employers under common control). (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.20.020 Intent of chapter.
This chapter is intended to meet the requirements of California Government Code Section 65089 (b)(3) which requires development of a trip reduction and travel demand element to the CMP. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.20.030 Policy.
New commercial, industrial, and mixed-use development including employment centers of two hundred fifty persons or more, may adversely impact existing transportation and parking facilities, resulting in increased motor vehicle emissions, deteriorating levels of service, and possibly significant additional capital expenditures to augment and improve the existing transportation system. To more efficiently utilize the existing and planned transportation system and to reduce vehicle emissions, it is the policy of the city to:

A.    Reduce the number of peak-period vehicle trips generated in association with additional development;

B.     Promote and encourage the use of alternative transportation modes such as ridesharing, carpools, vanpools, public bus and rail transit, bicycles and walking, as well as those facilities that support such modes;

C.     Achieve related reductions in vehicle trips, traffic congestion, and public expenditure, and achieve air quality improvements through utilization of existing local mechanisms and procedures for project review and permit processing;

D.    Promote coordinated implementation of strategies on a countywide basis to reduce transportation demand; and

E.     Achieve the most efficient use of local resources through coordinated and consistent regional and/or local TDM programs. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.20.040 Applicability.
A.    This chapter shall apply to all new development projects that are estimated to employ a total of two hundred fifty or more persons and substantial building expansions that increase employment to two hundred fifty or more persons as determined by the methodology in subsection B of this section.

B.     For purposes of determining whether a new development project or substantial building expansion is subject to this chapter, the total employment figure will be determined as follows:

1.     Employment projections developed by the project applicant, subject to approval by the city; or

2.     Employment projections developed by the city using the following employee generation factors by type of use.

 

Table 18.20.040.B.2

 

Land Use Category

Gross Square Foot/Employee

Limited commercial

500

Commercial

500

commercial shopping center

500

General commercial

500

Office/professional

250

Light manufacturing

525

Hotel/motel

0.8-1.2/room

The employment projection for a development of mixed or multiple uses shall be calculated on a case-by-case basis based upon the proportion of development devoted to each type of use.

 

(Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.20.050 Facility standards.
All applicable developments shall be subject to the facility standards as specified in this section and shall have included in their project site development plan provisions to provide the improvements identified in either Option “A” or Option “B”:

A.    Option “A” Facility Improvements.

1.     Preferential Parking for Carpool Vehicles.

a.     At least fifteen percent of the employee parking spaces shall be reserved and designated for carpool vehicles by marking such spaces “carpool only.”

b.     Carpool spaces shall be used only by carpool vehicles in which at least two of the persons riding to the worksite will be or are employees or tenants of the proposed projects, or where

        a reciprocal preferential carpool parking agreement with other developments has been established.

c.     Such carpool spaces shall be located near the building’s employee entrance(s) or at other preferential locations within the employee parking areas as approved by the community development director or his/her designee.

d.     The total number of employee parking spaces shall be determined by using the following factor by type of use:

 

Table 18.20.050.A.1.d

 

Type of Use

Percent of Total Parking Devoted to Employee

Commercial: Regional, Community, Neighborhood

30%

Office/Professional

85%

Industrial

90%

Hotel

Case by Case

 

2.     Bicycle Parking and Shower Facilities.

a.     Bicycle parking and locker facilities shall be provided in a secure location for use by employees or tenants who commute to the work site by bicycle. The number of facilities/racks to be provided shall be at the rate of at least five racks for every one hundred employees or fraction thereof.

b.     A minimum of two shower facilities shall be provided, one each for men and women.

3.     Information on Transportation Alternatives.

a.     A commuter information area shall be provided at the worksite that offers employees appropriate information on available transportation alternatives to the single-occupancy vehicle.

b.     Information in the area shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

1.     Current maps, routes and schedules for public transit;

2.     Ridesharing match lists;

3.     Available employee incentives;

4.     Rideshare promotion material supplied by commuter-oriented organizations.

4.     Rideshare Vehicle Loading Areas.

a.     The need for, design, and location of passenger loading areas to embark and disembark passengers from rideshare vehicles shall be approved by the community development director or his/her designee.

b.     Passenger loading areas shall be of a size large enough to accommodate the number of waiting vehicles equivalent to the rate of at least five spaces per every one hundred of the required parking spaces for the project.

c.     The passenger loading areas shall be located as close as is practical to the building’s employee entrance(s), and should be designed in a manner that does not impede vehicular circulation in the parking area.

5.     Vanpool Vehicle Accessibility.

a.     The design of all parking facilities shall incorporate provisions for access and parking of vanpool vehicles.

b.     Where applicable, vanpool vehicle accessibility shall include a minimum seven feet and two inches vertical clearance for those parking spaces and ramps to be used by such vehicles.

c.     Vanpool parking spaces shall be located near the building’s employee entrance(s) or other preferential locations as approved by the community development director or his/her designee.

d.     The number of accessible vanpool parking spaces shall be at the rate of at least two spaces per every one hundred of the total required employee parking spaces as determined in subsection A.1.

6.     Bus Stop Improvements.

a.     Bus stop improvements including bus pull-outs, bus pads, and right-of-way for bus shelters shall be required for all applicable developments located along high traffic volume streets and established bus routes.

b.     Bus stop improvements shall be determined in conformance with standard traffic engineering principles including, but not limited to, the following:

1.     The frequency and relative impact of blocked traffic due to stopped buses;

2.     The level of transit ridership at the location.

B.     Option “B” Facility Improvements.

1.     A percentage of parking spaces, located as close as is practical to the entrance(s) of the use they are intended to serve, shall be reserved for use of carpool and vanpool vehicles, as determined by the city planning commission for the proposed use;

2.     Secure, adequate and convenient storage shall be provided for bicycles;

3.     Bus bays, bus stops and bus shelters shall be provided adjacent to roads and streets traversing or bounding the development, as determined by the city;

4.     Transportation information center shall be provided within each building of over twenty-five thousand gross square feet;

5.     A shower and locker room facility for employees of each sex shall be provided for each building of one hundred thousand or more gross square feet. For any development containing one hundred thousand or more total combined gross square feet, but which does not contain any single building of one hundred thousand or more gross feet, the city planning commission may elect, at its discretion, to approve a requirement on such development to provide shower and locker room facilities; and

6.     Sidewalks or other paved pathways following direct and safe routes from the external pedestrian circulation system to each building in the development shall be provided. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

18.20.060 Chapter implementation and monitoring.
For the purpose of determining whether applicable developments are complying with the provisions of this chapter, the city shall monitor such compliance in a manner it deems appropriate and reasonable. Monitoring mechanisms may include, but not be limited to, the following to verify compliance with the facility standards required under Section 18.20.050:

A.    Utilizing procedures for site development plan review, as appropriate;

B      Conducting field/site inspections;

C.     Requiring all facility standards required by this section to be completed prior to issuance of building occupancy permits; and

D.    Requiring other building site reports/surveys which the city may deem appropriate. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.20.070 Enforcement and penalties.
A.    For purposes of ensuring that applicable developments comply with the provisions of this chapter, city shall, following written notice to subject property owner or designee (employer), initiate enforcement action(s) which may include, but are not limited to, the following to enforce compliance with the facility standards under Section 18.20.050:

1.     Withhold issuance of a building permit or certificate of use and occupancy; and

2.     Issuance of stop work order(s).

B.     The facility standards under Section 18.20.050 shall include provisions to guarantee perpetual compliance regardless of changes in property/ownership through recorded codes, covenants and restrictions (CC&Rs), or by other means approved by the planning commission or community development director as appropriate. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.20.080 Fees.
A.    For purposes of meeting its obligations under this chapter, the city shall impose the following fees:

1.     A trip reduction/TDM strategy plan with mandatory standards review fee of one hundred sixty-nine dollars at the time of initial project application; and

2.     A trip reduction/TDM strategy plan with variable standards/alternative measures plan review fee of five hundred fourteen dollars at the time of initial project application.

B.     These shall be fixed fees charged to all applicable developments for purposes of defraying the costs of processing and reviewing the trip reduction/TDM strategy plan. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.20.090 Appeals.
A.    An appeal may be made to the city council by the property owner(s), tenant(s) or designee(s) of any applicable development regarding decisions, actions or lack thereof, on the part of the city pursuant to Chapter 18.20 within ten working days from the date of the decision, action or lack thereof, by the planning commission or community development direction. Such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be accompanied by a letter stating the reasons for the appeal.

 

B.     Consideration of the appeal shall be at a public hearing, notice of which shall be given pursuant to California Code Sections 65091 and 65905 and which hearing shall occur within thirty days of the filing of the appeal.

C.     The city council action on the appeal shall be by a majority vote of the members present and upon conclusion of the de novo public hearing, the city council shall grant, conditionally grant or deny the appeal.

D.    In reaching a decision, the city council shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence.

E.     The city council’s decision shall be final and conclusive and shall be rendered in writing within two days of the hearing. Notice of the decision and findings shall be given to the person appealing and shall include citation to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. The time for a court challenge to a decision of the city council is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 18.22 COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY
18.22.010 Commercial cannabis activity prohibited.
A.    Purpose. The city council of the city of La Habra hereby finds and determines that it is the purpose and intent of this chapter to prohibit all commercial cannabis activity whether for medical or adult use except as may be permitted by this chapter, in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents and the businesses within the city. To this end, the city shall, to the fullest extent of the law, maintain local control over all marijuana related uses and activities within the city by way of permitting and regulating marijuana businesses as set forth herein, and abating illegal marijuana-related uses and activities, including marijuana businesses engaged in prohibited marijuana use and activity.

B.     Applicability.

1.     Nothing in this section is intended, nor shall it be construed, to burden any defense to criminal prosecution under the Compassionate Use Act (“CUA”).

2.     All the provisions of this section shall apply to all property, public and private, within the city.

3.     All the provisions of this section shall apply indoors and outdoors.

4.     Notwithstanding subsection A, this section shall not be intended to preclude or limit personal possession or use of up to six living marijuana plants and possession of marijuana produced by the plants consistent with state law. Moreover, in accordance with state law, not more than six living plants may be planted, cultivated, harvested, dried, or processed within a single private residence or upon the grounds of that private residence at one time. The limitation of six living plants per residence is a maximum number of plants allowed at any residence no matter how many persons reside within that residence. The growth of living marijuana plants is to be conducted inside of the private residence or inside an accessory structure to a private residence located on the same property that is fully enclosed and secured not more than sixty-four square feet in size. No outdoor growth of cannabis is permitted. The use of gas products or volatile solvents, including carbon dioxide (CO2), methane, or any other flammable or non-flammable gas, for marijuana cultivation or for marijuana processing is prohibited. At no time, shall any cultivation, possession or use of marijuana plants or marijuana produced by the plants or manner of opera-

tions arise to the level of a public or private nuisance including, but not limited to, odor or lighting emanating from a structure. (Ord. 1791 § 3, 2018)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 18.22.020 Definitions.
The following definitions apply to this chapter:

“Adult use cannabis” means the non-medical use of cannabis by adults of age twenty-one and over as permitted by MAUCRSA and other applicable state and city laws.

“Applicant” means a person, partnership, entity, collective or organization that applies for a permit to engage in commercial cannabis activity under this chapter.

“Business and Professions Code” means the California Business and Professions Code, as amended from time to time.

“Cannabis” shall have the same meaning as in Section 26001 of the Business and Professions Code.

“Cannabis distribution” means the procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and cannabis products between those persons or entities holding commercial cannabis licenses.

“Cannabis distribution facility” means the designated structure and property specified in the application that is owned, leased or otherwise held under the control of the distribution permittee where cannabis distribution is conducted.

“Cannabis permittee” means a person who holds a cannabis permit issued by the city of La Habra and the state of California; and shall be deemed the “operator” as that term is used herein.

“Cannabis premises” means the designated structure or structures and land specified in the application that is owned, leased, or otherwise held under the control of the city permittee where the commercial cannabis activity will be or is conducted. The premises shall be a contiguous area.

“Cannabis product” shall have the same meaning as in Section 11018.1 of the Health and Safety Code.

“Cannabis review board” means the city manager, director of community and economic development, police chief, finance director, and director of public works, or their respective designees, who shall review the credentials of businesses wishing to establish commercial cannabis activities within the city of La Habra.

“Caregiver” or “primary caregiver” shall have the same definition as that set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7(d) and (e).

“City code” means the city of La Habra Municipal Code.

“City permit” means a permit issued by the city, in accordance with this chapter and state law, authorizing participation in a commercial cannabis activity.

“Commercial cannabis activity” means cultivation, possession, manufacture, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transporting, distribution, or sale of marijuana and marijuana products, including medical and non-medical marijuana, non-medical cannabis products and medical cannabis products within the meaning of California Business and Professions Code Sections 26001(i) and 26001(ai).

“Commercial cannabis business” means a person, partnership, entity, corporation, company or other organization that conducts commercial cannabis activity.

“Commercial cannabis facility” means a building, site, property, or parcel where commercial cannabis activity takes place.

 

“Conditional use permit” means a conditional use permit granted by the planning commission in accordance with La Habra Municipal Code Chapter 18.66 with appropriate conditions to mitigate impacts from the commercial cannabis activity and subject to a development agreement between the city and cannabis permittee. The cannabis conditional use permit is not transferrable. Should complaints be received regarding the business operation, the conditional use permit may be scheduled for reconsideration at which time the planning commission, during a public hearing, may reapprove, approve with additional conditions, or revoke the permit per La Habra Municipal Code Chapter 18.66.

“Cultivation” shall mean any activity involving the germinating, planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis. Indoor cultivation of marijuana for personal use by persons twenty-one years of age or older on the grounds of a private residence is permitted to the extent allowed by state law (Health and Safety Code Section 11362.1 through 11362.2). All cultivation of marijuana outdoors within the city of La Habra is prohibited.

“Delivery” shall have the same definition as set forth in California Business and Professions Code Section 26001(i). “Delivery” shall not include transportation of marijuana or marijuana products by a licensed transporter traveling through the city public roads to and from locations outside of the city where marijuana-related activities or uses are permitted.

“Director” means the director of community and economic development for the city of La Habra.

“Dispensary” shall mean any location where marijuana or devices for the use of marijuana are offered, either individually, or in combination, and includes retail sales. “Dispensary” includes delivery services, mobile dispensing and distribution.

“Dispensing” shall mean any activity involving the provision of marijuana for any purpose.

“Distribution” means the procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and cannabis products between state licensees, including any city permittees who are state licensees.

“Distribution Permit” means a city permit for distribution in accordance with the terms and conditions of a cannabis conditional use permit and the conditions of approval for the applicable city permit issued to such distribution permittee. Such permits shall be associated with state license Type 11 or such other distribution license types created by the state.

“Distribution permittee” means a person that has been issued a distribution permit by the city pursuant to the terms and conditions of this chapter; and shall be deemed the “operator” as that term is used herein.

“Fully enclosed and secure structure” means a space within a building structure which has a complete roof enclosure supported by connecting walls extending from the ground to the roof, which is secured against unauthorized entry and provides complete visual screening and which is accessible only through one or more lockable doors and is inaccessible to minors or other barriers that are sufficient to prevent unauthorized access and entry.

“Gross receipts” means the total amount of the sales of a city permittee, valued in money, whether paid in money or otherwise, without any deduction for the cost of materials used, any costs of transportation of the city permittee, or any other expenses.

“Health and Safety Code” means the California Health and Safety Code, as amended from time to time.

“Manufacturer” shall mean a person that conducts the production, preparation, propagation, or compounding of marijuana, either directly or indirectly or by extraction methods, or independently by means of chemical synthesis or by any combination thereof, and includes packaging, repackaging, labeling, and/or relabeling.

“Marijuana” shall have the same definition as that set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 11018. “Marijuana” shall include: “cannabis” as defined in California Business and Professions Code Section 26001(f); “cannabis concentrate” as defined in California Business and Professions Code Section 26001(h); “edible cannabis product” as defined in California Business and Professions Code Section 26001(t); cannabis that is manufactured as defined in California Business and Professions Code Section 26001(ag); “medical cannabis,” “medical cannabis product,” or “cannabis product” as defined in California Business and Professions Code Section 26001;

“Marijuana businesses” shall mean marijuana businesses for any purpose (medical or non-medical) including dispensaries, cooperatives, cultivation, manufacturing, testing facilities, transporting, or distributing; all of which are prohibited from being established or operating within the city, except that licensed marijuana transporters are permitted to pass through the city on public roads as mandated by Business and Professions Code Section 26080.

“Person” shall mean any person, firm, corporation, association, club, society, or other organization. The term person shall include any owner, manager, proprietor, employee, volunteer and/or salesperson.

“Permit zone” means, with respect to a person holding a city permit, the zones or portions of the city where such city permit type is permitted to operate. Such permit zones may be amended from time-to-time by a majority vote of the city council. To the extent not otherwise specified in this definition, a city permittee shall be able to operate in any portion of the city, which complies with the zoning, radius and other requirements of this chapter.

“Qualified cannabis applicant “ means a person who applies for a permit to conduct commercial cannabis activity under this chapter and whose application complies with this chapter and has not been deemed disqualified.

“Qualified patient” or “qualifying patient” shall mean qualified patient and persons with identification cards as those terms are defined by the Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7. This prohibition does not apply or prohibit qualified patients and persons with identification cards to cultivate indoors, possess, and use marijuana for their own personal medical purposes only, as permitted by state law. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize qualified patients to engage in the collective cultivation of marijuana as described by Health and Safety Code Section 11362.775, nor are they permitted to cultivate marijuana above limits established by state law and guidelines for their own personal use.

“Sampler” is a testing laboratory employee who collects samples of cannabis goods for testing.

“State” means the state of California.

“State law” means all laws of the state, including all rules and regulations adopted by state agencies and state regulatory entities.

“State license” means a state license issued under Division 10, commencing with Section 26000, of the Business and Professions Code, and includes both an A-License and M-Licenses as well as a testing laboratory license.

“State licensee” means a person that has been issued a state license.

“Testing laboratory” is an entity that is licensed by the state to conduct sampling and analyses of medical and or adult use cannabis goods and includes the personnel, specialized apparatus, and instruments used to analyze medical and or adult use cannabis goods. This definition does not include the cloning, planting or cultivation of cannabis plants or the direct sales, distribution, delivery, or dispensing of cannabis and cannabis products to the public.

“Testing site” shall mean any facility, entity, or site in the city that offers or performs tests of marijuana.

“Transport” or “transportation” means the transfer of cannabis or cannabis products between one or more cannabis permittee.

“Volatile solvent” means a solvent that is or produces a flammable gas or vapor that, when present in the air in sufficient quantities, will create explosive or ignitable mixtures. (Ord. 1794 § 2, 2018; Ord. 1791 § 3, 2018)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 18.22.030 Commercial cannabis activity.
A.    All commercial cannabis activity shall be prohibited in all zoning districts and areas that are regulated by specific plans or planned unit developments, except as permitted in this chapter.

B.     Declaration of Public Nuisance. Any use, structure, or property that is altered, enlarged, erected, established, maintained, moved, or operated contrary to the provisions of this chapter, is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil, criminal, and/or administrative proceedings by means of a restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction, or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances.

C.     Violations.

1.     Violations of this chapter shall be punishable pursuant to Chapter 1.08 of the city of La Habra Municipal Code.

2.     This chapter is not the exclusive means for the abatement of cannabis related use and activity within the city. The remedies set forth pursuant to this section shall be in addition to any other existing remedies for violations of the municipal code, including, but not limited to, any action at law or equity.

D.    The following type of commercial cannabis activity is conditionally permitted when conducted in compliance with this chapter:

1.     Cannabis distribution facilities within M-1, M-1(PUD) and PC-I zones.

2.     Cannabis testing laboratories within M-1, M-1(PUD) and PC-I zones subject to the provisions within this chapter, state requirements and the following standards:

a.     The business owner, operator, and employees are prohibited from holding a license for any other cannabis activity while owning, operating or being employed by a testing laboratory. No individual shall be employed by a testing laboratory that is also employed by any other cannabis licensee other than a testing laboratory license.

b.     The state licensee must submit proof of ISO (International Organization for Standardization) accreditation to the city prior to commencing operations.

c.     Only samplers trained in accordance with established industry standards employed by the licensed testing laboratory may obtain samples for the laboratory.

 

d.     The state licensee must follow established chain-of-custody protocols consistent with industry standards to ensure that sample integrity is such that it may be maintained from the point of collection, receipt of the samples at the laboratory, testing, and destruction.

e.     Upon completion of testing, documentation of samples being incinerated shall be maintained.

f.      The state licensee must submit to the city a copy of its Standard Operating Procedures and shall maintain a copy of these procedures on site and available to city inspection at all times.

g.     The state licensee shall conduct an internal audit at least once per year or according to the ISO accrediting body’s requirements, whichever is more frequent. The internal audit must cover everything required to be covered by ISO 17025 internal-audit standards.

h.     All testing laboratory records must be kept for a minimum of seven years.

i.      A testing laboratory cannot operate on a parcel that contains another commercial cannabis facility unless there is at least one commercial unit of separation between the testing laboratory and another commercial cannabis facility, except that a testing laboratory may be located adjacent to another testing laboratory on the same parcel. (Ord. 1794 § 2, 2018; Ord. 1791 § 3, 2018)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 18.22.040 Commercial cannabis activity business standards.
A.    Governing Structure and Initial Application Process. A cannabis review board consisting of the city manager, director of community and economic development, police chief, finance director, and director of public works, or their respective designee, shall review the credentials of businesses wishing to establish commercial cannabis activities within the city of La Habra. Within thirty days after the adoption of this chapter, the director of community and economic development shall prepare a commercial cannabis activity application form and related administrative policy submittal sheet. The application form shall at a minimum request the following information:

1.     The address of the applicant’s current corporate/business operation.

2.     The address of the location for which the conditional use permit is sought.

3.     The size of the proposed commercial cannabis business operation.

4.     A site plan and floor plan for the proposed commercial cannabis activity denoting the use of all areas within the building and the exterior improvements of the property, excluding any security measures or features that would compromise the safe storage of products or cash management.

5.     A proposed security plan in compliance with the standards in this chapter that would be administered between the licensee and the police chief or designee in order to maintain confidentially of the security plan.

 

 

6.     The names, addresses, and relevant criminal histories of those with an ownership interest of ten percent or more and any person who will be a facility manager or otherwise responsible for the commercial cannabis activity (collectively, the “applicant’s agents”). A full criminal history which includes all arrests and reasons regardless of convictions as well as any civil court proceedings. A copy of state driver’s licenses or identification cards shall be provided for all ownership with an interest of ten percent interest or more in the business, any managers, and employees of the business.

7.     The name and address of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the commercial cannabis activity is proposed to be located. In the event the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, the application must be accompanied with a signed and notarized acknowledgement from the owner of the property that the commercial cannabis activity can occur on the property and is not in conflict with any lending requirements of the property.

8.     Copies of the Secretary of State Articles of Incorporation, Certificates of Amendment, Statement of Information and a copy of the Corporation Bylaws for the ownership group.

9.     Authorization for the city manager or the city manager’s designee to seek verification of the information contained within the application.

10.   Evidence that the commercial cannabis activity is compliant with all applicable state and city laws.

11.   List the experience of the operators of the commercial cannabis activity as it relates to the type of operation proposed within other communities, including out of state operations. Provide a governmental contact person within each of those communities that can address questions regarding that facility.

12.   A statement in writing as to the applicant hiring practices and a description of community involvement that will accrue as a result of the commercial cannabis facility.

13.   A statement in writing by the applicant that certifies under penalty of perjury that all the information contained in the application is true and correct.

14.   Any such additional and further information as reasonably necessary by the city manager or the city manager’s designee to administer this chapter.

B.     The police chief or designee shall conduct a background check of any applicant seeking a conditional use permit, including the applicant’s agents and those who have a ten percent or more interest in the marijuana business, and shall prepare a report on the acceptability of the applicant and the applicant’s agents and the suitability of the proposed location of the commercial cannabis facility.

C.     Each application shall be accompanied by a fee as established by city council resolution to offset the cost of required police investigation and application processing. The fee is non-refundable and shall not be returned in the event the application is denied, revoked, or suspended.

D.    The cannabis review board shall review all qualified applications and identify those that best satisfy the requirements of this chapter. The cannabis review board may establish criteria to rank qualified applications based on compliance with this chapter, the applicant’s experience, the proffered business plan, the accuracy of information provided in the application, and the level of community service and employment opportunities for residents of the city. (Ord. 1791 § 3, 2018)

 

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 18.22.050 Disqualification of applications.
A.    The director or designee shall determine whether each application demonstrates compliance. Should an application involve any of the following matters, the application shall be disqualified:

1.     The applicant or the applicant’s agents made one or more false or misleading statements or omissions in the application or during the application process.

2.     The proposed commercial cannabis facility at the proposed location is not allowed by state law or city zoning code.

3.     The applicant is not a legal representative of the proposed business operator.

4.     The applicant or the applicant’s agents or business partners have been convicted of a felony, or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or the illegal use, possession, distribution, transportation, or any such similar activity related to controlled substances, for which the conviction occurred prior to passage of Compassionate Use Act of 1996. A conviction means a plea or verdict of guilty or a conviction following a plea of nolo contendere.

5.     The applicant or the applicant’s agents have engaged in unlawful, fraudulent, unfair, or deceptive business acts or practices.

6.     The applicant has not been or is not in good standing with the city related to other or previous business activities operated in the city.

7.     The applicant has not satisfied all requirements of this chapter.

B.     Each application that complies with this chapter and not deemed disqualified shall be placed on the “qualified cannabis applicant list” for the particular commercial cannabis business operation proposed and the director of community and economic development shall notify the applicant in writing that it is a “qualified cannabis applicant.” (Ord. 1791 § 3, 2018)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 18.22.060 Development agreement.
The highest ranked qualified cannabis applicants for the commercial cannabis facility permitted by this chapter shall be permitted to submit an application for a conditional use permit, based on the total number of available permits being offered by the city. Those applicants that are selected must enter into a negotiated development agreement with the city, which must be completed within one hundred twenty days of notification to proceed to the conditional use permit process and may be extended by the community development director one time for a maximum of sixty days if good faith negotiations are proceeding. Upon completion of the development agreement, the qualified cannabis applicant has sixty days to submit an application for a conditional use permit. Failure to reach agreement on a development agreement or submittal of an application for a conditional use permit will remove the applicant from the qualified cannabis application list and waitlist. Should at any time the development agreement become void, the conditional use permit shall also immediately become null and void or should the conditional use permit become void or revoked, the development agreement would become void. (Ord. 1791 § 3, 2018)

 

18.22.070 Waitlist.
A.    Qualified cannabis applicants will appear on a “qualified cannabis applicant list” for the particular activity the application was submitted for in the order they are ranked pursuant to this chapter. This list will serve as a waitlist which will be used to select another qualified cannabis applicant in the event that:

 

1.     An applicant with a higher ranking on the qualified cannabis applicant list is disqualified.

2.     A request from a higher ranked applicant to be removed from the list is received.

3.     Additional permits become available as determined by the city council. A qualified cannabis applicant’s ability to submit an application for a conditional use permit is determined by the applicant’s position on the waitlist.

B.     A qualified cannabis applicant that moves from the waitlist to the submittal of a conditional use permit must complete the development agreement process as outlined in this chapter following issuance of a written notice advising the applicant of that opportunity. Failure to complete this process per the noted time will remove the applicant from the qualified cannabis applicant list for that particular business activity.

C.     The director of community and economic development shall maintain the waitlist and update it on an annual basis as needed. A qualified cannabis applicant on the waitlist must submit a written request each year to maintain their status on the waitlist. A qualified cannabis applicant can modify their application by submitting a new application and the required fee. The director of community and economic development shall place new or modified applicants on the waitlist in the order in which they are ranked. (Ord. 1791 § 3, 2018)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 18.22.080 Zoning and land use.
A.    Location. All commercial cannabis facilities allowed by this chapter are permitted only within those zones as designated by this chapter and subject to issuance of a conditional use permit. All commercial cannabis facilities shall not be located within six hundred feet of a school providing instruction in kindergarten or any grades 1 through 12, day care center, youth center or public park (minimum 0.6 acres in size). All distances shall be measured from the property where the facility to a school, day care center, youth center or public park (minimum 0.6 acres in size) is located along any public street/roadway from the nearest point of the property, which the commercial cannabis facility is to be located, to the nearest property line of those uses described in this subsection. No property containing a commercial cannabis operation shall be immediately adjacent to a property containing a school, day care center, youth center or public park (minimum 0.6 acres in size).

B.     Co-Location. To the extent not prohibited under state law, another commercial cannabis facility may be located within the same building, facility or real property parcel subject to a conditional use permit for the added facility.

C.     Conditional Use Permits.

1.     Prior to commencing operation of a commercial cannabis activity, all persons shall obtain a conditional use permit from the city for all parcels of real property (or portion thereof) upon which the commercial cannabis activity will operate.

2.     All commercial cannabis facilities shall operate in accordance with the conditions of approval associated with the applicable conditional use permit for the specified parcel of real property (or sub-portion thereof).

3.     The issued conditional use permit shall be subject to an approved development agreement. Should the development agreement become void, the conditional use permit shall immediately become null and void.

4.     Commercial cannabis facilities shall not exceed the square footage authorized pursuant to the applicable conditional use permit.

5.     The commercial cannabis facility operator shall have a valid state license for the specific classification permitted by this chapter prior to business operations. Unless determined by the planning commission that cross permitting would negatively affect public safety, the conditional use permit can be for both commercial adult-use and medicinal cannabis activity. The business operator must conduct commercial cannabis activities in accordance with this chapter and state law. The applicant must inform the city in writing if they will be conducting commercial adult-use cannabis activity or commercial medicinal cannabis activity or both as part of the conditional use permit application.

6.     Commercial cannabis facilities are allowed only within fully enclosed and secure structures that are inaccessible to minors unless allowed by state law. The business operator shall deter and prevent unauthorized entrance into the areas containing cannabis or cannabis products and theft of cannabis or cannabis products. All commercial cannabis facilities shall have a security plan that satisfies the following requirements, but shall not be limited to, all of the following:

a.     Security cameras shall be installed and maintained in good condition at all times. The areas to be covered by the security cameras would be executed per the public safety and security plan between the licensee and the police chief that shall include, but are not limited to all operation areas, all doors and windows, and any other areas as reasonably determined by the police chief. Requirements for the camera system include:

i.      The cameras shall be in use twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.

ii.     The operator shall maintain at least ninety days of concurrent hours of digitally recorded documentation.

iii.    Any disruption in security camera images shall be cured expeditiously within twenty-four hours.

b.     If the commercial cannabis facility directly serves the public, all customer and public access to the facility must be through a secured single point of entry. Entry into the facility from the outside must be completed through a secured vestibule area that is designed to allow for identification confirmation prior to entry into the main lobby or customer service area.

c.     Prevent persons from remaining on the premises of the commercial cannabis business if they are not engaging in the activity expressly related to the operations of the commercial cannabis business. An armed security guard shall monitor the premises. Panic buttons shall be installed in all commercial cannabis businesses in locations approved by the police chief or designee.

d.     Establish limited access areas accessible only to authorized commercial cannabis business personnel. Sensors shall be installed to detect entry and exit from all secured areas. An employee safety plan shall be created and submitted to the police chief for review and approval.

e.     Commercial cannabis facilities shall be secured with an alarm system that is operated and monitored by an independent third party security company as approved by the chief of police. All security personnel, whether employed by the commercial cannabis business or contracted by the commercial cannabis business, shall be subject to prior review and approval of the chief of police or designee.

f.      Entrance to the commercial cannabis facility, and all storage areas therein, shall be locked at all times, and under the control of the person operating the commercial cannabis facility.

g.     The entrances and all window areas of the commercial cannabis facility shall be illuminated during evening hours as required by the chief of police to assure security cameras have the proper lighting to function. The commercial cannabis facility shall comply with the city’s lighting standards regarding fixture type, wattage, illumination levels, shielding, etcetera, and shall secure the necessary lighting approvals and permits as needed from the chief building official.

h.     All windows on the commercial cannabis premises shall be appropriately secured and all cannabis securely stored as approved by the chief of police. Should any bars be installed on the windows or the doors of the commercial cannabis facility, they shall be located only within the interior of the building if allowed by the California Building Code.

i.      Recordings made by the security cameras shall be made available to law enforcement upon verbal request—no search warrant or subpoena shall be needed to view the recorded materials. City code enforcement or law enforcement officers are authorized to conduct reasonable inspections of the commercial cannabis facility. No search warrant or subpoena shall be needed to inspect the facility at any time, unannounced, for making reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance with this chapter and all city and state laws. Law enforcement and other agents and employees of the city (collectively, the “city parties”) shall have access to commercial cannabis facility, video footage, business records, data, inventory levels and information relating to customers, vendors, products, plans and agreements (collectively, “confidential information”). To the extent confidential information is viewed or possessed by any city parties, the city parties shall, to the maximum extent possible, keep such confidential information confidential, not disclose the confidential information to any third parties, and shall only use the confidential information for purposes specified in this chapter or other laws and regulations of the city related to the city permittees from whom such confidential information has been received. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city may disclose confidential information: (i) as may be required by the California Public Records Act or pursuant to a valid subpoena or court order, provided, however, that the city shall first notify the applicable business operator and provide a reasonable opportunity to obtain a protective order before disclosing the confidential information; and (ii) in connection with any city enforcement proceeding relating to compliance with the city’s municipal code and this chapter, but only to the extent the confidential information is relevant to the proceeding.

j.      The security system installed for the facility shall be by a licensed Underwriters Laboratory certified security firm.

k.     A yearly service maintenance contract for the security system shall be submitted for review and approval by the police chief. Should the business operator wish to terminate the service contract, the police chief shall be informed thirty days prior to such termination. The business operator shall submit a substitute yearly service contract for review and approval by the police chief. Termination of the existing contract shall not occur until after the substitute contract has been approved by the police chief.

l.      A contract for yearly staff training of the security system is to be submitted and approved by the police chief.

m.    Quarterly maintenance reports of the security system shall be submitted to the police chief.

7.     There shall be no consumption of any cannabis or cannabis products on site. The entrance of the commercial cannabis premises shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that smoking, ingesting, or consuming cannabis, cannabis products or alcohol on the premises is prohibited. Should an employee be found to be under the influence of any behavior-impairing drug, action to terminate employment shall be taken as allowed by law.

8.     Commercial cannabis facilities shall not adversely affect the health or safety of the nearby property owners/business operators by creating odor, dust, glare, heat, noise, smoke, traffic, vibration, or other impacts, and shall not be hazardous due to use or storage of materials, processes, products, or wastes. Any person issued a conditional use permit pursuant to this chapter must follow all local, state and federal requirements for solid waste and hazardous waste disposal.

9.     The hours of operation of all commercial cannabis activity shall be established as part of the conditional use permit application as approved by the planning commission. Modification of operation hours shall be subject to a recommendation made by the director to the planning commission.

10.   All cannabis and cannabis products shall be kept in a secured manner during all business and nonbusiness hours.

11.   All commercial cannabis facilities shall pay all applicable taxes pursuant to federal, state, and local laws, in addition to any payment terms established within the development agreement.

12.   All commercial cannabis facilities shall provide sufficient odor absorbing ventilation and exhaust systems so that odor outside the premises is not detected on any adjacent property, on or about the exterior or interior common area walkways, hallways, breezeways, foyers, lobby areas, or any other areas available for use by common tenants or the visiting public, or within any other unit located inside the same building or premises as the commercial cannabis business. Any violation of this chapter shall be remedied within fourteen days of the operator receiving notice of such violation unless extended by the director of community and economic development.

13.   Prior to the sale or the delivery of any edible cannabis or edible cannabis product the same shall be labeled and in tamper-evident packaging which at least meets the requirements of the state.

14.   Inventory Control.

a.     All commercial cannabis facilities shall utilize product and inventory tracking software and accounting software that is in-line with state law and as approved by the director of finance. Each commercial cannabis business shall file with the finance director or designee a report (the “quarterly report”) showing:

i.      Gross receipts (or net receipts based on the terms of the development agreement) from operations for the immediate prior quarter by the commercial cannabis business operator, and a cumulative total of all amounts of gross receipts from operations received by the commercial cannabis business operator for the calendar year;

ii.     A calculation of the quarterly payment due to the city for the prior quarter; and

iii.    A calculation of the cumulative total of all quarterly payments for the calendar year.

b.     The commercial cannabis business operator shall keep complete, accurate and appropriate books and records of all receipts from operations in accordance with generally acceptable accounting principles. For purposes herein “books and records” shall mean all bookkeeping or accounting documents the commercial cannabis business operator utilizes in managing its business operations relating to the commercial cannabis business. Such books and records, as well as all other relevant documents as the city shall reasonably require, shall, upon reasonable written notice, be open for inspection by the city, its auditors or other authorized representatives. If, at any time such books and records prove inadequate in the reasonable judgment of the city to record the gross receipts from business operations as herein required, the commercial cannabis business operator shall, upon the written request of the city, procure and maintain such books and records as shall be of a character and form adequate for such purpose.

c.     The city shall have the right to audit and examine such books, records and documents and other relevant items in the possession of the commercial cannabis business operator, but only to the extent necessary for a proper determination of gross receipts from the commercial cannabis business operation, and all such books, records, documents and other items shall be held available for such audit and examination.

d.     Upon request by the city, the commercial cannabis business operator shall make such books, records and documents available to the city, and provide removable copies thereof, within thirty days of the date of the city’s request. The cost for any audit shall be shared equally by the commercial cannabis business operator and the city of La Habra. The commercial cannabis business operator shall preserve such books, records, documents, and other items for a period of not less than seven years for the purpose of auditing or re-auditing these accounts upon reasonable notice; except that, if an audit is made within the seven-year period and the commercial cannabis business operator claims that errors or omissions have occurred, the books and records shall be retained and made available until those matters are resolved.

e.     The city council has found and determined that the disclosure of confidential financial statements and certain other confidential records in the possession of the city that relate to or concern a permitted commercial cannabis business is outweighed by the public interest in non-disclosure of such records. The city shall keep strictly confidential all statements of revenue furnished by the commercial cannabis business and all other information concerning the commercial cannabis business operation obtained by the city by way of the city’s inspection, audit and examination privileges hereunder, except as otherwise required by law or judicial order. Upon receipt of a request for such records pursuant to the Public Records Act (California Government Code Section 6250 et seq.) or by way of a subpoena duces tecum or other civil discovery method, the city shall provide notice of same to the commercial cannabis business operator prior to disclosing any such records and/or the information contained therein. It shall be the sole responsibility of the commercial cannabis business to seek a protective order, as deemed necessary to protect such records and/or information from disclosure.

f.      Within seven years after receipt of any statement of receipts, the city at any time shall be entitled to carry out an audit of such revenue either by the city or agents to be designated by the city. If it shall be determined as a result of such audit that there has been a deficiency in any payment due to the city made on the basis of such statement, then such deficiency shall become immediately due and payable. If such statement of revenue for the relevant year shall be found to have understated receipts by more than two percent and the city is entitled to any additional payment as a result of such understatement, then the commercial cannabis business operator shall, in addition, pay all of the city’s reasonable costs and expenses connected with such audit, including the expense incurred in retaining such agent; otherwise the city shall bear the cost and expense of such audit.

15.   Signage for all commercial cannabis facilities shall comply with the city’s sign code and any restrictions placed on the facility within the development agreement.

16.   The commercial cannabis facility shall fully comply with all applicable rules, regulations, and laws, including, but not limited to, zoning and building city codes, the city’s business license ordinances, the Revenue and Taxation Code, the Americans with Disabilities Act, and the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act.

17.   The owner or operator of each commercial cannabis facility shall provide the chief of police with the name, cell phone number(s), facsimile number, and email address of the on-site representative of such facility whom the city and the public can provide notice if there are any operational problems associated with the facility.

18.   Each commercial cannabis facility shall have the capacity to remain secure and operational during a power outage through the use of an emergency generator or other means approved by the police chief and shall ensure that all access doors are not solely controlled by an electronic access panel to ensure that locks are not released during a power outage.

19.   Each commercial cannabis business shall submit to the chief of police or designee for review and approval, a transportation plan describing the procedures for safely and securely transporting cannabis and cannabis products, drivers and currency. Delivery vehicles shall be equipped with video recording equipment that monitors the inside and outside of the vehicle. All recordings shall be stored up to seven calendar days and be available to city personnel upon request. In addition, each vehicle shall also be equipped with GPS tracking system and an alarm system. All drivers shall have active motor carrier permits issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles.

20.   Employee Work Permits—Identification.

a.     Work Permit Required. Any person who is an employee or who otherwise works or volunteers within a  commercial cannabis business must obtain a work permit from the police chief or designee. No person under the age of twenty-one may be employed by or act as a responsible person on behalf of a commercial cannabis operation. The police chief or designee is hereby authorized to establish all regulations necessary to implement the work permit process contemplated in this section, including, but not limited to, the reasons for denial of a work permit to any person. A work permit shall be valid for a twelve-month period and must be renewed on an annual basis. Applications for work permits shall be submitted under oath and shall contain a statement of the past criminal record, if any, of the applicant and such information as may be deemed necessary by the police chief or designee to determine whether the applicant should be issued a work permit. The applicant for a work permit will be required to submit to LiveScan fingerprinting and a photograph for the purpose of the city performing a background investigation and issuance of a work permit. A union employee for which a LiveScan and background investigation has been successfully completed, shall provide proof of such action to obtain a work permit from the police chief. Any determination made by the police chief or designee based on the background check who had a cannabis or marijuana-related conviction that has been subsequently reclassified, dismissed or sealed would not prohibit that employee from receiving a work permit.

b.     Employee Records. Each owner or operator of a  commercial cannabis business shall maintain on-site a register of all the employees currently employed by the commercial cannabis business and shall produce such register to the chief of police or designee or any other city of La Habra official authorized to enforce the La Habra Municipal Code for purposes of determining compliance with this chapter. A copy of the employee’s work permit shall also be contained in the register.

c.     Employee Termination. The commercial cannabis business operator shall notify the chief of police or designee within ten calendar days when an employee terminates employment with the business. Failure to notify the chief of police shall automatically void the work permit.

d.     Fee. Each application for a work permit and renewal of an existing work permit shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the city council. The fee is non-refundable and shall not be returned in the event the work permit is denied, revoked, or suspended.

21.   Commercial cannabis facilities shall obtain and have in place non-automotive insurance to protect employees for a minimum of one million dollars. (Ord. 1791 § 3, 2018)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 18.22.090 Permit conditions.
A maximum of four commercial cannabis facility conditional use permits are allowed for each type of commercial cannabis activity permitted by this chapter within the city of La Habra.

A.    Each commercial cannabis facility is subject to the conditions of approval placed on the conditional use permit by the planning commission.

B.     The business operator shall keep the chief of police updated with the names, addresses, and relevant criminal histories of the owners and business operators of the facility. Failure to report or inaccurately report a change in ownership or business operator is grounds for reconsideration of the conditional use permit for suspension or revocation by the planning commission.

C.     Any transfer of ownership of a conditional use permit shall be approved by the planning commission. The owner must submit a request to modify the conditional use permit to the new owner. The new owner shall submit all necessary information as would be required from a new operator with appropriate background check conducted by the chief of police. The cost of the background check shall be borne by the owner requesting the transfer of the conditional use permit as per a fee established by the city council. Upon completion of the background check, the chief of police shall make a recommendation to the planning commission. Any attempt to transfer or any transfer of a commercial cannabis facility without approval of the planning commission is hereby declared void and the conditional use permit is deemed immediately revoked and no longer of any force or effort.

D.    A conditional use permit shall expire and be null and void twelve months after issuance if no action is taken to operate the facility or should the business cease operation due to inactivity.

E.     To the fullest extent permitted by law, the city does not assume any liability, and expressly does not waive sovereign immunity, with respect to any commercial cannabis facility or for any other activities taking place at a commercial cannabis facility. (Ord. 1791 § 3, 2018)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 18.22.100 Enforcement.
A.    Immediate Notification to Police Chief. A commercial cannabis business shall notify the chief of police or designee immediately upon discovering that the security system required by this chapter has become inoperative or is malfunctioning. In addition, notification to the chief of police must be made within twenty-four hours after discovering any of the following:

1.     Significant discrepancies identified in a  commercial cannabis business’s inventory. The level of significance shall be determined by the regulations established by the chief of police or designee

2.     Diversion, theft, loss, or any criminal activity involving the commercial cannabis business or any agent or employee of the commercial cannabis business.

3.     The loss of unauthorized alteration of records related to cannabis, or employees or agents of the commercial cannabis business.

4.     Any other breach of security.

B.     Any person who willfully or knowingly: (1) engages in a violation of this chapter; or (2) owns, possesses, controls, or has charge of any parcel of real property in the city upon which a violation of this chapter is maintained and who has actual knowledge of such violation (or would have actual knowledge of such violation after a reasonable inquiry), shall be subject to the penalties and remedies provided by this chapter.

C.     Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense for each day the violation occurs or persists.

D.    Any person in violation of any provision of this chapter or who causes another person to be in violation of this chapter shall have committed a misdemeanor. In addition, such violation may be punishable by a fine of up to one thousand dollars for each violation and for each day, the applicable violation continues to persist.

E.     Any person in violation of any provision of this chapter may be subject to an administrative fine of up to a one thousand dollars per offense.

F.     Revocation of Conditional Use Permit. Any violation of this chapter or any other relevant city or state law or regulation by a  commercial cannabis business is grounds for revoking the relevant conditional use permit by the planning commission, including, but not limited to, the following:

1.     The director of community and economic development determines that the operator allowed by a conditional use permit has failed to comply with this chapter, any condition of approval, or any agreement or covenant as required pursuant to this chapter.

2.     The operations and/or the particular commercial cannabis activity permitted by a conditional use permit cease for more than one year.

3.     The city permittee and/or operator of the commercial cannabis business that is the subject of a conditional use permit fails to obtain and maintain a state license. Revocation, termination, non-issuance or suspension of a license issued by the state of California, or any of its departments or divisions, shall immediately suspend the conditional use permit and the ability of a commercial cannabis business to operate within the city until the state of California, or its respective department or division, reinstates or issues the state license. The city may suspend and/or revoke a conditional use permit in the event the state takes action against the commercial cannabis business and/or its operators, employees, or agents.

4.     Ownership of the use allowed by a conditional use permit is changed or transferred to a third party, without approval from the planning commission.

5.     The use allowed by a conditional use permit fails to materially comply with its approved security plan.

6.     The use allowed by a conditional use permit fails to provide access to the security cameras to the chief of police, or fails to allow inspection of the security recordings, the activity logs, or of the premises by authorized city officials.

7.     The development agreement entered into as part of the conditional use permit process becomes void.

8.     The property and/or the commercial cannabis business and/or activities conducted thereon are declared a public nuisance negatively impacting the health, safety, or welfare of the community.

G.    The director of community and economic development shall schedule the conditional use permit for possible revocation or any other action deemed appropriate by the planning commission. Notice of such hearing shall be provided to the property owner, business operator, and public as is required for any conditional use permit by Chapter 18.66 of the La Habra Municipal Code. Any decision made by the planning commission is final ten working days after such determination, unless appealed to the city council. Notice of such hearing before the city council shall be provided to the property owner, business operator, and public as required for any conditional use permit. The decision of the city council shall be final. These penalties and remedies are cumulative, and in addition to any other penalties and remedies available to the city. (Ord. 1791 § 3, 2018)

 

18.22.110 State and city license requirement.
A.    State License. Commercial cannabis operations permitted through a conditional use permit by the city of La Habra must obtain the appropriate state license, either an A-License or M-License or both A-License and M-License, within six months of the building permit becoming final and prior to business operation. Failure to obtain the required state license, will result in the automatic expiration of the conditional use permit. Except as otherwise set forth in this chapter, there shall be no prohibitions or restrictions on an M-Permittee obtaining and holding an A-Permit in the specific classification, or an A-Permittee obtaining and holding an M-Permit or vice versa unless a specific condition has been placed on the facility by the planning commission.

B.     City Business License. An application for a  commercial cannabis business license shall be consistent with this chapter, section and regulations adopted by the city council. Each commercial cannabis business license issued by this chapter shall be renewed annually twelve months after the date of its issuance. The issuance of a  commercial cannabis business license shall not entitle any person to engage in any cannabis business without first complying with the requirements of this code and all other applicable laws.

C.     City Business License Denial. A commercial cannabis business license can be denied or revoked if any of the following exists:

1.     The conditional use permit is suspended or revoked that allows for the commercial cannabis activity.

2.     The commercial cannabis business has not been in continuous operation the four months prior to the renewal application.

3.     The commercial cannabis business fails to conform to the requirements of this chapter, any regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter, or the conditions imposed as part of any conditional use permit or zoning requirements.

4.     The permittee fails to renew its state of California license. (Ord. 1791 § 3, 2018)

Article II. Zone Standards
Chapter 18.24 R-1a, R-1b AND R-1c ONE-FAMILY DWELLING ZONES
18.24.010 Generally.
The regulations contained in this chapter shall apply in the R-1a, R-1b, and R-1c one-family dwelling zones unless otherwise provided in this title. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.24.020 Uses.
See Section 18.06.040. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.24.030 Accessory uses permitted.
In the R-1a, R-1b, and R-1c zones, the following accessory uses are permitted:

A.    The accessory buildings necessary to such use located on the same lot or parcel of land including a private garage, the capacity of which shall not exceed three automobiles (for occupancy and storage of trailers, boats, etc., see Section 18.12.090).

B.     Home occupation in compliance with the regulations provided in Chapter 18.60.

C.     Private greenhouses of not to exceed one thousand two hundred square feet in area and horticultural collections, flower and vegetable gardens and fruit trees.

D.    Poultry, rabbits or similar livestock raised for food, scientific or fur bearing purposes; provided that not more than twelve of any one or combination of such animals may be maintained on one lot. The keeping of such fowl and animals shall conform to all other provisions of law governing same, and no fowl or animals, nor any pen or coop, shall be kept or maintained within fifty feet of any dwelling or other building used for human habitation, or within one hundred feet of the front lot line of the lot upon which it is located, or within one hundred feet of any public park, school, hospital or similar institution. (See Title 6 of this code for more restrictive provisions for specifically named animals and fowl.)

E.     Yard Sales. “Yard sale” shall mean any event where items of personal property owned, utilized, or maintained by the occupants of the premises, other than a licensed commercial business, are to be offered for sale to the general public, including garage, estate and moving sales. Rummage sales by licensed non-profit organizations are not included within this definition.

1.     It is unlawful for any person to conduct, or allow to be conducted, a yard sale in violation of the following regulations:

a.     Yard sales shall only be conducted on properties owned and permitted for residential use;

b.     All items sold at a yard sale must be used goods, wares or merchandise of a household or personal nature, from that household, and not acquired elsewhere for resale;

c.     A yard sale may not be held for more than three consecutive weekend days;

d.     Yard sales may only be conducted on the second weekend of every month with a maximum of four yard sales per calendar year per residentially zoned parcel. For purposes of this section, “weekend” is defined as a consecutive Friday, Saturday and Sunday. Exception: The director of community development may under special circumstances approve yard sales on alternate weekends;

e.     Yard sale activity shall be limited to the hours of eight a.m. to five p.m.;

f.      Yard sale activity shall not be conducted in the public right-of-way including sidewalks, parkways, streets or alleys;

g.     Yard or garage sales advertising signs may not be posted on telephone poles, streetlights, traffic signs, or any other structure in the public right-of-way. Signs may be posted on premises other than those of the sale, only with the written permission of the owner of those premises. Signs may be posted two days prior to the event and shall be removed at the termination of the sale.

2.     Penalty. Violation of this section shall be deemed an infraction, except as provided for herein. The city upon the first offense for failing to comply with the provisions relating to yard sales, shall advise the property owner/resident of the regulations of this section. The city upon the fourth yard sale shall provide a letter to the property owner/resident warning that the next such event will result in violation of this section. For the first violation of this section, the fine shall be one hundred dollars within the calendar year period. For the second violation of this section within the calendar year period, the fine shall be two hundred dollars. The fine for the third and each additional violation of this section within the calendar year period shall be five hundred dollars, or may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor and at the discretion of city authorities. The city, at its discretion, may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Pursuit of one remedy does not preclude the pursuit of any other remedies.

F.     “Accessory dwelling unit” shall have the same definition as provided in Government Code Section 65852.2 as it may be amended from time to time. See Section 18.12.150, “Accessory Dwelling Units.” (Ord. 1813 § 1, 2019; Ord. 1727 § 3, 2011; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.24.040 Standards of development.
In the R-1a, R-1b, and R-1c zones, the following standards of development shall apply:

A.    Building Height.

1.     Two and one-half stories and not to exceed thirty-five feet.

2.     Accessory Buildings. All detached accessory structures, including, but not limited to, garages, garden and storage sheds, and accessory living quarters, shall not exceed a height of one story or fifteen feet, whichever is less. All accessory buildings shall be architecturally and visibly com-

        patible with the main dwelling unit. This provision shall not apply to structures that comply with the setback requirements for the main dwelling.

3.     No penthouses or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment; towers, steeples, roof signs, or other structures shall exceed the height limit provided in this title. Radio and television masts, camouflaged wireless communication facilities, flagpoles, chimneys and smokestacks may extend not more than thirty-five feet above the height

        limit provided in this title; provided, however, that the same may be safely erected and maintained at such height in view of the surrounding conditions and circumstances.

B.     Front Yard.

1.     There shall be a front yard of not less than that identified in Table 18.24.040.B or twenty-five percent of the depth of the lot, whichever is less, except where lots comprising forty percent of the frontage on one side of a street between intersecting streets are developed with buildings having an average front yard with a variation of not more than ten feet, no building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall project beyond the average front yard line established. In determining such front yard depth, buildings located more than thirty-five feet from the front property line or buildings facing a side street on a corner lot shall not be counted.

 

Table 18.24.040.B

 

Zone

Distance from Front Property Line

R-1a

25 feet

R-1b

25 feet

R-1c

20 feet

2.     For all buildings or houses fronting on a cul-de-sac, there shall be a minimum setback of fifteen feet from the property line to all parts or portions of such buildings or houses.

3.     Where yards are required in this chapter, they shall be not less in depth or width than the minimum dimension specified for any part, and they shall be at every point open and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as follows:

a.     Cornices, canopies, carports, eaves or other similar architectural features not providing additional floor space within the building may extend into a required front, side or rear yard not to exceed two feet six inches.

b.     Open, unenclosed, uncovered porches, platforms or landing places which do not extend above the level of the first floor of the building, may extend into any front, yard not more than six feet; provided, however, that an open work railing not more than thirty inches in height shall be installed or constructed on any such porch, platform or landing place.

4.     The area of the required front yard setback, except for required driveways and walkways, shall be landscaped with evergreen or similar plant and lawn materials and maintained to provide a consistent greenbelt along all residential neighborhoods. At no time shall any portion of the required landscaped front yard setback be used for the parking or storage of any vehicle of any kind or any vehicle parts or similar item except as provided in Section 18.12.050(F) of this title.

C.     Side Yards.

1.     There shall be a side yard on each side of a main building of not less than five feet; provided, that there shall be a side yard along the street side of all corner lots of not less than ten feet. Where a garage is attached to or built into the main building, such garage shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet from the side lot line along the street side of a corner lot when the garage door faces the street.

2.     Detached accessory buildings may occupy side yards as provided in Section 18.12.030.

 

3.     On a corner lot no detached accessory buildings shall be located at a distance less than ten feet from the side street line. A detached garage shall be located at least twenty feet from the side street line when the garage door faces the street.

D.    Rear Yard.

1.     There shall be a rear yard behind every main building of not less than twenty-five feet or twenty-five percent of the depth of the lot, whichever is less.

2.     Detached accessory buildings may occupy rear yards as provided in Section 18.12.030.

3.     A private garage of not to exceed six hundred square feet may be a part of the main building if the garage and the main building have a common wall of not less than five feet in length, or if connected by a roof of not less than five feet in width. Such attached garage may extend into the required rear yard for a distance of not more than fifteen feet.

4.     A private garage may be connected to a single-family residence with an unenclosed breezeway, and in such cases the garage need not be considered part of the main building for purposes of maintaining the required rear yard.

5.     On through lots, either line separating such lot from a public thoroughfare may be designated by the owner as the front lot line. In such cases, the minimum rear yard shall be the average of the yards on lots next adjoining. If such lots next adjoining are undeveloped, the minimum rear yard shall conform to the front yard setback for the zone in which the property is located.

6.     A patio roof may extend into a required rear yard setback no more than fifteen feet; provided, however, the patio is unenclosed on no less than two sides. For purposes of this subsection, an enclosure shall be a wall of solid material either transparent or opaque that is higher than three feet.

7.     An addition for habitable purposes to an existing single-family structure may encroach a maximum of fifteen feet into the required rear yard setback subject to the following provisions:

a.     For the purposes of this chapter, an existing single-family structure shall be one for which the certificate of occupancy was issued at least one year prior to the approval of any encroachment allowed by this chapter.

b.     Any addition allowed by this chapter shall be deemed by the planning division of the city to be similar to and compatible with the architecture of the existing structure with particular reference to the roof line, the roof covering and the exterior wall surface.

c.     A minimum of one thousand square feet of usable yard area as defined in subsection F of this section.

d.     A minimum setback of ten feet from the rear property line shall be maintained.

E.     Area Requirements.

1.     The minimum lot area shall be not less than identified in Table 18.24.040.E.

Table 18.24.040.E

 

Zone

Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit

Minimum Ground Floor Area

R-1a

>10,000 sf per dwelling

>1,500 sf

R-1b

>7,200 sf per dwelling

>1,200 sf

R-1c

>5,500 sf per dwelling

>1,000 sf

 

Except any lot with less area than herein required and was recorded prior to the passage of this section may be developed with a single-family dwelling unit and any accessory use permitted by this title. Minimum floor areas shall not include open or enclosed porches, patios or garages.

F.     Usable Yard Area.

1.     For each dwelling unit placed on a lot or parcel there shall be provided one thousand square feet of usable yard area. Such usable yard space shall have no dimension less than fifteen feet, except that not more than fifty percent of the required usable yard area may have a minimum dimension of twelve feet. This area may be provided at any location on the lot except in the required front yard or in a required side yard abutting a street. Such space may be divided into not more than two separate subareas.

2.     Such usable area shall not be used for parking, driveways, automobile turning area or accessory buildings. Maximum gradient for usable yard area shall be five percent.

G.    Parking. See Chapter 18.14, Off-Street Parking Requirements. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.24.050 Special development standards.
In the R-1a, R-1b, and R-1c zones, the following special development standards shall apply:

A.    Distance Between Buildings on the Same Lot.

1.     There shall be a minimum distance of ten feet between a building used for dwelling purposes and an accessory building.

2.     There shall be a minimum distance of six feet between accessory buildings.

B.     Walls and Fences. See Section 18.12.070 Fences, walls, and hedges and Section 18.12.080 Required walls.

C.     Miscellaneous Requirements.

1.     Every dwelling shall be on a lot having a minimum of sixty feet frontage upon a dedicated street, or access to a dedicated street via a private roadway or easement. The minimum frontage onto a private roadway or easement shall be twenty feet. Where a lot has less than sixty feet but more than forty-four feet of frontage as herein required, and recorded prior to the passage of the ordinance codified in this title, the lot may be improved with new, reconstructed and/or additions to single-family homes.

D.    The director of community development or his/her designee may approve variations from subsections B, C, D, E and F of Section 18.24.040 and subsection A of this section for existing legal nonconforming conditions. The director of community development or his/her designee may approve variations from subsection G of Section 18.24.040 as hereinbefore prescribed; providing further, that there is no building floor increase and that the expense of such rehabilitation of the building does not exceed fifty percent of the fair market value of the building or structure. Administrative consideration of the project is subject to appropriate conditions which may be placed on the property as determined by the director of community development or his/her designee. Any decision may be appealed to the planning commission within ten working days. Any decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council within ten working days. (Ord. 1813 § 2019; Ord. 1748 § 3, 2013; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

 

Chapter 18.26 R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6 and R-7 MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING ZONES
18.26.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards, land use regulations and permit processes for the development of multiple family housing; and to implement the general plan goals and policies. (Ord. 1803 § 3, 2019)

 

18.26.020 Uses.
See Section 18.06.040. (Ord. 1803 § 3, 2019)

 

18.26.030 Accessory uses permitted.
In the R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6 and R-7 zones the following accessory uses are permitted:

A.    Accessory Buildings. The accessory buildings necessary to such use located on the same lot or parcel of land.

B.     Home Occupation. In compliance with the regulations provided in Chapter 18.60. (Ord. 1803 § 3, 2019)

 

18.26.040 Standards of development.
A.    All development shall comply with the basic development standards as set forth in Table 18.26.040.A and in the following subsections.

 

Table 18.26.040.A

 

Regulations

 

Zones

 

Additional Requirements

 

R-2

R-3

R-5

R-7

 

 

 

R-4

R-6

 

 

Allowed Density (dwelling units per acre)

Maximum

14

15/24

30/36

50

 

Minimum Setbacks (feet)

Front, First 2 Stories

15

15

15

15

See Section 18.26.040.C

Front, 3rd Story and Above

 

 

20

20

See Section 18.26.040.C

Side Corner, First 2 Stories

10

10

15

15

 

Site Corner, 3rd Story and Above

 

15

20

20

 

Side Interior, First 2 Stories

5

5

10

10

 

Site Corner, 3rd Story and Above

 

10

15

15

 

Rear, First 2 Stories

10

10

15

15

 

Rear, 3rd Story and Above

 

15

20

20

 

Maximum Lot Coverage (percentage)

Lot Coverage

35%

40%

50%

60%

See Section 18.26.040.D.1

Maximum Height and Number of Stories (feet)

Primary Building

35

35

40

50

See Section 18.26.040.B

Accessory Building

15

15

15

15

 

Number of Stories

2.5

3

4

5

 

Open Space Requirement (square feet per dwelling unit)

Private Usable Yard Area

250

See Section 18.26.040.E

Common Useable Yard Area

400

Minimum Dwelling Unit Size (square feet per dwelling unit)

One Family Dwelling

1,000

 

Multifamily studio unit

480

 

Multifamily one bedroom unit

700

 

Multifamily two bedroom unit

900

 

Multifamily three bedroom plus

900 + 150 for each additional bedroom

 

Area Requirements

Under 10,000 square feet

3,350

3,000

1,800

1,200

 

 

 

2,850

1,450

 

 

10,001 through 20,000 square feet

3,100

2,600

1,600

1,000

 

 

 

2,100

1,300

 

 

20,001 square feet +

2,850

2,350

1,450

870

 

 

 

1,800

1,200

 

 

 

B.     Building Height.

1.     Maximum Height—Other Structures. Roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, towers, steeples, or other rooftop equipment may exceed the height limit provided in this title. Provided, that they are architecturally compatible with the design and scale of the building.

2.     Rooftop deck and patio may be permitted and may have a railing/wall that does not exceed six feet.

C.     Yard Setbacks.

1.     Cul-de-sacs. For all buildings, fronting on a cul-de-sac there shall be a minimum yard and building setback of fifteen feet from the property line to all parts or portions of such buildings or houses.

2.     Definition. Yards and setbacks where required in this title shall be required for an overall development and shall not pertain to individual units within the development. They shall be at every point open and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as follows:

a.     Cornices, canopies, eaves or other similar architectural features, not providing additional floor space within the building may extend into required setbacks as approved by the planning commission.

b.     Open, unenclosed, uncovered porches, platforms or landing places, which do not extend above the level of the first floor of the building not more than six feet into the front setback; provided, however, that an open work railing not more than thirty-six inches in height may be installed or constructed on any such porch, platform or landing place.

c.     Fountains, public art, and plants as approved by the planning commission.

3.     Patio Location. No patio area designed for or used for outdoor recreational purposes shall be located within the required front yard or within a required side yard abutting a street.

4.     The roof platform created by the difference between the first-story setback and the second-story setback may be used for as approved by the planning commission.

5.     Accessory buildings shall not be placed in required front yard setbacks and shall not be more than one story in height nor located closer than five feet to any interior property line.

6.     Through Lots. On through lots, the planning commission will designate the front lot line. In such cases, the minimum rear yard shall be the average of the yards on the lots next adjoining. If such lots next adjoining are developed, the minimum rear yard area shall conform to the front yard setback for the zone in which the property is located.

D.    Area Requirements.

1.     Minimum Lot Area—One-Family Dwelling. Each lot or parcel of land shall have a minimum lot area of three thousand square feet per dwelling unit for each one-family dwelling.

2.     Land Coverage Exceptions. Carports and parking structures shall not be considered in computing land coverage.

E.     Usable Yard Area.

1.     Minimum Area per Parcel. All parcels in the zone shall have a minimum of one thousand square feet of usable yard area in any combination described below.

2.     Minimum Area per Dwelling Unit. The minimum required usable yard area shall be not less than two hundred fifty square feet for each dwelling unit, either as a private usable open space or as a combination of private and common open space with at least thirty percent of the total number of dwelling units having private usable open spaces.

3.     Private Usable Yard Area.

a.     The required private usable yard area when located on open ground, utilized as patios, terraces, atriums or surfaces of courts shall have a minimum dimension of eight feet, and minimum area of ninety-six square feet.

b.     The required usable yard area when located on balconies, porches or decks shall have a minimum area of seventy square feet and a minimum dimension of seven feet.

4.     Common Usable Yard Area.

a.     The remaining required usable open space, when not a part of the private usable open space shall be a part of the common usable open space, and shall be not less than four hundred square feet in area, having no dimension less than fifteen feet.

b.     All common yard area shall be conveniently located and readily accessible from all dwellings; shall be screened from adjacent streets and highways and shall be landscaped with lawns, trees, shrubs and other permanently maintained plant material excepting for swimming pools, game courts and other recreational facilities.

5.     Description.

a.     Any usable yard area required by this chapter shall not be used for parking, driveways, automobile turning area or accessory buildings. Maximum gradient of usable yard area shall be five percent unless approved by the planning commission as an integral part of a landscaped scheme.

b.     Such usable yard area shall not be located within a required front yard or in a required side yard abutting a street, or in a required rear yard abutting a street.

F.     Parking. See Chapter 18.14, Off-Street Parking Requirements. (Ord. 1803 § 3, 2019)

 

18.26.050 Special development standards.
In all multifamily zones, the following special development standards shall apply:

A.    The distance between buildings on the same lot shall comply with the applicable section of the most current adopted version of the building and fire code.

B.     Walls and Fences. See Section 18.12.070, Fences, walls, and hedges and Section 18.12.080, Required walls.

C.     Signs. See Chapter 15.40 of this code.

D.    Miscellaneous Requirements.

1.     Street Access. Every dwelling shall be on a lot having a minimum of sixty feet frontage upon a dedicated street, or upon a private roadway or easement providing access to a dedicated street. Where a lot was improved with a single-family dwelling and has less than sixty feet, but more than forty-four feet of frontage as herein required, was recorded prior to the passage of this title, the lot may be improved with a replacement of no more than one single-family dwelling, unless approved by the planning commission and/or city council.

2.     Unit Access. No access to any unit shall be designed so as to place a stairway or projecting walkway immediately adjacent to windows opening into any habitable room, unless specifically approved by the planning commission.

3.     Storage of Refuse. Each development shall be provided with adequate refuse and trash storage areas. All outdoor trash, garbage and refuse storage shall be screened from public view on all sides by a minimum six-foot-high concrete or solid masonry wall provided with a gate of durable wood or other approved material. Such areas shall be located as to be easily accessible for trash pickup. All trash, garbage and refuse storage shall be deposited in such form or manner so as to prevent transferal by natural cause or force. Any waste which may cause fumes, dust or which constitutes a fire hazard or which may be edible by rodents or otherwise attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored in closed containers. All parcels having more than ten dwelling units shall utilize bins approved by the director of public works. Each development shall be provided with one bin per each ten units.

 

4.     Storage. Each carport space shall contain an enclosed storage cabinet of at least seventy-five cubic feet capacity. All storage of furniture, appliances or other items or equipment shall be kept within permanent buildings and completely screened from public view.

5.     Landscaping. All required yard areas abutting on public rights-of-way shall be entirely landscaped with approved ground cover, trees, shrubs and other plant materials. Landscape plans shall be submitted and approved, pursuant to Chapter 18.16 of this title.

6.     Noise Control. See Chapter 9.32 of this code.

7.     Lighting. All lighting of buildings, landscaped parking areas or similar facilities shall be arranged so as not to reflect or spill onto adjoining properties.

8.     Mechanical Equipment. All mechanical and rooftop equipment shall be screened from public view behind a permanent parapet wall that is architectural consistent with the structure on which it sits. Such screening shall be as high as the highest portions of equipment.

9.     Laundry Facilities.

a.     All outdoor clothes drying areas are prohibited.

b.     When common indoor laundry facilities exist, they shall be designed with sufficient area for folding of clothes.

10.   Utilities. All utilities (poles, lines, cables, etc.) shall be placed underground. All meters or aboveground utility equipment such as transformers shall be outside of a recreational area and shall be screened on all sides from public view by a landscaped screen, fence or wall not less than six feet in height. All developments shall be wired for a master TV antenna system or cable TV.

11.   Mailboxes. All mailboxes shall be located under a roofed area to the satisfaction of the director of community development and or his/her designee area and shall be located in accordance with U.S. Postal Regulations.

E.     Design Review. All new construction and major remolding shall comply with the requirements and procedures of Chapter 18.68.

Exceptions: Patio roofs and shade structures to multiple-family units. In addition minor outbuildings, additions or replacement of a single-family residence with a new single-family residence within the multiple-family zones may be approved as an administrative adjustment at the discretion of the director of community development.

F.     The director of community development or designee may approve variations from Section 18.26.040 and Section 18.26.050 in any area deemed eligible for Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funds. Any decision may be appealed to the planning commission within ten days. Any decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council within ten days.

G.    Accessory Dwelling Units. See Section 18.12.150. (Ord. 1803 § 3, 2019)

 

 

Chapter 18.28 MHP MOBILE HOME PARK RESIDENTIAL ZONE
18.28.010 Generally.
The mobile home park residential zone is designated to provide for the accommodation of residential mobile homes at a standard consistent with the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the community. Such zone is herein deemed to be multiple family residential zone. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.28.020 Uses.
See Section 18.06.040. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.28.030 Accessory uses permitted.
In the MHP zone, the following accessory uses are permitted:

Incidental uses related to the convenience needs of the mobile home zone residents; provided, however, that such uses shall not include commercial or other nonresidential facilities for use by persons not residing within the zone. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.28.040 Standards of development.
In the MHP zone, the following standards of development shall apply:

A.    Building Height. No building or structure erected in this zone shall have a height greater than two and one-half stories, not to exceed thirty-five feet.

B.     Front Yard. Each MHP zone mobile home park which abuts a dedicated street shall have a front yard of not less than twenty-five feet extending for the full width of the mobile home park. Such yard shall be landscaped and maintained with evergreen materials.

C.     Side Yard. Each MHP zone mobile home park shall have a side yard on both sides of the mobile home park of not less than five feet, except for corner and reversed corner lots, in which case the side yard on the street side shall be not less than ten feet.

D.    Rear Yard. Each mobile home park shall have a rear yard extending across the full width of the mobile home park of not less than five feet.

E.     Area Requirements.

1.     A mobile home park residential zone shall be not less than five acres in size.

2.     Each mobile home space shall have a minimum area of one thousand five hundred square feet. Mobile home parks existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section which

        provide spaces having less than this requirement in the existing spaces may continue to operate, but no additions or alterations affecting more than twenty-five percent of the park area will be permitted unless the space requirements herein provided are complied with.

3.     Each mobile home space shall be not less than thirty feet in width, nor less than thirty feet in depth.

4.     There shall be a minimum of three thousand three hundred fifty square feet of gross area for each dwelling in a mobile home park. In computing the gross area, access, landscaped area, mobile home parking, automobile parking, out-building space, recreational areas and other similar uses may be included.

F.     Usable Yard Area. None.

G.    Parking and Loading. See Chapter 18.14, Off-Street Parking Requirements. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.28.050 Special development standards.
In the MHP zone, the following special development standards shall apply:

A.    Distance Between Buildings and Mobile Home Units. Comply with the requirements of Title 25, Article 7 of the California Code of Regulations.

B.     Walls and Fences.

1.     A mobile home park shall be entirely enclosed with a six-foot high solid masonry wall or other fencing as approved by the director of community development. No such wall or fence in the required street front setback area shall exceed three feet in height.

2.     No fence or wall over six feet in height shall be located in a MHP zone.

C.     Signs. Signs conforming to Chapter 15.40 shall be permitted in the MHP zone, which advertise the mobile home park. Such signs shall be located on the premises and shall not exceed one square foot of such sign for each front foot of the frontage along the street serving as access to the mobile home park; provided, however, that there shall be a maximum area for signs for any one trailer park of one hundred square feet of sign on any one frontage.

D.    Design Review. Before the planning commission or the city council may approve the location of any residential mobile home park and before any buildings for mobile home park purposes are erected, the applicant for such use shall submit the project for design review per the requirements of Chapter 18.68.

E.     Miscellaneous.

1.     Mobile homes, either without toilet facilities or with toilet facilities that cannot be connected to a sanitary sewer line shall not be permitted in the MHP zone.

2.     Accessory buildings, cabanas, and other structures constructed as a permanent part of a mobile home shall comply with the requirements of Title 25, Article 9 of the California Code of Regulations.

3.     All utilities required for service to structures shall be placed underground.

4.     Each mobile home park shall be connected to a sanitary sewer. Each mobile home space shall be provided a connection to such sanitary sewer. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

Chapter 18.30 SPECIAL NEEDS HOUSING
18.30.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish uniform standards, land use regulations and permit processes for the development of congregate housing, domestic violence shelters, emergency shelters, homeless shelters, senior hotel, single-room occupancy housing (SROs), and transitional housing; and to implement general plan policies regarding special needs households. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.30.020 Definitions.
“Congregate housing” means a residential facility with shared common living areas, restricted by an agreement approved by the city for occupancy by low and very low-income households, providing services which may include meals, housekeeping, child care, and other services as well as common areas for residents of the facility.

“Domestic violence shelter” means a residential facility which provides temporary accommodations to persons and/or families who have been the victims of domestic violence. Such a facility may provide meals, child care, counseling, and other services. The term “temporary accommodations” means that a person or family will be allowed to reside at the shelter for a time period not to exceed six months.

“Emergency shelter” means housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay.

“Homeless shelter” means a residential facility which provides temporary accommodations to homeless persons and/or families and which meet standards for shelters contained in Title 25 California Administrative Code, Part 1, Chapter F, Subchapter 12, Section 7972. The facility may provide, or contract with recognized community organizations to provide, emergency or temporary shelter, and may also provide meals, child care, counseling, and other services. Such facility may have individual rooms, but is not developed with individual dwelling units, with the exception of manager units. The term “temporary accommodations” means that a person or family will be allowed to reside at the shelter for a time period not to exceed six months.

“Low-income family” means any household whose income exceeds fifty percent but does not exceed eighty percent of median income adjusted for household size as defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development for the Anaheim-Santa Ana Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area.

“Senior hotel” means a cluster of guest units with shared common living areas, restricted for occupancy by persons who are sixty-two years of age or older, providing services which may provide meals, housekeeping and other services.

“Single-room occupancy housing” means a cluster of guest units within a residential hotel providing sleeping and living facilities restricted by an agreement approved by the city for occupancy by low and very low-income individuals, designed for occupancy for periods of one month or longer.

“Transitional housing” means a residential facility that provides accommodations to low and very low-income persons and families for periods of up to two years, and which also may provide meals, child care, counseling, and other services, as well as common areas for residents of the facility. The intent of this type of facility is to provide a stable environment for the homeless and to facilitate self-sufficiency. This type of facility typically involves a situation wherein the resident is accountable to the owner/operator for his/her location and conduct among other factors.

“Very low-income” means any household whose income does not exceed fifty percent of median income adjusted for household size as defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development for the Anaheim-Santa Ana Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.30.030 Applicability.
A.    The specific requirements of this chapter are applicable to the development of congregate housing, domestic violence shelters, emergency shelters, homeless shelters, senior hotels, single-room occupancy housing (SROs), and transitional housing as defined in Section 18.30.020.

B.     Congregate housing, domestic violence shelters, emergency shelters, homeless shelters, senior hotels, single-room occupancy (SROs), and transitional housing projects are permitted within commercial, industrial, and high density land use designated areas within multiple family zones with an approved conditional use permit pursuant to the procedures established in Chapter 18.66.

C.     Emergency shelters are allowed ministerially within the ES overlay zone. In all cases emergency shelters shall conform to all standards of development of the zone in which it is located except as provided in this section. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.30.040 General provisions.
A.    All facilities shall maintain a scale, character, and design consistent with the area and compatible with the surrounding developments.

B.     All congregate housing, domestic violence shelter, homeless shelter, senior hotel, single room occupancy (SROs) and transitional housing projects within permitted commercial, industrial, and residential zones shall be subject to the special development standards established in Section 18.12.070.

C.     Site Access. A single controlled entryway for routine ingress to the site shall be situated adjacent to and in full view of the manager’s office.

D.    Laundry Facilities. Washer and dryer shall be provided in a separate room in a location accessible to all the residents of the facility. Washers and dryers may be coin-operated.

 

E.     Child Care Area. All facilities providing child care on-site shall provide yard area in compliance with all state regulations. The yard area required for child care shall be provided in addition to the required usable yard area for the facility.

F.     Pay Telephone. A minimum of two pay telephones shall be provided in the facility.

G.    On-Site Manager. Each congregate housing, domestic violence shelter, homeless shelter, single room occupancy (SROs), senior citizen hotel and transitional housing project shall have a twenty-four hour on-site manager.

H.    Management Plan. A management plan shall be submitted for review and approval with the conditional use permit application. The management plan shall contain the following information, as applicable:

1.     Child care;

2.     Emergency procedures;

3.     Maintenance plans;

4.     Management policies;

5.     Operation of the facility;

6.     Rental procedures and policies;

7.     Residency rules;

8.     Screening of residents to insure compatibility with services provided at the facility;

9.     Security programs;

10.   Services, training, counseling, and treatment programs for residents to be provided by the facility, including services to assist resident to obtain permanent income and shelter;

11.   Staffing needs;

12.   Staff training;

13.   Tenants responsibility.

I.      Project Review.

1.     Annual Review. Each project shall be subject to annual review by the city which includes the review of management services. The project owner shall be responsible for filing an annual report to the city which includes the range of monthly rents, average length of tenancy, range of monthly income of residents, occupancy rates, number of family served, the number of vehicles owned by the residents, and services provided at the facility;

2.     Management Plan Revisions. Management plan revisions shall be reviewed and approved by the chief planner, before implementation of changes. Substantive changes or revisions as determined by the chief planner shall be approved by the planning commission. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.30.050 Congregate housing, domestic violence shelter and transitional housing.
Congregate housing, domestic violence shelter and transitional housing shall conform to all standards of development of the zoning in which it is located except as provided in this section.

A.    Density.

1.     In high density residential land use designated areas within multiple family residential zones, the number of families shall not exceed the number of families permitted pursuant to the appropriate zoning designation provided for in Table 18.26.040.1.C, plus twenty-five percent.

2.     In all commercial and industrial zones, the number of families shall not exceed that pursuant to the zoning designation provided in Table 18.30.050.A, plus twenty-five percent. The maximum floor area ratio (FAR) shall not exceed that established within the appropriate land use designation of the general plan land use element.

 

Table 18.30.050.A

 

Total Area of Parcel Being Developed

Minimum Area Per Family Within: CP; C-1; C-2; C-3; PC-I; M-1

Under 10,000 square feet

1,980

10,001 through 20,000 square feet

1,742

20,001 square feet and over

1,555

 

B.     Building Design.

1.     Each facility within the high density residential, commercial, and industrial land use designated areas shall contain common kitchen, dining and living room areas adequate for the number of residents serviced.

a.     Bathrooms shall contain lavatory, toilet, and shower or bathtub adequate for the number of residents serviced,

b.     Each bedroom shall have access to a bathroom,

c.     Each bedroom shall have a minimum of eighteen square feet of closet/storage space,

d.     Bedroom occupancy shall be determined in accordance with the Uniform Building Code or as limited by the planning commission;

2.     Each facility shall provide private sleeping areas per families serviced in accordance with the requirements of the building code.

C.     Recreational and Usable Yard Area.

1.     Minimum Area Per Parcel. Such usable yard area shall have no dimension of less than fifteen feet. This area may be provided at any location on the lot except in the required front yard or in a required side yard abutting a street. This area may be divided into not more than two separate sub-areas

a.     Within the multiple family zone, no parcel of land shall have less than one thousand square feet of usable yard area plus one hundred square feet per bedroom.

b.     Within commercial and industrial zones, no parcel of land shall have less than eight hundred square feet of usable yard area plus eighty square feet per bedroom.

D.    Parking.

 

1.     Automobiles. For each facility located within an allowed designation, a minimum of two parking spaces shall be provided per the standards established in Chapter 18.14. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.30.060 Emergency and homeless shelter.
Emergency and homeless shelters shall conform to all standards of development of the zoning in which it is located except as provided in this section.

A.    Density.

1.     In high density residential land use designated areas within a multiple family zone, the number of beds shall be limited to three times the maximum units permitted within the zoning designation in which the facility is located as established in Table 18.26.040.1.C.

2.     In all commercial and industrial zones, the number of beds shall be limited to three times the maximum number of units allowed within the commercial/industrial zone as provided in Table 18.30.050.A. The proposed development shall not exceed the maximum floor area ratio (FAR) established within the general plan land use element for the appropriate land use designation.

B.     Building Design.

1.     Each facility shall provide common kitchen and dining room area adequate for the number of residents serviced.

2.     Each facility shall provide bathroom with lavatory, toilet, and showers adequate for the number of residents serviced.

C.     Recreational and Usable Yard Area.

1.     Minimum Area Per Parcel. Such usable yard area shall have no dimension of less than fifteen feet. This area may be provided at any location on the lot except in the required front yard or in a required side yard abutting a street. Subareas may be divided into not more than two separate sub-areas.

a.     Within multiple family zones, no parcel of land shall have less than one thousand square feet of usable yard area plus sixty-two square feet per bed.

b.     Within the commercial and industrial zones, no parcel of land shall have less than five hundred square feet of usable yard area plus ten square feet of additional usable yard area per each additional bed over twenty-five.

D.    Parking. See Chapter 18.14.

E.     Operating and Location Requirements.

1.     No more than one federal, state or youth authority parolee shall be allowed to live in an emergency shelter or homeless shelter at any one time.

2.     The conditional use application submitted for any emergency or homeless shelter shall provide information, including identifying information such as the full name and age of the parolee and the proposed time of residency at the facility, regarding any proposed residents who will be, at the time of proposed residency in the emergency or homeless shelter, federal, state or youth authority parolees. Such information shall be updated with the city by the owner or landlord of the facility as to each lessee, renter, resident or occupant upon the signing, entering into, or otherwise com-

        mencing any rental or lease agreement, arrangement or accommodation within three business days. Exception: emergency shelter located in the ES emergency shelter overlay zone is exempt from the conditional use permit requirement.

3.     All emergency or homeless shelters shall require residents or occupants to sign an agreement that provides that a conviction for any criminal violation, not including infractions and minor traffic violations, during residency or occupancy in the transitional shelter/house, is grounds for termination of the residency, tenancy, occupancy or accommodations of that resident or occupant, whether the rental, lease, or sublease agreement is written or oral.

4.     Emergency or homeless shelters shall be in compliance with all requirements of the city’s zoning code at all times, as well as any other applicable provisions of this code, including obtaining any other permits or licenses, such as building permits or a business license, required before establishing, expanding or maintaining the use.

5.     No emergency or homeless shelter shall be maintained as a nuisance. The conduct of any homeless shelter within the city in violation of any of the terms of this chapter or other applicable provisions of this code found and declared to be a public nuisance, and the city attorney or the district attorney may, in addition or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or proceeding for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law; and shall take other steps and shall apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such homeless shelter and restrain and enjoin any person from conducting, operating or maintaining an emergency shelter or homeless shelter contrary to the provisions of this chapter or code.

6.     Any violation of any local, state or federal laws by residents or occupants of an emergency shelter or homeless shelters while on the premises shall be grounds for revocation of the emergency or homeless shelter’s conditional use permit, including but not limited to any violations of this section, California Penal Code Section 3003.5 or Chapter 9.66 of this code, where the property owner contributed to or did not take all reasonable steps to protect against or prevent the violation.

7.     Any owner, operator, manager, employee or independent contractor of an emergency shelter or homeless shelter violating or permitting, counseling, or assisting the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or applicable provisions of this code regulating emergency or homeless shelters shall be subject to any and all civil remedies, including conditional permit revocation, criminal penalties pursuant to Chapter 1.08 of this code, and/or administrative citations pursuant to Chapter 1.09. All remedies provided herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. Any violation of these provisions shall constitute a separate violation for each and every day during which such violation is committed or continued. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.30.070 Senior hotel.
Senior hotels shall conform with all local state and federal requirements for senior housing. Each facility shall conform to all property development standards of the zoning in which it is located except as provided in this section.

A.    Density.

 

1.     In high density residential land use designated areas within multiple family residential zoned areas, the number of units shall not exceed that pursuant to the zoning designation provided in Table 18.26.040.1.C, plus twenty-five percent.

2.     In all commercial and industrial zones, the number of units shall be limited by the maximum floor area ratio (FAR) as established within the general plan land use element for the appropriate land use designation.

B.     Building Design. Each guest unit shall contain a bathroom.

1.     Bathrooms shall contain a lavatory, toilet, and shower or bathtub.

2.     Each unit shall have a minimum forty-eight cubic feet of closet/storage space.

C.     Recreational and Usable Yard Area.

1.     Minimum Area Per Parcel. Such usable yard area shall have no dimension of less than fifteen feet. This area may be provided at any location on the lot except in the required front yard or in a required side yard abutting a street.

a.     Within multiple family zones, no parcel of land shall have less than one thousand square feet of usable yard area plus one hundred square feet per bedroom.

b.     Within the commercial and industrial zones, no parcel of land shall have less than one thousand square feet of common usable yard area plus fifteen square feet of common recreational area per guest unit for projects over twenty-five units.

2.     Common recreational space may be indoor or outdoor provided there is at least forty percent allotted towards outdoor space; the balance may be indoors or outdoors.

D.    Parking. See Chapter 18.14.

E.     Common Facilities. The development may provide one or more of the following common facilities for the exclusive use of the senior citizen residents:

1.     Central cooking and dining room;

2.     Recreation room;

3.     Library;

4.     Beauty salon and barber shop;

5.     Small pharmacy;

6.     Laundry facilities or laundry services.

F.     Occupancy.

1.     No more than one person shall be permitted to reside in any unit which is less than two hundred twenty square feet in size. No more than two persons shall be permitted to reside in any unit.

2.     Residential occupancy shall be limited to single persons sixty-two years of age or older, or to couples in which one person is sixty-two years of age or older. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.30.080 Single-room occupancy housing (SROs).
SRO projects shall conform to all standards of development of the zoning in which it is located except as provided below.

 

A.    Density.

1.     In high density residential land use designated areas with multiple family residential zones, the number of units shall not exceed that pursuant to the zoning designation provided in Table 18.26.040.1.C, plus twenty-five percent.

2.     In all commercial and industrial zones, the number of units shall be limited by the maximum floor area ratio (FAR), as established within the appropriate land use designation of the general plan land use element.

B.     Building Design.

1.     Unit Size. Minimum unit size for all SROs shall be one hundred seventy square feet and maximum unit size for all SROs shall be four hundred square feet.

2.     Each unit shall contain a kitchen and bathroom.

a.     Kitchens shall contain a sink with garbage disposal, counter top minimum sixteen by twenty-four inch, refrigerator, and stove or microwave oven.

b.     If stoves are not provided in each unit, then stoves shall be provided in a common kitchen area(s).

c.     Bathrooms shall contain a lavatory, toilet, and shower or bathtub.

d.     Each unit shall have a minimum forty-eight cubic feet of closet/storage space.

C.     Recreational and Usable Yard Area.

1.     Minimum Area Per Parcel.

a.     Within multiple family zones, no parcel of land shall have less than one thousand square feet of usable yard area plus one hundred square feet per unit.

b.     Within the commercial and industrial zones, no parcel of land shall have less than five hundred square feet of common usable yard area plus fifteen square feet of common recreational area per unit for projects over twenty-five units. Such usable yard area shall have no dimension of less than fifteen feet. This area may be provided at any location on the lot except in the required front yard or in a required side yard abutting a street.

2.     Common recreational space may be indoor or outdoor provided there is at least forty percent allotted towards outdoor space; the balance may be indoors or outdoors.

D.    Parking. See Chapter 18.14.

E.     Occupancy. No more than one person shall be permitted to reside in any unit which is less than two hundred twenty square feet in size. No more than two persons shall be permitted to reside in any unit. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.30.090 Transitional housing project.
Transitional housing projects shall also comply with the following operating and location requirements:

A.    No more than one federal, state or youth authority parolee shall be allowed to live in a transitional housing project at any one time.

 

B.     No transitional housing project shall be within five hundred feet of any other transitional housing project. The distance requirement herein shall be measured from property line to property line, along a straight line extended between the two points.

C.     The conditional use application submitted for any transitional housing project shall provide information, including identifying information such as the full name and age of the parolee and the proposed time of residency at the facility, regarding any proposed residents who will be, at the time of proposed residency in the transitional housing project, federal, state or youth authority parolees. Such information shall be updated with the city by the owner or landlord of the facility as to each lessee, renter, resident or occupant upon the signing, entering into, or otherwise commencing any rental or lease agreement, arrangement or accommodation within three business days.

D.    All transitional housing projects shall require residents or occupants to sign an agreement that provides that a conviction for any criminal violation, not including infractions and minor traffic violations, during residency or occupancy at the transitional housing project, is grounds for termination of the residency, tenancy, occupancy or accommodations of that resident or occupant, whether the rental, lease, or sublease agreement is written or oral.

E.     Transitional housing projects shall be in compliance with all requirements of the city’s zoning code at all times.

F.     No transitional housing project shall be maintained as a nuisance. The conduct of any transitional housing project within the city in violation of any of the terms of this chapter or other applicable provisions of this code found and declared to be a public nuisance, and the city attorney or the district attorney may, in addition or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or proceeding for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law; and shall take other steps and shall apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such transitional housing project and restrain and enjoin any person from conducting, operating or maintaining a transitional housing project contrary to the provisions of this chapter or code.

G.    Any violation of any local, state or federal laws by residents or occupants of transitional housing projects while on the premises shall be grounds for revocation of the transitional housing project’s conditional use permit, including but not limited to any violations of this section, California Penal Code Section 3003.5 or Chapter 9.66 of this code, where the property owner contributed to or did not take all reasonable steps to protect against or prevent the violation.

H.    Any owner, operator, manager, employee or independent contractor of a transitional housing project violating or permitting, counseling, or assisting the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or applicable provisions of this code regulating transitional housing projects shall be subject to any and all civil remedies, including conditional permit revocation, criminal penalties pursuant to Chapter 1.08 of this code, and/or administrative citations pursuant to Chapter 1.09. All remedies provided herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. Any violation of these provisions shall constitute a separate violation for each and every day during which such violation is committed or continued. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

 

Chapter 18.32 C-P, C-1, C-2, C-2s, C-2sH, AND C-3 COMMERCIAL ZONES
18.32.010 Generally.
The regulations set out in this chapter shall apply in the C-P, C-1, C-2, C-2s, C-2sH, and C-3 commercial zones unless otherwise provided in this title.

A.    The C-P zone is intended to provide for the establishment of medical and other professional offices and related types of uses and facilities.

B.     The C-2s and C-2sH zones are intended to serve as a planned unified shopping center. (Ord. 1750 § 3, 2014; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.32.020 Uses.
See Section 18.06.040. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.32.030 Accessory uses permitted.
A.    In the C-P zone accessory uses consisting of commercial facilities related and incidental to the uses permitted.

B.     In the C-1 and C-2, C-2s, C-2sH, and C-3 zones the following accessory uses are permitted:

1.     The accessory buildings necessary to such use located on the same lot or parcel of land, including storage structures for the exclusive use of the patrons of the stores or businesses listed in Section 18.06.040.

2.     Processing or treatment of products which is clearly incidental to the business conducted on the premises; and provided, that no more than five persons and not more than fifty percent of the full area of the building is used in the manufacture or manufacturing or treatment of products and that such operations or products are not objectionable due to noise, odor, dust, smoke, vibration or other similar causes. (Ord. 1750 § 3, 2014; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.32.040 Standards of development.
In the C-P, C-1, C-2, C-2s, C-2sH, and C-3 zones the following standards of development shall apply:

A.    Building Height.

 

 

Table 18.32.040.A.1

 

Zone

Maximum Height Limit

C-P

2.5 stories not to exceed 35 feet

C-1

2.5 stories not to exceed 35 feet

C-2

4 stories not to exceed 50 feet

C-2s

4 stories not to exceed 50 feet

C-2sH

5 stories not to exceed 60 feet

C-3

6 stories not to exceed 75 feet

1.     No penthouse or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment; towers, steeples, roof signs or other structures shall exceed the height limit provided in this title.

2.     Exception: Radio and television masts, camouflaged wireless communication facilities, flagpoles, chimneys and smokestacks may extend not more than thirty feet above the height limit provided in this chapter; provided, however, that the same may be safely erected and maintained at such height in view of the surrounding conditions and circumstances.

B.     Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than fifteen feet. In cases where a structure is built adjacent to this setback and the building height exceeds twenty-five feet, the front yard setback shall be increased to twenty feet in front of the structure.

Exception: Existing properties with approved building structures are exempt from this requirement but must maintain existing front yard setbacks. No new improvements will be permitted within the front fifteen- or twenty-foot setback area based on the location and height of the structures on the property. Total new construction shall be limited to fifty percent of the assessed value of the existing structures as established by the county assessor’s office.

C.     Side Yard. Where a lot abuts upon a lot in any R zone, there shall be a side yard of five feet. There shall be a side yard along the street side of all corner lots of ten feet. In all other cases, a side yard for a commercial building shall not be required.

D.    Rear Yard. There shall be behind every building a rear yard having a minimum depth of twenty feet. Where there is an alley at the rear of the lot, such rear yard may be measured to the center of the alley.

E.     The maximum intensity of development shall be equal or less than the following floor area ratios:

 

Table 18.32.040.E

 

Zone

Floor Area Ratio

C-P

70%

C-1

30%

C-2

30%

C-2s

50%

C-2sH

80%

C-3

30%

 

F.     Parking and Loading. See Chapter 18.14, Off-Street Parking Requirements. (Ord. 1750 § 3, 2014; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

18.32.050 Special development standards.
In the C-P, C-1, C-2, C-2s, C-2sH, and C-3 zones the following special development standards shall apply:

A.    Walls and Fences. See Section 18.12.070 Fences, walls, and hedges and Section 18.12.080 Required walls.

B.     Signs. See Chapter 15.40.

C.     Design Review. In the C-P, C-1, C-2, C-2s, C-2sH, and C-3 zones site plan/design review is required as follows:

1.     Design plans for the parking lot (new and rehabilitation), minor repair to the exterior of the building, walls and fences, minor exterior or site changes, exterior colors, installation of mechanical equipment, minor exterior building changes such as doors and windows, freestanding signs and neon sign, and similar projects shall be reviewed and approved by the director of community development or designee, prior to the issuance of any building permits. The decision of the director may be appealed to the planning commission.

2.     All new development, major remodeling or structural rehabilitation of more than twenty-five percent of the building area, and additions which results in additional floor area, shall be subject to design review by the planning commission in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 18.68 of this title.

D.    Miscellaneous Requirements.

1.     Such stores, shops or businesses except automobile service stations, newsstands, and outdoor garden centers shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building.

2.     All public entrances to such stores, shops or businesses shall be from the principal street upon which the property abuts or within fifty feet thereof, except that a rear or side entrance from the building to a public parking area may be provided.

3.     Every dwelling, commercial, manufacturing or industrial building shall be on a lot having frontage upon a dedicated street or upon a private roadway or easement providing access to a dedicated street.

4.     Exception: No building permits shall be issued on any lot not having frontage on a dedicated street until the applicant has applied for and secured a zone variance as per Chapter 18.76.

5.     All mechanical equipment shall be screened behind a permanent structure and all roof-top equipment shall be screened by a permanent parapet wall and shall not be visible from grade level or adjacent higher street elevations. Such screening shall be as high as the highest portion of equipment and shall be readily accessible for maintenance.

E.     Transportation Demand Management.

1.     All new development projects that are estimated to employ a total of two hundred fifty or more persons, including substantial building expansions, as determined in Chapter 18.20 is subject to this section.

2.     All applicable developments shall provide a transportation demand management strategy plan pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 18.20. (Ord. 1750 § 3, 2014; Ord. 1748 § 3, 2013; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

Chapter 18.33 C-R COMMERCIAL AND HIGH-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONE
18.33.010 Generally.
The C-R zone is intended to provide an area where a planned, integrated relationship can be developed utilizing certain commerce, office and high-density residences. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.33.020 Uses.
See Section 18.06.040. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.33.030 Accessory uses permitted.
In the C-R zone, the following accessory uses are permitted:

The accessory buildings and structures necessary to such use of the permitted uses set out in Section 18.33.020. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.33.040 Standards of development.
In the C-R zone, the following standards of development shall apply:

A.    Building Height. No limit except for structures in excess of four stories or fifty feet in which case a conditional use permit is required.

B.     Front Yard.

1.     There shall be a front yard of not less than fifteen feet. In cases where a structure is built adjacent to this setback and the building height exceeds twenty-five feet, the front yard setback shall be increased to twenty feet in front of the structure.

Exception: Existing properties with approved building structures are exempt from this requirement but must maintain existing front yard setbacks. No new improvements will be permitted within the front fifteen or twenty-foot setback area based on the location and height of the structures on the property. Total new construction shall be limited to fifty percent of the assessed value of the existing structures as determined by the county assessor’s office.

2.     Where buildings exceed two stories in height, the side yard shall be increased by one foot for each additional one story above two stories; provided, however, that such side yard need not exceed sixteen feet.

3.     Where a garage is attached to or built into the main building such garage shall set back a minimum of twenty feet from the front property line when the garage door faces the street.

 

4.     Where yards are required in this title, they shall be not less in depth or width than the minimum dimension specified for any part, and they shall be at every point open and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as follows:

a.     Cornices, canopies, carports, eaves or other similar architectural features not providing additional floor space within the building may extend into a required front, side or rear yard not to exceed two feet six inches.

b.     Open, unenclosed, uncovered porches, platforms or landing places which do not extend above the level of the first floor of the building, may extend into any front, side or rear yard not more than six feet; provided, however, that an open work railing not more than thirty inches in height may be installed or constructed on any such porch, platform or landing place.

c.     Detached accessory buildings may occupy side and rear yards as provided in Section 18.12.030.

d.     A patio roof may extend into a required rear yard fifteen feet; provided, however, the patio is unenclosed on no less than two sides. For the purposes of this chapter a wall of a height of three feet or less shall not be considered to constitute an enclosure.

5.     Front yards shall be landscaped and maintained.

C.     Side Yards.

1.     There shall be a side yard on each side of a main building of not less than five feet; provided, that there shall be a side yard along the street side of all corner lots of not less than ten feet. Where a garage is attached to or built into the main building, such garage shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet from the side lot line along the street side of a corner lot when the garage door faces the street.

2.     No accessory buildings, if two stories in height, shall be located nearer than five feet to any interior property line.

3.     On a corner lot no detached accessory buildings shall be located at a distance less than ten feet from the side street line. On a corner lot no detached garage shall be located at a distance less than twenty feet from the side street line when the garage door faces the street.

4.     No accessory buildings on the rear twenty-five feet of a reversed corner lot shall be located nearer to the side lot line on the street side of such reversed corner lot than the front yard depth required on the key lot in the rear.

5.     Side yards may be used for access to parking or loading, but may not be used for parking.

D.    Rear Yard.

1.     There shall be behind every commercial building a rear yard having a minimum depth of twenty feet. Where there is an alley at the rear of the lot, such rear yard may be measured to the center of the alley. There shall be behind every residential building a yard area having a minimum depth of fifteen feet.

Exception: Multistory buildings shall have rear yards not less than the following: Two-story buildings, fifteen feet; three-story buildings, twenty feet; four-story buildings and over, twenty-five feet.

 

2.     The rear yard may be used for parking, access to parking or loading.

3.     On through lots, either line separating such lot from a public thoroughfare may be designated by the owner as the front lot line. In such cases, the minimum rear yard shall be the average of the yards on lots next adjoining. If such lots next adjoining are undeveloped, the minimum rear yard shall conform to the front yard setback for the zone in which the property is located.

E.     Area Requirements.

1.     Residential Uses.

a.     For one-family dwelling, each lot or parcel of land shall have a minimum lot area of three thousand square feet per dwelling unit.

b.     Each lot or parcel for other than a one-family dwelling shall have a minimum lot area of not less than provided for in Table 18.26.040.1.C of Chapter 18.26, Multiple-Family Dwelling Zones.

2.     All lots hereafter created shall comply with the following minimum standards and lots now existing may not be reduced below these standards.

a.     Width. All lots shall have a minimum lot width of sixty feet.

b.     Depth. All lots shall have a minimum lot depth of one hundred feet.

3.     For single residential units the minimum floor area exclusive of open porches or garages shall be not less than seven hundred and fifty square feet. The following uses shall be subject to minimum square feet of gross floor area per living unit, exclusive of garages, carports and open porches:

a.     Bachelor apartment, three hundred square feet;

b.     One-bedroom apartment, five hundred square feet;

c.     Two-bedroom or more apartment, seven hundred fifty square feet.

4.     Lot Coverage.

a.     Residential Uses. All buildings including existing buildings and structures shall cover not more than forty percent of the lot or parcel.

b.     The maximum intensity of development shall be equal to or less than a floor area ratio of forty percent.

F.     Usable Yard Area.

1.     For each dwelling unit placed on a lot or parcel there shall be provided one thousand square feet of usable yard area. Such usable yard space shall have no dimension less than fifteen feet and may be provided at any location on the lot except in a required front yard or in a required side yard abutting a street. Such space may be divided into not more than two separate subareas.

2.     Usable yard area shall not be used for parking, driveways, automobile turning area or accessory buildings. Maximum gradient for usable yard area shall be five percent.

G.    Parking and Loading. See Chapter 18.14, Off-Street Parking Requirements. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.33.050 Special development standards.
In the C-R zone, the following special development standards shall apply:

 

A.    Distance Between Buildings on the Same Lot.

1.     When the subject lot is used for residential purposes the following space between buildings shall apply:

a.     Buildings side to side, no entry or exit into space: ten feet;

b.     Buildings side to side, rear to side, front to end, only one entry or exit into space: fifteen feet;

c.     Buildings side to side, rear to side, front to end, front to rear, rear to front, more than one entry or exit into space: twenty feet;

d.     Buildings front to front arranged about an interior court, permitting a ten-foot wide driveway in such interior court, such driveway being accessible to parking area or building: thirty feet;

e.     Where U-shaped buildings, forming an interior open space, are proposed, the opposing wings of such U-shaped buildings shall be separated by a space of not less than twenty feet.

2.     When the subject lot is used exclusively for commercial purposes there shall be no minimum space between buildings requirements.

3.     When the subject lot is used for commercial and residential uses, there shall be a minimum space between commercial and residential uses of not less than fifteen feet.

B.     Walls and Fences. See Section 18.12.070 Fences, walls, and hedges and Section 18.12.080 Required walls.

C.     Signs. See Chapter 15.40.

D.    Site Plan Review. See Chapter 18.68.

E.     Miscellaneous Requirements.

1.     Every dwelling shall be on a lot having frontage upon a dedicated street.

Exception: No building permits shall be issued on any lot not having frontage on a dedicated street until the applicant has applied for and secured a zone variance as per Chapter 18.78.

2.     All mechanical equipment shall be screened behind a permanent structure and all roof-top equipment shall be screened by a permanent parapet wall and shall not be visible from grade level or adjacent higher street elevations. Such screening shall be as high as the highest portion of equipment and shall be readily accessible for maintenance.

F.     Transportation Demand Management.

1.     All new development projects that are estimated to employ a total of two hundred fifty or more persons, including substantial building expansions, as determined in Chapter 18.82, is subject to this section.

2.     All applicable developments shall provide a transportation demand management strategy plan pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 18.20. (Ord. 1748 § 3, 2013; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

Chapter 18.34 RESERVED
Chapter 18.36 PC-I PLANNED COMMERCIAL-INDUSTRIAL ZONE
18.36.010 Generally.
The objective of the planned commercial-industrial development is to secure a fuller realization of the general plan of the city than that which would result from the application of present zone district regulations. It is intended to be applied to those parcels which by the nature of their size, location, topography, configuration or other considerations require overall planning design and control in order to achieve the goals and objectives of the general plan. The planning design and control will secure to the community, the future occupants, and the developer, values and amenities greater than those likely to be achieved by the relatively inflexible provisions necessary to regulate the successive development of individual lots by numerous different owners. For industrial development, the planned development provides a method whereby land may be designed and developed as a unit by taking advantage of modern site planning techniques in order to produce an environment of stable, desirable character which will be in harmony with existing or potential development of the surrounding neighborhood. For commercial development, the zone is intended to serve as a planned unified shopping center or as an integrated combination of uses for a compatible commercial industrial business park. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.36.020 Uses.
See Section 18.06.040. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.36.030 Accessory uses permitted.
In the PC-I zone, the following accessory uses are permitted:

A.    Administrative research offices, corporate headquarters related to permitted industrial uses.

B.     The accessory buildings necessary to such use located on the same lot or parcel of land. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.36.040 Standards of development.
In the PC-I zone, the following standards of development shall apply:

A.    Those standards required by the M-1 zone or such standards which are clearly designated on the master plan or on the precise plan as approved by the planning commission and city council.

B.     Area Requirements. The minimum lot or parcel area developed under the standards of this PC-I zone shall not be less than four acres in size.

Exception: Where individual lots are adjacent to each other to form an overall integrated PC-I site of not less than four acres providing that appropriate covenants or agreements which run with the land in perpetuity. The maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.80.

C.     Usable Yard Area. None is required; however, consideration should be given to provide common rest area for employees at the site.

D.    Parking and Loading. See Chapter 18.14, Off-Street Parking Requirements. (Ord. 1750 § 3, 2014; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.36.050 Special development standards.
In the PC-I zone, the following special development standards shall apply:

A.    Those standards required by the M-1 zone Section 18.38.070 or such standards which are clearly designated in the master plan or on the precise plan approved by the planning commission and city council pursuant to this chapter.

B.     Commercial stores, shops or businesses except automobile service stations, newsstands, and outdoor garden centers shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.36.060 Application.
A.    Master Plan and Precise Plan Required. Planned commercial-industrial developments in the PC-I zone shall require the approval of both a master plan and a precise plan. Such master plan and precise plan shall be subject to the regulations and requirements of this title and, except otherwise provided herein, shall be processed in accordance with this chapter.

B.     Master Plan Application. All the information listed below is required at the time a master plan application is submitted to the community development department:

1.     A complete application on the form provided by the city and signed by the property owner or its authorized representative;

2.     A fee as set forth by the city master fee schedule as adopted by the city council;

3.     A legal description or boundary survey map of the property (a tentative subdivision map may be substituted for this requirement if the applicant proposes to subdivide the property);

4.     A letter of justification describing and explaining how the proposed project will satisfy the findings required in Section 18.36.090;

5.     Information required for public meetings and hearings, as determined by the director of community development;

6.     A dimensioned master plan showing/providing the following information shall be submitted for each land use area:

 

a.     The dimensions of the total site, including gross and net acreage,

b.     The project density calculated on gross acreage and net acreage for each land use,

c.     General building locations,

d.     General interior circulation system in relationship to the exterior circulation system,

e.     General location of interior water and sewer system in relationship to the exterior water and sewer system to each land use,

f.      A calculation of the total number of parking spaces required for the use and general location of the parking area,

g.     An economic analysis of the cost and benefits of the proposed use and the projected cost to provide city services to the project,

h.     A time schedule for the proposed development with evidence of the intent and the ability of the applicant to carry out the plan within such time,

i.      Other information as determined to be necessary to facilitate review by the planning commission and city council by the director of community development.

C.     Precise Plan Application. The information listed below is required at the time a precise plan application is submitted to the community development department:

1.     A complete application on the form provided by the city and signed by the property owner or its authorized representative;

2.     A deposit or fee as set forth by an ordinance or resolution of the city council;

3.     A legal description or boundary survey map of the property (a tentative subdivision map may be substituted for this requirement if the applicant proposes to subdivide the property);

4.     A letter of justification describing and explaining how the proposed project will satisfy the findings required in Section 18.36.100;

5.     Information required for public meetings and hearings, as determined by the director of community development;

6.     A precise development plan with at least the following details shown to scale and dimensioned:

a.     The proposed land ownerships, the uses, dimensions and locations of all proposed structures, the areas reserved for vehicular and pedestrian circulation, open spaces, landscaping, recreation or other public uses,

b.     Architectural drawings and sketches showing the design and character of the proposed uses and their relation to one another,

c.     Height and approximate location of all proposed walls and fences and statement setting forth the method by which such walls and fences shall be preserved and maintained,

d.     Location and design of automobile parking areas and signs,

e.     Type of surfacing proposed for walks and driveways,

f.      Preliminary plans showing the proposed method for control and disposal of water flowing into, across or from the development,

 

g.     Tables showing the total number of acres and their distribution by use, and the percentage of the whole designated for dwellings of different types, nonindustrial uses, streets, off-street parking, public uses and open spaces,

h.     A time schedule for the proposed development with evidence of the intent and ability of the applicant to carry out the plan,

i.      A complete traffic impact study indicating trip generation, traffic impacts and mitigation measures,

j.      Such other pertinent information as the planning commission may require to complete its evaluation of the intent and impact of the proposal.

D.    Joint Processing. An applicant may, but need not submit a precise plan application at the same time as submitting a master plan application. If applications are concurrently submitted, they may, at the applicant’s election, be processed concurrently. In the absence of concurrent processing, the master plan shall remain valid until such time as the zoning is amended in a manner which would prevent development under the approved master plan. Development under the master plan however shall not be permitted until such time as a precise plan is approved pursuant to Section 18.36.100.

E.     Phased Development Authorized. Build-out of an approved master plan can be pursued and completed in a single phase or over several phases with the filing of individual, phased precise plans. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.36.070 Master plan pre-application coordination.
There is created a planning coordinating committee composed of the director of community development (chair), city engineer, planning manager, chief building official, police chief and fire chief, or their authorized representatives, and any other department representative as requested by the chair. Before filing any application for a master plan for a planned commercial-industrial development, the prospective applicant shall submit to the planning coordinating committee preliminary plans, sketches, and basic site information for consideration and advice as to the relation of the proposal to general developmental objectives to be attained, in the area, and as to the policies of the planning commission and city council with reference thereto. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.36.080 Public hearing.
A.    Following the receipt in proper form of any properly completed master plan application and/or a precise plan application, a public hearing before the planning commission and city council shall be conducted as provided herein. The secretary of the planning commission or the city clerk shall fix a time and place of public hearing thereon. Not less than ten days before the date of such public hearing, notice of the date, time, place of hearing and location of the property and the nature of the request shall be given in the following manner:

1.     By publishing once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city; and

2.     By mailing a notice, postage prepaid, to the applicant, to each member of the planning commission, city council, and to the owners of all property within three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the property involved, using for this purpose the last-known name and address of such owners as shown upon the last assessment roll of the city or county.

B.     Public hearings as provided for in this chapter shall be held before the planning commission or the city council at the time and place for which public notice has been given as required in this section. The planning commission or city council may establish their own rules for the conduct of such hearings. A summary of all pertinent testimony offered at a public hearing, together with the names and addresses of all persons testifying, shall be recorded and made a part of the permanent files of the case. Any such hearing may be continued; provided, that prior to the adjournment or recess thereof, the presiding officer at such hearing shall announce the time and place to which such hearing will be continued. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.36.090 Master plan approval and findings.
In order for the planning commission or city council to approve a master plan, the planning commission or city council shall find that:

A.    The proposed master plan is consistent with the city’s general plan;

B.     The proposed master plan is consistent with the city’s zoning ordinance;

C.     The proposed master plan is in the best interests of the public health, safety and welfare of the community;

D.    The nature of the proposed land uses and the maximum intensity provided for in the master plan is appropriate for the proposed locations depicted on the master plan and is not inconsistent with the surrounding land uses;

E.     The project complies with all applicable requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.36.100 Precise plan approval and findings.
In order for the planning commission or city council to approve a precise plan, the planning commission or city council shall find that:

A.    The location, design and proposed uses are compatible with the character of existing development in the vicinity;

B.     The plan for development will produce internally an environment of stable and desirable character, and not tend to cause any traffic congestion on surrounding or access streets;

C.     The standards of development applicable to the planned commercial-industrial development project as shown on the precise plan are subject to one of the following or any combination thereof:

1.     All of the development standards of the appropriate zone which would permit the requested land use,

2.     Such standards of development which are clearly designated in the approved master plan;

D.    The proposed development will be well integrated into its setting;

E.     Provision is made for both public and private open spaces, at least equivalent to that required by the underlying preceding zoning regulations;

F.     Suitable provision is made, where appropriate, for the protection and maintenance of private areas reserved for common use;

 

G.    The proposed development does not negatively impact the city’s ability to provide services over the short and long term to city residents because the projected cost of providing city services to the property outweighs the economic benefits of the project to the city;

H.    There is substantial compliance with the spirit and intent of this code;

I.      That the phasing of development under the master plan as provided for by the proposed precise plan, if any, is appropriate;

J.      The proposed project complies with all appropriate requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.36.110 Conformance.
A.    The precise plan shall be recorded, and a notation of reference thereto shall be made forthwith upon the zoning map. No permit shall thereafter be issued for any building, structure or use except in substantial conformance with the precise plan.

B.     The applicant shall submit to the city attorney a draft of covenants, conditions and restrictions which shall apply to the subject development for approval. Once approved the covenants, conditions, and restrictions shall be recorded with the county recorder along with the conditions of approval and map of the subject development prior to the issuance of any building permits. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.36.120 Violation.
A violation of any part of the approved precise plan or of any condition of the approval shall constitute a violation of this chapter. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing within forty days in accordance with the procedures prescribed in Section 18.66.080 for appeals, and if not satisfied that the regulation, general provision, or condition is being complied with, may revoke all previous precise plan approvals or take such action as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the regulation, general provision, or condition. Within fifteen days following the date of a decision of the planning commission revoking any previous approvals, the secretary shall transmit to the city council written notice of the decision. The decision shall be final thirty days following the date on which previous approval was revoked unless an appeal has been filed. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.36.130 Expiration.
A.    Master plans are of unlimited duration and will not expire. The city council has the authority to adopt an ordinance/resolution either amending or rescinding a master plan. If no development is commenced under the approved precise plan within twelve months after the date of approval and no time extension has been approved by the planning commission, the precise plan shall become null and void, and the approval of a new precise plan shall be required for any use and/or development under the approved master plan.

B.     For purposes of this section, “development” shall mean commencement of construction on the site consistent with the precise plan, which shall not include the commencement of any predevelopment work on the site, including surveying, preliminary construction staking, installation of erosion control measures or construction fencing, but which shall include review and approval by the city of proposed building plans and the issuance of building permits authorizing construction to commence, and actual

        construction shall have commenced on the site, such as final grading, pouring of footings and/or foundation, or similar activities. Should the building permit expire and no time extension has been ap-proved by the planning commission, the precise plan shall become null and void, and the approval of a new precise plan shall be required for any use and/or development under the approved master plan.

C.     The planning commission and/or city council may by resolution extend any specified time limit for starting or completing development under the precise plan upon the showing of good faith and effort to comply therewith. (Ord. 1727 § 3, 2011; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.36.140 Previously approved PUD permits and/or precise plan permits.
All previously approved PUD permits and/or precise plans for development in the PC-I zone shall be deemed to be approved master plans under this chapter. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

 

Chapter 18.38 M-1 LIGHT MANUFACTURING ZONE
18.38.010 Generally.
The M-1 light manufacturing zone is intended to provide for the development of industrial uses which include fabrication, manufacturing, assembly or processing of materials that are in already processed form and which do not in their maintenance, assembly, manufacture or plant operation create smoke, gas, odor, dust, sound, vibration, soot or lighting to any degree which might be termed obnoxious or offensive to persons residing in or conducting business in either this or any other zone. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.38.020 Uses.
See Section 18.06.040. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.38.030 Accessory uses permitted.
In the M-1 zone, the following accessory uses are permitted:

A.    Commercial uses customarily incidental and directly related to the service or operation of the permitted industrial uses, based upon a planning commission interpretation;

B.     Administrative research or sales office related to a permitted industrial use, excluding sales limited to retail operations only. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.38.040 Standards of development.
In the M-1 zone, the following standards of development shall apply:

A.    Building Height.

1.     For M-1 property not abutting or across the street from a residential zone two and one-half stories and not to exceed thirty-five feet unless the building sets back from each street, alley and lot line at least one foot for each three feet of height above the two and one-half stories or thirty-five feet. No building shall exceed seventy-five feet or six stories in height.

2.     For M-1 property abutting or across the street from a residential zone:

a.     Between front yard setback and front one hundred feet, no building or structure erected shall have a height greater than thirty-five feet or two stories.

b.     To the rear of the one-hundred-foot distance from the front lot line, and within fifty feet of a rear property line when such line is a zone boundary with a residential zone, no building or structure shall have a height greater than fifty feet.

 

3.     Roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building, and fire or parapet walls, skylights, towers, flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks, silos, water tanks or wireless masts or similar structures may be erected above the height limits prescribed in this subsection; provided, that the same may be safely erected and maintained at such height in view of the surrounding conditions and circumstances. No roof structure, or any space above the height limit, shall be allowed to provide additional floor space.

B.     Front Yard.

1.     There shall be a front yard of not less than fifteen feet. In cases where a structure is built adjacent to this setback and the building height exceeds twenty-five feet, the front yard setback shall be increased to twenty feet in front of the structure.

Exception: Existing properties with approved building structures are exempt from this requirement but must maintain existing front yard setbacks. No new improvements will be permitted within the front fifteen or twenty-foot setback area based on the location and height of the structures on the property. Total new construction shall be limited to fifty percent of the assessed value of the existing structures as determined by the county assessor’s office.

2.     Across the street from a residential zone:

a.     There shall be a front yard of not less than twenty-five feet extending across the full width of the lot, this yard to be a buffer.

b.     Standard residential curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be installed and parkway trees shall be planted in the parkway area.

3.     When a M-1 zone fronts on a block frontage which is in more than one zone, the most restrictive front yard requirements shall apply.

4.     In no case shall a building or structure be located less than fifty feet from any boundary which separates a M-1 zone from any residential zone.

C.     Side Yard. These provisions shall not apply to those lots on record on the effective date of this amendment (September 2, 1960) in an existing industrial district where such lots have a width or depth of less than one hundred fifty feet.

1.     Across a street from a manufacturing or commercial zone there shall be a yard of not less than ten feet extending along the full depth or width of the lot. If the yard is on an alley, it may be used for loading.

2.     Across a street from a residential zone:

a.     There shall be a yard of not less than twenty-five feet extending along the full depth or width of the lot, this yard to be a buffer.

b.     Standard residential curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be installed, and parkway trees shall be planted in the parkway area.

3.     Across an alley from a residential zone:

a.     There shall be a yard of not less than forty-five feet measured from the opposite side of the alley, extending along the full depth or width of the lot, this yard to be a buffer.

 

b.     Such yard may also be used for storage providing the entire storage area is enclosed by a solid masonry wall six feet in height and that no materials stored are at a height greater than the height of the enclosing wall.

4.     On a boundary between the M-1 zone and residential zone, which is not a street, highway or alley:

a.     There shall be a yard of not less than twenty-five feet extending along the full depth or width of the lot, this side yard to be a buffer.

b.     There shall be a solid masonry wall six feet in height on the property line abutting the residential zone.

c.     The entire yard area enclosed by the wall may be used for parking or for storage, providing that no materials stored in such yard shall be at a height greater than the height of the enclosing wall.

5.     When a M-1 zone sides or rears on a block frontage which is in more than one zone, the most restrictive yard requirements shall apply.

6.     In no case shall a building or structure be located less than fifty feet from any boundary which separates a M-1 zone from any residential zone.

D.    Rear Yard. The side yard requirements of subsection C of this section shall apply.

E.     The maximum intensity of development shall be equal to or less than a floor area ratio of eighty percent.

F.     Usable Yard Area. None.

G.    Parking and Loading. See Chapter 18.14, Off-Street Parking Requirements. (Ord. 1750 § 3, 2014; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.38.050 Special development standards.
In the M-1 zone, the following special development standards shall apply:

A.    Distance between buildings on the same lot. None.

B.     Walls and Fences. See Section 18.12.070 Fences, walls, and hedges and Section 18.12.080 Required walls.

C.     Signs. See Chapter 15.40.

D.    Design Review. In the M-1 zone design review is required as follows:

1.     Design plans for the parking lot (new and rehabilitation), minor repair to the exterior of the building, walls and fences, minor exterior or site changes, exterior colors, installation of mechanical equipment, minor exterior building changes such as doors and windows, freestanding signs and neon sign, and similar projects shall be reviewed and approved by the director of community development or his/her designee, prior to the issuance of any building permits. The decision of the director may be appealed to the planning commission.

2.     All new development, major remodeling or structural rehabilitation of more than twenty-five percent of the building area, and additions which will result in increased floor area, shall be subject to design review and approved by the planning commission in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 18.68 of this title.

E.     Miscellaneous Requirements.

1.     Performance Standards. All uses established or placed into operation after the effective date of this subsection (September 2, 1960) shall comply at all times thereafter with the following limitations or performance standards. All uses actually established and in operation on the effective date of this subsection shall be made to comply with the following limitations or performance standards on or before January 1, 1965 and shall comply at all times thereafter:

a.     Fire and Explosion Hazards. All activities involving, and all storage of, flammable and explosive materials shall be provided with adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosions and adequate firefighting and fire-suppression equipment and devices standard in industry. All incineration is prohibited.

b.     Radioactivity or Electrical Disturbance. Devices which radiate radio-frequency energy shall be so operated as not to cause interference with any activity carried on beyond the boundary line of the property upon which the device is located. Radio-frequency energy is electro-magnetic energy at any frequency in the radio spectrum between ten kilocycles and three million megacycles.

c.     Noise.

i.      The maximum sound pressure level radiated by any use or facility when measured at the boundary line of the property on which sound is generated shall not exceed the values shown in the following table:

 

Table 18.38.050.E.1.c.i

 

Octave-Band Range in Cycles per Second

Sound Pressure Level in Decibels 0.0002 dyne/cm2

Below 75

72

75—150

67

151—300

59

301—600

52

601—1200

46

1201—2400

40

2401—4800

34

Above 4800

32

 

ii.     If the noise is not smooth and continuous or is not present between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. one or more of the following corrections shall be applied to the octave levels specified in Table 18.38.050.E.1.c.i above:

 

 

Table 18.38.050.E.1.c.ii

 

 

Correction in Decibels

Daytime operation only

+ 5

Noise source operates less than 20% of any one-hour period

+ 5

Noise source operates less than 5% of any one-hour period

+10

Noise of impulsive character such as hammering

- 5

Noise of periodic character such as humming or screeching

- 5

 

iii.    The sound pressure level shall be measured with a sound level meter and associated octave band analyzer conforming to standards prescribed by the American Standards Association as set forth in a pamphlet published by the association entitled, “American Standard Sound Level Meters for Measurement of Noise and Other Sounds No. Z 24.3,” published in 1944, and in another pamphlet published by the same association entitled, “American Standard Specification for an Octave-Bank Filter Set for the Analysis of Noise and Other Sounds No. Z 24.10,” published in 1953.

d.     Vibration. Every use shall be so operated that the ground vibration inherently and recurrently generated is not perceptible, without instruments, at any point on any boundary line of the lot on which the use is located.

e.     Emission of Dust, Heat and Glare. Every use shall be so operated that it does not emit dust, heat or glare in such quantities or degree as to be readily detectable on any boundary line of the lot on which the use is located.

f.      Outdoor Storage and Waste Disposal. All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products shall be enclosed by a fence or wall adequate to conceal such facilities from adjacent properties. All outdoor storage facilities shall be paved pursuant to the surfacing standards established for off-street parking lots in Chapter 18.14, Off-Street Parking Requirements. No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a subject lot in such form or manner that they may be transferred to the lot by natural causes or forces. All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible by or otherwise be attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only in closed containers.

g.     Frontage on Street Required. Every building shall be located on a lot having frontage upon a dedicated street.

Exception: No building permits shall be issued on any lot not having frontage on a dedicated street until the applicant has applied for and secured a zone variance as per Chapter 18.76.

F.     Transportation Demand Management.

1.     All new development projects that are estimated to employ a total of two hundred fifty or more persons, including substantial building expansions, as determined in Chapter 18.20 is subject to this section.

2.     All applicable developments shall provide a transportation demand management strategy plan pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 18.20. (Ord. 1748 § 3, 2013; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

Article III. Special Zones*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 1828. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


Chapter 18.40 C-U CIVIC-UTILITY ZONE
18.40.010 Generally.
The C-U civic-utility zone is designed to permit special applications for essential public uses, either governmental or private, which by necessity must be located in areas other than normally zoned for such specific uses. For purposes of zoning requirement considerations, all requirements in C-U civic-utility zones shall generally be deemed as similar to the zone in which such uses are permitted elsewhere in this code. The C-U civic-utility zone is expressly intended for detailed site plan consideration in every case, as contained hereafter, and thus detailed specifications are not listed. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.40.020 Uses permitted.
In the C-U zone, the following uses are permitted:

The uses permitted in this zone are those of a civic or public utility nature, which are considered necessary or convenient to the public welfare, as specifically determined by the planning commission and city council.

A.    Public buildings of any nature, owned, leased, or used by any government jurisdiction; including civic center structures, waterworks, parks and publicly owned easements; schools and installations, and flood-control and other public rights-of-way;

B.     Public utilities installation of an industrial or operational, but noncommercial nature, including power or telephone substations, gas or water aboveground structures and apparatus, and railroad trackage, rights-of-way, except as such uses are or may in the future be regulated by the Public Utilities Commission of the state;

C.     Such other uses as the planning commission and city council may find similar to those listed in this subsection. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.40.030 Accessory uses permitted.
In the C-U zone, the following accessory uses are permitted:

The accessory buildings and structures necessary to such use of the permitted uses set out in Section 18.40.020. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.40.040 Uses permitted by conditional use permit.
In the C-U zone, the following uses are permitted by conditional use permit as provided for under Chapter 18.66:

Such uses which are, in the opinion of the planning commission, similar to and compatible with, and are not detrimental to the welfare of the community as compared to the uses specifically mentioned. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.40.050 Uses expressly prohibited.
In the C-U zone, the following uses are expressly prohibited:

All, except those specifically listed in Sections 18.40.020, 18.40.030 and 18.44.040. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.40.060 Standards of development.
In the C-U zone, the following standards of development shall apply:

A.    Building Height. Generally subject to the applicable standards of adjacent zones.

B.     Front Yard. Generally subject to the applicable standards of adjacent zones.

C.     Side Yard. Generally subject to the applicable standards of adjacent zones.

D.    Rear Yard. Generally subject to the applicable standards of adjacent zones.

E.     Area Requirements. Generally subject to the applicable standards of adjacent zones.

F.     Usable Yard Area. Generally subject to the applicable standards of adjacent zones.

G.    Parking and Loading. See Chapter 18.14, Off-Street Parking Requirements. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.40.070 Special development standards.
In the C-U zone, the following special development standards shall apply:

A.    Distance Between Buildings on the Same Lot. Generally subject to the applicable standards of adjacent zones.

B.     Walls and Fences. Generally subject to the applicable standards of adjacent zones.

C.     Signs. Generally subject to the applicable standards of adjacent zones.

D.    Design Review. See Chapter 18.68. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

 

Chapter 18.42 OS OPEN SPACE ZONE
18.42.010 Generally.
The OS open space zone is intended to provide for the protection of those parcels designated as permanent open space. This zone is intended to protect parcels and/or areas which have been designated by the city council to be necessary for the preservation of public health, safety and welfare. The OS open space zone shall apply to public parks, flood control channels specified on the official map of open space, reservoirs and their associated land, and those areas designated on the official map of open space to be too hazardous for construction due to slope steepness, soil instability or seismic hazard. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.42.020 Uses.
See Section 18.06.040.A. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.42.030 Accessory uses permitted.
In the OS zone, the following accessory uses are permitted:

The accessory buildings and structures necessary to such use of the permitted use under Section 18.42.020. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.42.040 Standards of development.
In the OS zone, the following standards of development shall generally apply; however, the planning commission and/or city council may require compliance to specific development standards based on a determination to be made on an individual case:

A.    Building Height. Generally subject to the applicable standards of adjacent zones.

B.     Front Yard. Generally subject to the applicable standards of adjacent zones.

C.     Side Yard. Generally subject to the applicable standards of adjacent zones.

D.    Rear Yard. Generally subject to the applicable standards of adjacent zones.

E.     Area Requirements. Generally subject to the applicable standards of adjacent zones.

F.     Usable Yard Area. Generally subject to the applicable standards of adjacent zones.

G.    Parking and Loading. See Chapter 18.14, Off-Street Parking Requirements. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

18.42.050 Special development standards.
In the OS zone, the following development standards shall apply, except as specifically required by the planning commission or city council to be determined on an individual case:

A.    Distance Between Buildings on the Same Lot. Generally subject to the applicable standards of adjacent zones.

B.     Walls and Fences. Generally subject to the applicable standards of adjacent zones.

C.     Signs. Signing, other than that required for identification and regulation of city parks, erected in the OS open space zone shall identify only the name of the facility and the street number. Maximum height of the sign shall not exceed five feet, maximum size shall not exceed forty square feet, and only one sign may be erected. All signing shall be approved by the planning commission.

D.    Design Review. See Chapter 18.68. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

Chapter 18.43 P AUTOMOBILE PARKING ZONE
18.43.010 Generally.
Land classified in a P zone may also be classified in an R zone and the following regulations shall apply in the P automobile parking zone unless otherwise provided in this title. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.43.020 Uses permitted.
In the P zone, the following uses are permitted:

A.    Any use permitted in the R zone in which the land is classified and when so used subject to all of the provisions contained in the sections defining the R zone.

B.     Open-air, temporary parking of transient automobiles, except trucks of over one thousand five hundred pounds capacity. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.43.030 Standards of development.
In the P zone, the following standards of development shall apply:

Parking. See Chapter 18.14, Off-Street Parking Requirements. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

Chapter 18.44 SP-1 LA HABRA BOULEVARD SPECIFIC PLAN ZONE
18.44.010 Generally.
A.    Whenever the regulations in this specific plan zone differ from other regulations, within this title the regulations contained herein supersede those sections and other city regulations. Where an issue is not addressed by the regulations in this specific plan zone, the appropriate section of Title 18 shall prevail.

B.     All building construction within the specific plan area shall comply with applicable building codes.

C.     The development standards and design guidelines contained in the specific plan shall apply as an overlay ordinance to all three sub-areas of La Habra Boulevard.

D.    All existing nonconforming uses within the specific plan area shall be subject to the requirements of Section 18.08.070 of the Municipal Code, unless otherwise stated within this chapter. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.44.020 Uses.
See Section 18.06.040. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.44.030 Accessory uses permitted.
A.    On all sites within the plan area designated as residential uses, the following accessory uses are permitted:

1.     Accessory buildings necessary to such use located on the same lot or parcel of land including a private garage, the capacity of which shall not exceed three vehicles; and

2.     Home occupation in compliance with the regulations provided in Chapter 18.60 of the La Habra Municipal Code.

B.     On all sites designated for commercial uses, the following accessory uses are permitted:

1.     Accessory buildings necessary to such use located on the same lot or parcel of land including storage sheds for exclusive use of the patrons of the stores or business located on-site, provided that appropriate building permits are received; and

2.     Processing or treatment of products which is clearly incidental to the business conducted on-site and provided that not more than five persons and not more than fifty percent of the full area of the building is used in the manufacture or manufacturing or treatment of the products and that such operations or products are not objectionable due to noise, odor, dust, smoke, vibration or other similar causes. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.44.040 Standard of development.
Within the boundaries of the La Habra Boulevard specific plan, the following standards of development, as specified below shall apply:

A.    Building Heights.

1.     On all parcels with a commercial designation, building heights shall not exceed four stories or fifty feet.

2.     On all parcels with a residential designation, building heights shall not exceed two and one-half stories or thirty-five feet.

3.     No penthouses or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment, towers, steeples or other structures shall exceed the height limit provided in this chapter. Radio and television masts, flagpoles, chimneys and smokestacks may extend not more than thirty feet above the height limit provided in this chapter; provided, however, that the same may be safely erected and maintained at such height in view of the surrounding conditions and circumstances.

B.     Front Setbacks.

1.     There shall be a front building setback of not less than ten feet on all land uses within the plan area designated for commercial uses. Such area shall be landscaped. Such landscaping may be a combination of hardscape and softscape (plants) with at least twenty-five percent of the area devoted to softscape.

2.     For residential uses the front setback shall be twenty feet for low-density development and fifteen feet for medium- and high-density development.

3.     Cornices, canopies or awnings, eaves, balconies, landings, window boxes or other similar architectural features, not providing additional floor space within the building, may extend into the required front setback area no more than thirty-six inches. Additional encroachment of architectural features may be allowed as approved by the planning commission.

4.     Patios provided for uses within areas designated for residential use as private yard area shall not encroach into the setback area.

5.     No accessory structure may encroach into any setback area.

C.     Side Setbacks.

1.     For all side yards along a street frontage there shall be a minimum of a ten-foot setback. Encroachments shall be allowed as described in subsection B of this section.

2.     Side setbacks for commercial buildings are not required, except when such building is located on a corner lot or when it is adjacent to any site designated residential.

3.     Whenever an interior side lot line of a commercial or multiple family residential use abuts any portion of a single-family residential use there shall be provided a setback of not less than ten feet, such area shall be landscaped. For multifamily residential uses such spaces may be used as private or common yard area.

4.     For all uses encroachments are permitted as identified in subsection (B)(3) of this section.

5.     For multifamily development the second floor shall be set back fifteen feet. The roof platform created by the difference between the first and second floor may be used for any use consistent with all the other development standards for the plan area.

6.     No accessory structure may encroach into any setback area.

D.    Rear Setbacks.

1.     There shall be a minimum rear setback requirement along the rear property line of all sites designated for commercial uses of not less than twenty feet.

2.     There shall be a minimum rear setback requirement along the rear property line of all sites designated for low-density residential uses of not less than twenty-five feet.

3.     There shall be a minimum rear setback requirement along the rear property line of all sites designated for multifamily residential consistent with the requirements of subsection C of this section.

4.     No accessory structure may encroach into any setback area.

E.     Area Requirements. For all sites located in the plan area the minimum standards apply.

1.     A minimum lot size for new commercial development shall be five thousand square feet. Minimum lot frontage shall be fifty feet.

2.     A minimum parcel size of twenty-four thousand square feet shall be required for new high-density multiple family residential developments. Minimum lot frontage shall be sixty feet.

3.     A minimum parcel size of fifteen thousand square feet shall be required for new medium-density multiple family residential developments. Minimum lot frontage shall be sixty feet.

4.     Exception. These standards shall not apply to the upgrading, remodeling or overall enhancement or improvement of any existing structure provided that the floor area of such building is not increased more than twenty percent and further provided that there is no decrease in available on-site parking.

5.     A minimum lot size of five thousand feet shall be required for all low-density residential uses. Minimum lot frontage shall be fifty feet.

6.     Each lot designated for medium-density residential use shall have a minimum of three thousand one hundred feet per dwelling unit.

7.     Each lot designated for high-density residential use shall have a minimum of one thousand nine hundred feet per dwelling unit.

8.     Maximum land coverage (building footprint) for all multifamily development shall not exceed forty percent.

9.     A minimum floor area of one thousand square feet shall be provided for all one-family residential dwellings.

10.   A minimum dwelling unit size exclusive of garages, carports, balconies, patios, terraces and open porches shall be provided for all multifamily residential dwellings. The minimum sizes shall be as provided in the following table.

 

 

MINIMUM UNIT SIZE

 

Unit Type

Minimum Square Feet

Bachelor unit

480

One bedroom

700

Two bedroom

900

Over two bedrooms

900 + 150 for each additional bedroom

F.     Usable Yard Area.

1.     For all commercial uses: none.

2.     For all residential uses:

a.     Minimum Area Per Parcel. No parcel used for residential development shall have less than one thousand square feet of usable yard area. Usable yard area must have a minimum dimension of fifteen feet. Exception: up to fifty percent of the required area may be twelve feet.

b.     Minimum Area Per Dwelling Unit. The minimum required usable yard area shall not be less than two hundred and fifty square feet for each dwelling unit, either as a private usable open space or a combination of private and common open space with at least thirty percent of the units having private open space.

c.     Private Usable Yard Area.

i.      The required usable yard area when located on open ground, utilized as patios, terraces, atriums, or surfaces of courts shall have a minimum dimension of eight feet and a minimum area of ninety-six square feet.

ii.     The required usable yard area when located on balconies, porches or decks shall have a minimum dimension of seven feet and a minimum area of seventy square feet.

d.     Common Usable Yard Area.

i.      The remaining required usable open space shall be part of the common open space and shall not have any dimension less than fifteen feet and shall not be less than four hundred square feet in area.

ii.     All common yard area shall be conveniently located and readily accessible from all dwellings, shall be screened from adjacent streets and shall be landscaped with lawns, trees, shrubs and other permanently maintained plant materials when not used as swimming pools, game courts or other similar recreational facilities.

e.     Description.

i.      The usable yard area required by this chapter shall not be used for parking, driveways, and automobile turning areas or assessory buildings. The maximum gradient shall be less than five percent.

ii.     Such usable yard area shall not be located within a required front yard or a side yard abutting a street, or a required rear yard abutting a street.

 

G.    Parking and Loading—General Regulations, Design Standards, Spaces Required, and Landscaping/Screening. See Chapter 18.14, Off-Street Parking Requirements. (Ord. 1748 § 3, 2013; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.44.050 Special development standards.
A.    Distance Between Buildings on the Same Lot (Residential Development Only).

1.     There shall be a minimum distance of ten feet between a building used for dwelling purposes and an accessory building.

2.     There shall be a minimum of six feet between accessory buildings.

3.     The minimum space between the exterior walls of main buildings shall be twenty feet.

B.     Fences and Walls.

1.     All fences and walls, excluding masonry and building code approved permanent-finish panels, shall be painted in a color scheme, consistent with the color palette in Chapter 5, Section D of this plan, and improvements shall be maintained in a neat, orderly condition at all times.

2.     No portion of the wall or fence shall be used for advertising or display.

3.     Any structures that are used as part of the yard boundaries and/or are exposed to view from a street or highway frontage shall be subject to painting, maintenance and sign requirements for fences and walls.

4.     No barbed wire, concertina wire, grape stakes or chain link shall be permitted as fencing material.

5.     A solid masonry wall six feet in height shall be provided between all neighboring sites of commercial and residential uses. Exception: all walls in front setback areas may not exceed three feet in height.

6.     Where a wall required by this plan is located between properties having different grade levels, the height shall be measured from the highest grade.

C.     Signs.

1.     Commercial Signage Criteria—General.

a.     Wall-mounted, projecting, and pedestal signage is permitted.

b.     Signage shall be integrated with the architectural details of the structure. Signage shall be placed so that it does not overlap significant design elements, such as cornices, columns, balustrades, or surface details.

c.     Colors used in the signage shall complement the color palette used for the building façade. Sign backgrounds shall consist of neutral or muted colors. Bright colors may be used for sign copy or logos as approved by the head planning official or his/her designee.

d.     Signage should be pedestrian-oriented, generally located no higher than twelve feet above the sidewalk elevation.

e.     The use of neon signage is permitted. Only one neon sign will be permitted for each business. The use of neon is subject to review by the planning commission.

f.      Moving or animated signage is not permitted.

g.     New roof signs and billboards are not permitted.

 

2.     Wall Signs.

a.     Wall signs may be placed above the storefront, between the ends of the building wall line, and no higher than the lowest of the following:

i.      Twelve feet above grade;

ii.     The bottom of second story windows or their theoretical location if none exist in a multi-story structure; or

iii.    The cornice line at the building line.

b.     Signs may not project vertically above the top of the parapet or horizontally beyond the end walls of the structures.

c.     Exceptions to these location standards may be granted for existing or specialized signs, e.g., movie theaters by approval of the planning commission.

d.     The maximum area of a wall sign shall not exceed two square feet per lineal foot of the store frontage. Larger signs may be considered depending on their individual design and architectural merit. Unique oversize logo and identification signs may be considered as exceptions. When an oversize sign is permitted, it shall be limited to the legal name of the business and no other wording (e.g., “hardware” or “videos”) shall be permitted.

e.     Wall signs shall be mounted flush to or recessed into the building and fixed securely. They shall not project more than twelve inches from the face of the building wall.

f.      One wall sign shall be permitted on each sidewalk or alley elevation. Provided that the total signage does not exceed the maximum allowed for the site.

3.     Window Signs. A window sign is defined as a sign, which is painted, posted, or displayed on an interior translucent or transparent surface, including windows, and doors. The ground level area coverage is not to exceed twenty-five percent of the total window and door area visible from the exterior of the building. No window sign shall be displayed above the first floor.

4.     Projecting Signs.

a.     A projecting sign is defined as a sign which is attached to a building or structure and which projects in a perpendicular manner more than twelve inches from the wall surface of the portion of the building or structure to which it is mounted. The maximum allowable area should be sixteen square feet (eight square feet on either side of the sign) per business establishment. No less than six inches should exist between the sign and the building surface to which is mounted. Projecting signs should project no more than four feet from the building wall surface. In no case may a sign project over the public right-of-way. Projecting signs shall be no higher than the lowest of the following:

i.      Twelve feet from grade; and

ii.     Cornice line of building.

b.     There shall be no projecting signs lower than eight feet above grade.

c.     No projecting signs should be less than five feet from any common wall or other point common to two separate business establishments on the same property; nor should any projecting sign be located less than five feet from any other projecting or freestanding sign, whether on the same property or not.

d.     When a projecting sign is located on a structure in combination with an awning the sign shall be placed below the lowest elevation of the awning and no lower than eight feet above grade, and limited to four square feet on either side of the sign.

5.     Freestanding Business Identification Signs. A freestanding sign is defined as a sign which is not part of or attached to any building but located elsewhere on the parcel. The maximum allowable area should be thirty-two square feet (sixteen square feet on either side of the sign). Freestanding signs shall be located at or close to grade, no higher than eight feet from grade within an approved landscaped area, and not to be located in any public right-of-way.

6.     Building Tenant Identification. Multi-tenant buildings and businesses with entrances located within building pass-through may list the names of tenants on a building directory located near each major building and/or pass-through entrance. Each tenant is allowed up to two square feet of signage per directory. No directory shall exceed sixteen square feet.

7.     Temporary Signage/Banners. Any sign made of poster paint on glass, paper, wood, or plastic, will not be permitted for a continuous period to exceed thirty days. The area of temporary signs may not exceed ten percent of the total window and door area visible from the exterior and not to exceed five square feet per sign. No temporary signs shall be placed in the public right-of-way.

8.     Calculation of Sign Area. Signs shall be measured by the area of the geometric shape not exceeding four sides which encloses all words and/or symbols and background material which is a part of the sign.

9.     Lighting in Signs.

a.     Lighting may be used to illuminate signage, façade, and architectural details. Illumination levels shall be muted and indirect; excessively bright levels shall not be permitted. Lighting shall not shine directly on adjacent properties or result in glare which affects motorists or pedestrians.

b.     Lighting fixtures shall be integrated with the structure’s architectural details. Units, which overlap or obscure significant details, will not be permitted.

c.     Flashing and moving lights will not be permitted.

d.     Neon tube lighting may be used to highlight building details or as signage (following section). Such lighting must be discretely used and well integrated with the façade.

e.     Bare bulb illumination is permitted if discretely used and well integrated with the façade.

10.   Signage Exceptions.

a.     Signs required by law.

b.     Signs owned by a government agency.

c.     Public utility signs that contain no advertising copy and which are customarily utilized to explain the utility function.

d.     One construction sign located on a location where a building or structure is being erected or remodeled, provided that such sign shall not extend more than eight feet above ground level nor exceed forty square feet in area.

e.     Temporary real estate signs which indicate that the building, land, or premises is for sale, lease, or rent, provided such signs are located on the property to which they relate and do not exceed twenty square feet in area, and that they are removed immediately upon completion of the transaction.

f.      Holiday decorative signs (painted on windows); for a period not to exceed ten days after the holiday, except for Christmas signs which must be removed by January 15th.

g.     Traffic/parking signs.

h.     Open house signs (on private property).

i.      Special civic or volunteer organization event signs; as approved by the city council.

D.    Vehicle Repair Standards.

1.     All vehicle mechanical and body repair, painting, and upholstery activities shall be permitted only with approval of a conditional use permit by the planning commission. All such uses are subject to the following design standards:

a.     All operations shall be conducted within an enclosed building.

b.     All areas or structures used shall be so located or soundproofed as to prevent annoyance or detriment to surrounding property.

c.     All damaged or wrecked vehicles awaiting repair shall be effectively screened so as not to be visible from any street or surrounding property.

d.     All repair activities as described in this section shall be confined to the hours between seven a.m. and seven p.m. daily.

e.     No damaged or wrecked vehicles shall be stored for purposes other than repair and shall not constitute an automobile impound yard.

f.      Dismantling of vehicles for purposes other than repair or the sale of used parts is prohibited.

g.     No goods for sale shall be displayed outside of the building.

h.     Outdoor storage of recreational vehicles or construction equipment is not permitted.

2.     All future development of automobile/vehicle mechanical and body repair, painting, and upholstering activities shall be in compliance with the minimum site development standards as listed in subsection (D)(1) of this section.

3.     All existing automobile/vehicle uses shall have ten years from the effective date of the adoption of the ordinance approving the specific plan update (December 6, 1999) to comply with this section. Exception: any such existing use is remodeled or enlarged shall comply at such time that the remodeling or enlargement takes place.

E.     Closing of Automobile/Vehicle Repair and Service Facilities. In the event that automobile/vehicle repairs development is closed and not operated for a period of one hundred eight consecutive days (six months). The chief planner shall notify the property owner last occupying the site that the conditional use permit shall become null and void unless application for an extension of time is made to the planning commission within thirty days. The planning commission shall review any requests for extension as provided in Section 18.66.070. If no extension of time is requested or the planning commission denied an extension of time for the conditional use permit, the chief planner shall so notify the property owner in writing.

Any part of a building, structure or land occupied by an automobile/vehicle repair activity without a conditional use permit, if abandoned, shall not again be used or occupied for an automobile/vehicle repair use. Any part of a building structure or land occupied by any automobile/vehicle repair use which is discontinued for a period of one hundred eighty consecutive days, or more shall not again be used or occupied for an automobile/vehicle repair use, unless a conditional use permit is granted by the planning commission.

F.     Design Review. The intent of the site plan design review process set forth in this section is to assure the implementation of the La Habra Corridor specific plan in accordance with the design guidelines and development standards contained in the specific plan, Chapters IV and V and other applicable city of La Habra development and performance standards. Conformance of development is assured through a three-step review process involving: (1) La Habra community development planning department; (2) design review board/planning commission; and (3) planning commissioners.

1.     Process.

a.     Planning Department. Prior to the issuance of any minor building permits for interior building changes, landscaping, parking lot plans, minor repair to the exterior of the building, walls and fences, mechanical equipment and similar projects, the chief planner or designee shall first review the permit to determine if the intent and use of the goals and objectives of the specific plan are consistent with the design guidelines contained in this specific plan. Review of projects under this category may be performed over the planning department public counter without a fee.

b.     Design Review Board/Planning Commission. The planning commission shall also act as the design review board for projects within the specific plan. Prior to the issuance of building

        permits, the design review board shall consider projects of front landscaping if hardscape or encroachment is involved, minor exterior changes such as doors and windows, minor exterior or site changes, exterior colors, freestanding signs and neon sign, and similar projects shall be considered to ensure architectural compatibility. Projects requiring review by the design review board shall be scheduled on the next available planning commission agenda for consideration without fee. The design review board may conditionally approve, approve or deny the application. The decision of the design review board may be appealed to the city council subject to the appropriate appeal fee.

c.     Planning Commission. Prior to the issuance of any building permit, all new development, major remodeling or structural rehabilitation of more than twenty-five percent of the building area, and additions which add to the floor area, a site plan design review shall be approved by the planning commission. An application for a design review shall be filed along with such materials as may be required as per Chapter 18.68, Design Review, of this title excepting that the fee for site plan design review permit shall be one-half of the fee to process a site plan approval permit. Subsequent to the receipt of a complete application, the planning commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny any application for design review per the procedures and requirements established in Chapter 18.68, Design Review, of this title. The planning commission may grant deviations from the prescribed development standards guidelines to those parcels which by the nature of their size, location, topography, configuration or other considerations require overall planning design and control in order to achieve the goals and objectives of the specific plan. (Ord. 1735 § 1, 2012; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.44.060 Design guidelines.
The following design guidelines for building renovation and new constructions are established to effectuate the achievement of the overall aesthetic goals and objectives of the specific plan. These guidelines are especially designed to provide applicants with a variety of options in achieving the architectural effect of the Early California Spanish Style.

A.    Façade Treatments.

1.     Building Exterior Finishes. All finishes on the street elevations shall be smooth, semi-smooth or light sand exterior plaster or brick masonry (the intent is to make the wall surface appear to be plastered masonry). The planning commission must review all other proposed textures.

a.     The use of neon as an architectural feature is permitted, provided that it is well integrated with the building façade and adequately maintained. The use of neon is subject to review by the planning commission.

2.     Accent Materials/Treatments. Accents shall include at least three of the following:

a.     Arcades or colonnades (with circle arches, bows or heavy wood timber);

b.     Arches or bows;

c.     Brick (new or used);

d.     Ceramic tile;

e.     Clay pipe vents;

f.      Cloth awnings;

g.     Columns (with plaster banding);

h.     False second floor treatments (balconies, window, etc.);

i.      Plaster banding or built up plaster elements;

j.      Stone;

k.     Wood (rough sawn heavy timber); and

l.      Wrought iron.

3.     Colors. The following color requirements shall apply to the renovation of existing and construction of new structures within the La Habra Boulevard specific plan area:

a.     Earth tones shall be used as the base against which bolder, but not necessarily brighter, colors would be used as an accent to articulate design details.

b.     Alternative colors may be used upon approval by the planning commission.

4.     Exterior Pavement Treatments. All paved areas adjacent to any public sidewalk or setback area shall consist of at least one of the following materials:

a.     Brick;

b.     Ceramic tile;

c.     Stamped or colored concrete;

d.     Stone pavers;

e.     Or alternate materials as approved by the planning commission.

5.     Windows and Doors. All windows shall conform to the following requirements:

a.     At least twenty percent of the building façade shall be in glazing. This percentage may be reduced if a courtyard is provided.

b.     All windows and doors shall conform to the Early California/Mission Style architecture.

c.     All aluminum storefronts shall be painted or anodized with an accent color approved by the planning commission. No bare aluminum shall be used.

d.     The use of reflective “mirror” type glass windows (glazing) or “mirror” type reflective film on glass and metal panels is not permitted.

e.     All windows and doors shall have accent treatments, which include at least three of the following:

i.      Awnings and/or eyebrows;

ii.     Arched or bowed;

iii.    Double doors (with or without windows);

iv.    False balcony;

v.     Muttons and mullions (divided lights—applied or real);

vi.    Plaster bands;

vii.   Recessed opening;

viii.  Wood shutters;

ix.    Wood lintels;

x.     Wrought iron;

xi.    Or other treatments as approved by the planning commission.

B.     Roof Material and Form. The following treatments are required on all roofs to enhance and establish design consistency:

1.     Roof vents and appurtenances shall be painted a color which will match the roof color.

2.     All tiles used on roofs shall be clay or concrete barrel or “s” tiles. Tile colors shall be mixture with a minimum of seventy percent terra cotta. A material of similar texture, color consistency, durability and fire-retardant qualities may be used upon approval of the planning commission. Each tile shall be nonreflective (unglazed) for a soft finish look. Plastic, metal, wood shake and asphalt tiles shall not be permitted.

3.     Roof accents shall include at least one of the following:

a.     Chimneys (real or false);

b.     Finials;

c.     Heavy timber eaves and beams;

d.     Tile treatments (tiles at the end of the eaves may be double or triple layered with exposed rusticated mortar to emphasize thickness);

e.     Tower element;

f.      Or other treatments as approved by the planning commission.

4.     Roof form can consist of flat, mansards, sloped (hip or gable), or any combination provided that the architectural requirements for each type are met.

5.     Mansard type roofs may not have a slope of greater than five is to twelve.

6.     Material on sloping roofs of the same buildings shall be the same on all roof surfaces of the same building.

7.     A three is to twelve to five is to twelve (vertical: horizontal distance) roof pitch is required for all main roof surfaces with the exception of arcades or colonnades.

8.     Roof pitch for attached arcades or colonnades shall be a minimum two is to twelve. Roof types shall be restricted to low pitch gable roofs, with the occasional use of a hip roof or shed roof as an accent at the end of the building.

9.     Flat roofs with parapet walls to screen rooftop equipment are acceptable provided that all screening materials shall be consistent with the wall treatment materials listed in subsection (A)(2), Accent Materials/Treatments.

10.   Solar panels are to be flush with the roof slope and screened from view.

11.   Mechanical equipment and utilities shall be architecturally screened from view. Rooftop mechanical equipment and appurtenances to be used in the operation or maintenance of a building shall be arranged so as not to be visible from any point at or below the roof level of the subject building. This requirement shall apply in construction of new buildings that result in significant changes in such rooftop equipment and appurtenances. The features so regulated shall in all cases be either enclosed by outer building walls or parapets, or grouped and screened in a suitable manner, or designed in themselves so that they are balanced and integrated with respect to the design of the building. Minor features not exceeding one foot in height shall be painted but otherwise exempted from this regulation.

C.     Awnings.

1.     All awnings shall be presented to the planning commission for review.

2.     Cloth awnings will be permitted to provide shade to a storefront and identification through graphics. Metal and glossy vinyl awnings are prohibited. Colors may include earth tones and bright colors as approved by the planning commission. Fade-resistant fabrics should be used and replaced no less often than once every three years.

3.     Signage will be restricted to the horizontal edge of the awning. In special cases, with planning commission approval, signage may be permitted on the sloped elevation of the awning. This signage may include logos or graphics.

4.     Awnings shall be integrated with the architectural design character of the structure. They shall be placed to complement the rhythms established by storefront windows, doors, columns, cornices, and other elements and not overlap or obscure any significant design feature.

5.     An awning may project no more than four feet from the structure’s façade and shall be a minimum of eight feet above the sidewalk.

6.     All new awnings in integrated storefront or centers shall match or substantially conform to existing approved awnings.

7.     All awnings over public property shall be retractable.

8.     All awnings require approval of permits by the building official.

D.    Security/Access. Security systems for businesses along La Habra Boulevard are recommended to protect the safety of customers and property. Specific architectural measures shall include the following:

1.     Exterior Lighting. All new development or major remodeling shall include illumination of the property using light standards or building-mounted lights, which enhance the streetscape. Standards should be oriented to the pedestrian level and placed to shed light on the entrances to the shops, walkways, courtyards and parking lots.

2.     Interior Spaces. Storefront windows should be illuminated and allow visual observation of interior spaces from the exterior.

3.     Street Addresses. Street address numbers shall be posted in minimum ten-inch high letters on both the front and any rear elevation which faces an alley for all structures for loading/delivery, customer convenience and emergency personnel. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

 

Chapter 18.46 D ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN ZONE
18.46.010 Generally.
Land classified in a D zone shall also be classified in another zone and the regulations set out in this chapter shall apply in the D architectural design zone unless otherwise provided in this title. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.46.020 Architectural standards.
In order that buildings, structures, signs and landscaping will be in harmony with other structures and improvements in the area, and not of obnoxious, undesirable or unsightly appearance, the following items shall be considered in approving plans of proposed improvements in the architectural design zone:

A.    The height, bulk and area of buildings;

B.     The setback distances from all property lines;

C.     The colors and materials on the exterior;

D.    The type and pitch of roofs;

E.     The size and spacing of windows, doors and other openings;

F.     The size, type and location of signs;

G.    Towers, chimneys, roof structures, flagpoles, radio and television masts;

H.    Plot plan, landscaping and automobile parking areas;

I.      The relation to the existing buildings and structures in the general vicinity and area. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.46.030 Procedure.
All proposed new development or any exterior modification to any existing development in the D architectural design zone shall be subject to the requirements of Chapter 18.68, Design Review, of this title. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.46.040 Standards of development.
Parking Lot Landscaping and Design. See the landscaping requirements applicable to the primary zone to which this overlay zone applies. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

 

Chapter 18.48 ES EMERGENCY SHELTER OVERLAY ZONE
18.48.010 Generally.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards, and use regulations for the development of emergency shelters in compliance with state law and to implement the general plan policies of the housing element. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.48.020 Definitions.
“Emergency shelter” means housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.48.030 Uses permitted.
In the ES emergency shelter overlay zone the following uses are permitted:

A.    Emergency shelters in accordance with the regulations set forth in Chapter 18.30, Special Needs Housing;

B.     Commercial or industrial uses as may be indicated in the underlying zone in accordance with the regulations set forth in this title. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.48.040 Accessory uses permitted.
In the ES emergency shelter overlay zone, the following accessory uses are permitted: any accessory use necessary to the permitted uses provided for in the underling zone or Section 18.30.060. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.48.050 Uses permitted by conditional use permit.
In the ES emergency shelter overlay zone, the following uses are permitted by conditional use permit: those uses requiring conditional use permits in the underling zone. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.48.060 Uses expressly prohibited.
In the ES emergency shelter overlay zone, the following uses are expressly prohibited: those uses expressly prohibited in the underlying zone over which the ES zone is applied. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.48.070 Standards of development.
In the ES emergency shelter overlay zone, the following standards of development shall apply:

A.    Those standards of development specified for the underlying zone over which the ES zone is applied:

B.     Emergency shelters shall conform to all standards of development per Section 18.30.060. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

 

Chapter 18.50 OIL WELLS AND DRILLING OVERLAY ZONE
18.50.010 Generally.
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish a category for oil districts for oil operations under which present and future oil operations shall be permitted. It is the purpose of oil district overlay “O” to enable utilization of land for compatible development of normal commercial, residential and industrial surface uses as well as the extraction of hydrocarbon substances from the earth’s subsurface. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.50.020 Definitions.
The definitions set forth in Chapter 15.74, Oil Drilling and Production Regulations, shall also apply to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.50.030 Uses permitted.
In the “O” oil drilling overlay zone the following uses are permitted:

A.    Oil drilling and production in accordance with the regulations set forth in Chapter 15.74;

B.     Commercial, residential or industrial subsurface uses as may be indicated in any underlying zone in accordance with the regulations set forth in this title or by any adopted specific plan in accordance with state law. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.50.040 Application.
A.    Permit Required.

1.     Any subsurface uses as indicated by the underlying zone or by an adopted specific plan, shall require a planned unit development permit. Such permit shall be subject to the regulations and process requirements of Chapter 18.46, PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay Zone.

2.     For any new or expanded oil production fields, a permit is required pursuant to Chapter 15.74 of this code.

B.     Fees. Any application for a planned unit development permit or oil production field under the provisions of this chapter shall be accompanied by a fee as established in Chapters 18.70 and 15.74. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

18.50.050 Standards of development.
A.    Underlying Zone. Those standards of the zone under which the proposed use would be allowed or such standards which are clearly designated on the planned unit development as approved by the planning commission and city council.

B.     Specific Plan. Those standards of a specific plan approved and adopted by the city council pursuant to appropriate state law. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

Chapter 18.52 PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE
18.52.010 Generally.
The objective of the planned unit development overlay zone is to secure a fuller realization of the general plan of the city than that which would result from the application of present zone district regulations. The PUD overlay zone is intended to be applied to those parcels which, by the nature of their size, location, topography, configuration, economic potential or other considerations, require overall planning design and control in order to achieve the goals and objectives of the general plan. The planning design and control will secure to the community, the future occupants, and the developer values and amenities greater than those likely to be achieved by applying solely the relatively inflexible zoning provisions otherwise generally necessary to regulate the successive development of individual lots by numerous different owners. For commercial and/or residential development, the planned unit development overlay zone provides a method whereby land may be designed and developed as a unit by taking advantage of modern site planning techniques in order to produce an environment of stable, desirable character which will be in harmony with existing or potential development of the surrounding neighborhood. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.46.020 Uses permitted.
In the PUD overlay zone, the following uses are permitted: Commercial and residential uses consistent with the general plan land use designation and the primary zone, with specific uses to be reviewed and approved by the planning commission and city council as provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.52.030 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following shall apply:

 

“Assembly use” shall mean the use of a property, a structure, or any portion thereof for the gathering together of fifty or more persons for a common purpose, such as deliberation, education, instruction, worship, entertainment, amusement, or drinking or dining, on a regular basis. For purposes of this chapter, restaurants having no live entertainment and having a seating capacity of one hundred or less, and without banquet facilities, shall not constitute an assembly use.

“Final development plan” shall mean the precise site, floor and elevation plans submitted by an applicant, after approval of a project by the city council and incorporating all conditions of approval required by the city council, which has been reviewed and approved by all city departments for compliance with all conditions of approval. The final development plan is also the document(s) submitted to the city building department for the issuance of building permits.

“Primary zone” shall mean the zoning land use designation of a property in the absence of the PUD overlay, e.g., the property is in an underlying zoning designation of R-1, C-2, M-1, etc. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.52.040 Applicability.
A.    In the PUD overlay zone, the regulations set out in this chapter shall apply to the use of any property so zoned or any portion thereof, including the building, demolition or modification of any structure or any portion thereof. Uses may be permitted by the planning commission by way of conditional use permit, where such uses are permitted by conditional use permit in the primary zone, provided that such uses are deemed essential or desirable to the public convenience or welfare, and are in harmony with the various elements or objectives of the comprehensive general plan.

B.     Exceptions.

1.     The director of community development or his/her designee may approve demolition of structures in residential zones and any commercial and industrial buildings directed by a court of law or deemed to present a public health risk.

2.     Additions to, or remodeling of existing single-family dwellings located within a PUD zone are exempt from planning commission and city council review; however, all single-family dwellings shall comply with all the appropriate development standards for the zone in which they are located and shall be architecturally compatible with the existing structure.

3.     Façade changes or site plan alterations that do not involve any increase in usable floor area to existing commercial buildings in all zones, and existing residential structures in multiple family zones shall be exempt from the review requirements of this chapter, but shall be subject to design review as established in Chapter 18.68 of this title.

4.     All secondary dwelling units within planned unit development zones, as defined in Chapter 18.04 of the La Habra Municipal Code, are not subject to the approval process established within the PUD zone where only a maximum of two units will be erected on a parcel. All units that comply with the development standards of Chapter 18.04 shall be approved ministerially. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

18.52.050 Uses expressly prohibited.
In the PUD overlay zone, uses prohibited in the primary zone and assembly uses, except that assembly uses permitted in residential primary zones shall be permitted in residential primary zones with PUD overlay zone designations. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.52.060 General development standards.
In the PUD overlay zone, the following standards of development shall apply:

A.    Those standards of development of the primary zone in which the property and the proposed use are or will be located, except to the extent that special development standards are imposed as set forth in Section 18.52.070.

B.     The parking lot, design and landscaping requirements applicable to the primary zone in which the property is located. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.52.070 Special development standards.
In the PUD overlay zone, the following special development standards shall apply:

A.    Designated Standards. Modifications to those standards required for the primary zone in which the property and the proposed use are or will be located, as are clearly designated in the planned unit development ordinance approved by the planning commission and city council for the property.

B.     Variation in Residential Density.

1.     Any increase in the number of dwelling units other than that which would be permitted in the primary zone shall be limited to that which the planning commission and city council find to be fully compensated for by the quality and distinction of various elements of the architecture and the site plan, including:

a.     The character and magnitude of the provisions for both undeveloped and developed common open space;

b.     The reduction, through efficient design, of the total acreage needed for adequate vehicular circulation;

c.     Dedication for public use, if any, excluding streets; and

d.     The general excellence of the design as a whole, including among other criteria, the provisions for landscaping, the treatment of pedestrian ways and areas of recreational use, optimum relation to topography and other natural features and variety of building form and location.

2.     The planning commission and/or city council may reduce the permitted density on a particular parcel when it has been determined that such reduction is warranted by conditions specifically applicable to the parcel, such as topography, character of the surrounding property, etc.

C.     Mixed Use. The regulations of this chapter are intended to permit a diversity of uses, relationships and heights of buildings and open spaces in planned building groups while ensuring substantial compliance with the spirit, intent and provisions of this code.

D.    Economic Potential. The planning commission and/or city council may impose such other development standards as may reasonably enhance the economic benefit of any development to the city and the community. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.52.080 Pre-application coordination.
There is created a planning coordinating committee composed of the director of community development (chairman), director of public works, chief building official and fire chief, or their authorized representatives, and any other department representative as required by the chairman. At least forty-five days before filing any application for a planned unit development, the prospective applicant shall submit to the planning coordinating committee preliminary plans and sketches and basic site information for consideration and advice, which shall be provided within at least thirty days thereafter, as to the relation of the proposal to general development objectives to be attained in the area and as to the policies of the commission and city council with reference thereto. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.52.085 Application.
A.    Permit Required. Planned unit developments shall require a planned unit development permit for each such development. Such permit shall be subject to the regulations and requirements of this title and shall be processed in accordance with the terms of this chapter, including a public hearing before the planning commission and city council.

B.     Application for Permit.

1.     Fee. Any application for planned unit development permit under the provision of this chapter shall be accompanied by a fee as established pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18.70.

2.     Processing. Such application shall be processed by city staff, which shall make a recommendation to the planning commission for denial, approval, or approval subject to conditions, and shall schedule a public hearing thereon as provided in Section 18.52.090. The application shall then be reviewed by the planning commission and forwarded to the city council with a recommendation for its approval or disapproval, identifying any conditions the planning commission finds appropriate to impose. The city council may approve, disapprove or refer the same back to the planning commission for further consideration. Any such permit is subject to the final approval of the city council.

3.     Application Contents. Every application for a planned unit development shall be accompanied by the following, in the level of detail required in the city’s application form, available from the city’s planning department:

a.     A legal description or boundary survey map of the property. (A tentative subdivision map may be substituted for this requirement if the applicant proposes to subdivide the property.);

b.     A plot plan and description of the property involved showing the location of all existing and proposed buildings; plans and descriptions of the proposed use of the property with ground plans and elevations for all proposed buildings;

c.     A general development plan with at least the following details shown to scale and dimensioned:

 

i.      The proposed land ownerships, the uses, dimensions and locations of all proposed structures and of areas reserved for vehicular and pedestrian circulation, open spaces, landscaping, recreation or other public uses,

ii.     Architectural drawings and sketches showing the design and character of the proposed uses and their relation to one another. A sample material board is to be submitted detailing colors to be used along with samples of the building materials to be utilized,

iii.    Height and approximate location of all proposed walls and fences and a statement setting forth the method by which such walls and fences shall be preserved and maintained. Photographs of the proposed wall and fencing materials and design shall be provided,

iv.    Location and design of automobile parking areas and signs (plans to be in color),

v.     Type of surfacing proposed for walks and driveways,

vi.    Preliminary plans showing the proposed method for control and disposal of water flowing into, across or from the development,

vii.   Tables showing the total number of acres and their distribution by use, and the percentage of the whole designated for dwellings of different types, nonresidential uses, streets, off-street parking, public uses and open spaces,

viii.  Landscape design plans showing the types of planting materials to be used. A plant materials booklet is to be submitted providing photographs of all types of plant materials proposed to be used. A landscape maintenance schedule is to be included within the plant material booklet. The landscape design plan shall include a site elevation scheme accurately showing projected landscape heights at the time of development and a second design showing landscape heights five years after development,

ix.    An economic analysis of the costs and benefits of the proposed use and the projected cost to provide city services to the project,

x.     A time schedule for the proposed development with evidence of the intent and the ability of the applicant to carry out the plan within such time,

xi.    Operational characteristics of proposed use(s), including days and hours of operation, number of employees, etc., if applicable,

xii.   Such other pertinent information as staff may reasonably require at the time of submittal or that the planning commission may reasonably require at the time of its consideration of the development in order to complete its evaluation of the intent and impact of the proposal;

d.     A land use map showing the use of all property within five hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the property involved;

e.     A list, verified by the person or entity preparing the list as to its accuracy, containing the name and address of each property owner within three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the property involved, using for this purpose the last-known name and address of such owners as shown upon the last assessment roll of the city or county and a radius map depicting all such property owners;

 

C.     Once an application is submitted and deemed complete by city staff, staff shall conduct the environmental review required by the California Environmental Quality Act, and notify the applicant of the environmental document which is required to be prepared in connection with the proposed planned unit development. All requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act, including time limits, notice requirements, and review and documentation requirements, shall be complied with by the applicant and staff prior to public hearing on the application. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.52.090 Public hearing.
A.    Following the receipt in proper form of any PUD permit application, the secretary of the planning commission or the city clerk of the city council shall fix a time and place of public hearing thereon. Not less than ten days before the date of such public hearing, notice of the date, time, place of hearing and location of the property and the nature of the request shall be given in the following manner:

1.     By publishing once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city;

2.     By mailing a notice, postage prepaid, to the applicant, to each member of the planning commission, and to the owners of all property within three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the property involved, using for this purpose the last-known name and address of such owners as shown upon the last assessment roll of the city or county.

B.     Public hearings as provided for in this chapter shall be held before the planning commission or the city council at the time and place for which public notice has been given as required in this section. The planning commission or city council may establish their own rules for the conduct of such hearings. A summary of all pertinent testimony offered at a public hearing, together with the names and addresses of all persons testifying, shall be recorded and made a part of the permanent files of the case. Any such hearing may be continued; provided, that prior to the adjournment or recess thereof, the presiding officer at such hearing shall announce the time and place to which such hearing will be continued. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.52.095 Planning commission review.
A.    The commission shall not recommend approval of the proposal unless it finds that the planned unit development, as applied for, is or may be conditioned to be in full conformance to the general purposes of this chapter, and in particular unless it finds as follows:

1.     That the location, design and proposed uses are compatible with the character of existing development in the vicinity;

2.     That the plan will produce, internally, an environment of stable and desirable character, and will not tend to cause any traffic congestion on surrounding or access streets;

3.     That all required applications for the proposed use have been processed, including any conditional use permit applications;

4.     That the standards of development applicable to the planned unit development are clearly designated in the proposed planned unit development ordinance or plans approved there under and/or supplementary text material;

5.     That the proposed development will be well integrated into its setting;

6.     That provision is made for both public and private open space, at least equivalent to that required in the primary zone;

7.     That suitable provision is made, where appropriate, for the protection and maintenance of private areas reserved for common use;

8.     That the proposed development does not negatively impact the city’s ability to provide services over the short and long term to city residents because the projected cost of providing city services to the property outweighs the economic benefits of the project to the city;

9.     That the proposed project complies with all requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act;

10.   That there is reasonable assurance that the applicant intends to and will be able to proceed with the execution of the project without undue delay; and

11.   That there is substantial compliance with the spirit and intent of this title.

B.     Within thirty-five days after the conclusion of a public hearing, the planning commission shall render its decision on the matter so heard, in accordance with the provisions of this section. The failure of the planning commission to render such decision within this time shall be deemed to constitute a recommendation for denial to the city council.

C.     The planning commission shall make a recommendation of approval, approval with conditions, or denial of an application considered by it pursuant to this chapter along with any permits and/or applications considered in conjunction with such application, to the city council for its consideration. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.52.100 City council review.
A.    After receiving the planning commission’s recommendation on any application(s), the city council shall conduct a public hearing on such application(s), according to the provisions of this chapter. After such hearing, the city council shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny such application(s), taking into account everything submitted to and considered by the planning commission.

B.     The city council shall grant approval of a planned unit development permit only if it makes all of the findings required to be made by the planning commission pursuant to Section 18.52.095.

C.     The granting, either with or without conditions or the denial of such application by the city council shall be final and shall be made in writing to the applicant within forty-five days after the conclusion of the hearing on such matter. Reference shall be made, in the notice of written decision to the applicant, to the fact that judicial review of the decision is governed by the time limits set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.52.110 Conformance.
After adoption of a planned unit development ordinance, and prior to the issuance of any building permit, a final development plan shall be prepared and final subdivision map or parcel map recorded, if either is involved. The final development plan shall conform to the ordinance adopting the planned unit development and shall show to scale all buildings, off-street parking facilities, landscaping, finished grades and such other details as will suffice to indicate conformance with all the features, conditions and characteristics upon which the approval was predicated. The final development plan shall be recorded, and a notation of reference thereto shall be made forthwith upon the zoning map. No permit shall thereafter be issued for any building, structure, demolition, or use except in full conformance with the final development plan or with any revision to the plan which has been approved in accordance with the requirements in this chapter for initial planned unit development permit approval. A violation of any part of the plan or of any condition of the approval shall constitute a violation of this title. The planning commission and/or city council may, however, by resolution extend any specific time limit for starting and completing the development upon the showing of a good faith effort to comply therewith. Prior to final approval of a planned unit development ordinance by the city council, the applicant shall submit to the city attorney a draft of covenants, conditions and restrictions which shall be recorded with the county recorder concurrently with conditions of approval and a map of the subject development. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.52.120 Void for failure to develop.
A.    If no development has occurred pursuant to the adopted ordinance and final development plan within twelve months after the date of the adoption of the planned unit development ordinance and no extension has been approved, the adopted ordinance shall be rescinded, the final development plan shall become null and void, and a new planned unit development permit application and approval, with associated final development plan, shall be required for any use and/or development on the subject site.

B.     Upon expiration of any extension of time granted to start development granted by the planning commission and/or city council, the adopted ordinance shall be rescinded, the final development plan shall become null and void, and a new planned unit development permit application and approval, with associated final development plan, shall be required for any use and/or development on the subject site.

C.     For purposes of this section, “development” shall mean commencement of construction on the site, which shall not include the commencement of any predevelopment work on the site, including surveying, preliminary construction staking, installation of erosion control measures or construction fencing, but which shall include review and approval by the city of proposed building plans and the issuance of building permits authorizing construction to commence, and actual construction shall have commenced on the site, such as final grading, pouring footings and/or foundation, or similar activities. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.52.130 Re-approval required.
Re-application and re-approval of a planned unit development permit shall be required under the following circumstances:

A.    Any use or re-use of a property in the PUD overlay zone, or any portion thereof, that has been vacant for over one year from the date of the last issued business license for the use approved in accordance with this chapter.

B.     Any change in the use or any additional or different use of any property in the PUD overlay zone, or any portion thereof.

Exceptions:

1.     Modifications to any existing conditional use permit shall not require re-approval or modification to any existing planned unit development permit where no increase in floor area or change in use occurs.

2.     Consideration of any new conditional use permit for a use consistent with the allowed uses in the underlying zone and located within a pre-existing structure that involves no substantial change to

        the site shall not require re-approval or modification to any existing planned unit development permit.

C.     Modifications to the site design of an approved planned unit development precise plan, which does not involve any permanent increase in building area or change of use, may be approved by the planning commission, without the need for city council review, for permitted uses. Such actions may be considered through the filing of a modification and paying the fee established for modifications in the master fee schedule ordinance. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.52.140 Violation.
A.    Upon violation of any applicable provision of this title or, if granted subject to conditions, upon failure to comply with conditions, or due to a change in conditions on the property or as a result of the use of the property occurring after the granting of any permit pursuant to this chapter which change in conditions makes the continuation of the permit incompatible with the general welfare of the surrounding neighborhood, the city may take action pursuant to this section.

B.     The planning commission or city council shall hold a public hearing, and if satisfied that any provision of the planned unit development ordinance, applicable regulation, development standard, general provision or condition is not being complied with, or if the planning commission or city council finds that a change in conditions on the property or as a result of the use of the property has occurred which makes the continuation of the permit incompatible with the general welfare of the surrounding neighborhood, may do one or more of the following:

1.     Impose additional conditions on the planned unit development permit;

2.     Revoke any applicable conditional use permits associated with the property;

3.     Revoke and/or preclude the issuance of business licenses associated with the property;

4.     Revoke and/or preclude the issuance of building or demolition permits; or

5.     Revoke the planned unit development permit and rescind the planned unit development ordinance, where appropriate, if there has been a demolition or destruction, for any reason, of any substantial portion of the structures provided for in the final development plan;

6.     Revoke, preclude, suspend or otherwise render void any other entitlements to use and/or develop the property as is reasonable under the circumstances and serves to ensure future compliance with this chapter and title or the planned unit development permit, plan or ordinance.

C.     Any decision rendered by the planning commission or the city council shall be in writing and shall be transmitted immediately (within forty-eight hours) upon issuance to the permit holder and the property owner. Anyone aggrieved by a decision of the planning commission pursuant to this section may appeal such decision within ten days to the city council. If no timely appeal is filed, the planning commission decision shall be final. If a timely appeal is filed, the city council shall conduct a public hearing on the appeal and its decision shall be final. The city council shall issue a written decision within forty-five days after the hearing on such matter. Reference shall be made, in the notice of written decision to the applicant, to the fact that judicial review of the decision is governed by the time limits set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

18.52.150 Nonconforming uses.
Any legally permitted and actual use of property within the PUD overlay zone, existing at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter and rendered nonconforming solely by virtue of the adoption of said ordinance, shall be entitled to continue as a legal nonconforming use so long as there is no change, addition, modification or cessation of such use for any continuous period longer than six months. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

Chapter 18.54 MIXED-USE OVERLAY ZONES (MX)
18.54.010 Generally.
The objective of the mixed-use overlay zone is to provide a framework that allows for the development of mixed-use zoned properties in a manner consistent with the La Habra General Plan 2035. The MX overlay zone is intended to allow greater flexibility of development standard and building types than what would be permitted under the base zone for the site.

Mixed-use developments can be horizontally or vertically integrated. Horizontal mixed-use development consists of two or more attached or detached buildings of differing use categories (e.g., residential and commercial) within the same project area. Vertical mixed-use development consists of one or more different uses placed over another use within the same building (e.g. residential over commercial). A project area may encompass a single parcel or multiple parcels, planned and constructed as one, coordinated and unified project. (Ord. 1805 § 3, 2019)

 

18.54.020 Uses permitted.
In the MX overlay zone, the following uses are permitted: Commercial or residential uses consistent with the general plan land use designation and the primary zone, along with a combination of residential and commercial uses. Specific uses as listed in Table 18.06.40.A (Ord. 1805 § 3, 2019)

 

18.54.030 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall apply:

“Community amenities” means any combination of interior and exterior spaces created to provide for both active and passive recreational/social activity space for the residents and their guests. Samples of amenities include, but are not limited to, pools, spas, tot lots, outdoor exercise equipment, sports courts, barbeques, gazeboes, outdoor seating areas, workout rooms, clubhouse, meeting room, business centers.

“Development site” means a parcel or group of contiguous parcels that are proposed for development as one project.

“Mixed-use projects” means projects that combine residential uses with one or more of the following uses: office, retail, entertainment, restaurant, or community facilities. Mixed-use projects may be arranged vertically (ground level retail, office, restaurant, entertainment, or community facility with residential uses above) or horizontally (commercial uses on a portion of the property linked by pedestrian connections to residential uses as part of a unified development project).

“MX precise plan” shall mean the site, floor and elevation plans submitted by an applicant for the development of the site, as may be modified during the public hearing process and incorporating all project conditions. The MX precise plan is also the document(s) submitted to the city building department for the issuance of building permits.

“Primary or base zone” shall mean the zoning designation of a property in the absence of the MX overlay, e.g., the property is in an underlying zoning designation of R-1, C-2, M-1, etc. (Ord. 1805 § 3, 2019)

 

18.54.040 Applicability.
The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply to the use of any property with the MX overlay, in conjunction with the underlying zone(s). The regulations set forth in this chapter shall be in addition to those regulations set forth in the underlying zone. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of the mixed-use overlay zone and the provisions of the underlying zone, the provisions of the mixed-use overlay zone shall prevail, when a mixed-use project is being developed. If the mixed-use overlay zone is silent in relation to any development standard, the development standard identified in the underlying zone shall prevail.

A.    Relationship between overlay zone standards and base zone standards. The regulations in this chapter allow mixed-use development as an alternative to the type of development allowed under the base (underlying) zone standards, for property within a mixed-use overlay zone

1.     The provisions in this chapter shall apply to all properties within their respective mixed-use overlay zones. The provisions only supersede the underlying base zone provisions when property is developed as mixed-use.

2.     New, non mixed-use projects may be developed in compliance with the existing underlying base zone.

3.     Regulations, development standards, and requirements in the underlying base zone shall continue to apply to those projects that are currently developed according to the existing standards.

4.     Legal nonconforming uses (i.e., uses that do not comply with the provisions of the base zone or this chapter), the provisions in Section 18.08.070 (Nonconforming buildings and uses) shall apply.

B.     Exceptions.

1.     Additions to, or remodeling of existing single-family dwellings located within an MX overlay zone are exempt from planning commission and city council review; however, all single-family dwellings shall comply with all the appropriate development standards for the zone in which they are located and shall be architecturally compatible with the existing structure.

2.     Façade changes or site plan alterations that do not involve any increase in usable floor area to existing commercial buildings in all zones, and existing residential structures in multiple family zones shall be exempt from the review requirements of this chapter, but shall be subject to design review as established in Chapter 18.68 of this title.    

3.     The Planning Division of Community Development may approve minor building permits for interior building changes, minor landscaping modifications, parking lot plans, minor repair to the exterior of the building, walls and fences, mechanical equipment and similar projects for all existing nonconforming uses.

C.     Applicable regulations after completion of development. Once a property is developed in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter completely supersede the provisions of the underlying base zone. Whenever the requirements of the overlay zone impose a more or less restrictive standard than the provisions of the base (underlying) zone, the requirements of the overlay zone shall govern. (Ord. 1805 § 3, 2019)

 

18.54.050 Uses expressly prohibited.
Uses prohibited in the primary zone, except for residential uses as noted in Section 18.54.020. (Ord. 1805 § 3, 2019)

 

18.54.060 Standards of development.
Generally, the standards for development in the underling zone shall apply, unless modified or superseded by Section 18.54.070, Special development standards, as part of an “MX precise plan” (Ord. 1805 § 3, 2019)

 

18.54.070 Special development standards.
In the MX overlay zone, the following special development standards shall apply to all mixed-use projects and any residential project in a commercial zone. All other uses shall comply with the standards of the base zone.

A.    Designated Standards. Modifications to the base standards required for the primary zone in which the property and the proposed use are located, as are clearly defined in the “MX precise plan”, as approved by the planning commission and city council.

Mixed-use. The regulations of this chapter are intended to permit a diversity of uses, relationships and heights of buildings and open spaces in planned building groups while ensuring substantial compliance with the spirit, intent and provisions of this code.

B.     Economic Potential. The planning commission and/or city council may impose such other development standards (i.e. economic studies, public space enhancements) as may reasonably enhance the benefit of any development to the city.

C.     Open Space/Common Area Amenities

1.     Non mixed-use projects shall comply with the open space requirements of the base zone.

2.     Community amenities both indoor and outdoor shall be provided for passive and active recreation. These amenities shall enhance the overall quality of development, and contribute to the character of the area. The size of the amenities shall be proportional to number of dwelling units provided.

3.     All mixed-use projects shall provide private open space area such as patios or balconies adjacent to at least fifty percent of the units. Roof top decks may also be used to meet this requirement.

D.    Parking. For non-mixed-use project, the provisions of Chapter 18.14, shall apply. For mixed-use project, the following provision shall apply.

1.     Guest parking and parking for non-residential uses shall be located or assigned in such a way as to distinguish it from residential parking assigned to individual units.

2.     For new mixed-uses development within the MX overlay zone, a parking reduction in the number of parking spaces required in Chapter 18.14, Off-Street Parking Requirements, of the zoning title of this code, may be permitted, by the planning commission and city council, based upon information contained in a parking demand study prepared by a California-licensed, independent traffic engineer, at the developer’s expense.

3.     Due to variations in parking demand and needs of mixed-use projects, vehicle parking requirements and the design of parking areas, may be modified as part of the site plan review process based upon information contained in a circulation study prepared by a California-licensed, independent traffic engineer, at the developer’s expense.

E.     Mixed-use residential Densities.

1.     A minimum of one acre is required for mixed-use projects that are one hundred percent residential. Maximum Density shall conform to line three of Table 18.54.070.E

2.     All mixed-use projects within the mixed-use overlay zone shall conform to Table 18.54.070.E

 

 

Table 18.54.070.E

Lot size ( in Square feet)

General Plan Designation

 

TRA

MUC 2

CDM 1

 

MUC 1

CDM 2

 

 

CMU1

CMU 2

 

 

 

CMU 3

 

1

Less than 10,000

2,850 per unit

1,450 per unit

1,200 per unit

2

10,001 -20,000

2,100 per unit

1,300 per unit

1,000 per unit

3

20,001 +

1,800 per unit

1,200 per unit

870 per unit

TRA = Transitional

 

 

 

MUC = Mixed-use Center

 

 

 

CUM = Corridor Mixed-use

 

 

 

CDM = Central District Mixed-use

 

 

 

 

F.     Site Planning Standards.

1.     Lot Layout and Design.

a.     Primary vehicle access shall be from a public street. Developments with more than fifty dwelling units shall provide a second primary access.

 

b.     Proposed building(s) shall relate appropriately to surrounding land uses and streets by creating a cohesive visual identity for attractive street scenes; by promoting efficient site layout in terms of vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns; by increasing the potential for greater privacy of both existing and proposed residents through careful siting of buildings window-to-window sight lines between adjacent buildings. Additionally buildings shall be designed around a common open space, public open space (e.g., a linear park/paseo), or community amenity such as swimming pools or other recreational facilities.

c.     Pedestrian connections shall include an on-site system of pedestrian walkways designed to provide convenient access and connections to and between the primary entrance or entrances to each building(s) and any sidewalks or walkways on adjacent commercial properties or along perimeter streets.

i.      On-site pedestrian walkways and sidewalks shall be minimum of four feet wide except walkways that are directly adjacent to a parking area where parked cars may overhang them. Such walkways shall be a minimum of six feet wide.

d.     Building height transition shall be provided between multi-story buildings to one-story and two-story buildings on adjacent sites. Consideration shall be given to the size, proportion, scale, and orientation of the buildings. The height transition applies to side-to-side situations but may also apply to rear-to-rear, front-to-front, or other situations.

G.    Architectural Guidelines and Standards. Architectural guidelines found in the mixed-use zone designation also apply to single lot development in the mixed-use zone designation.

1.     Massing and Form.

a.     Design shall incorporate visually heavier and more massive elements at the building base and lighter elements above. Any second story, or higher, shall not appear to be unbalanced or heavier or to have greater mass than the first or street level.

b.     Building masses shall be organized as simple and well-scaled volumes. Excessive roof breaks and overly complicated hipped or gabled roofs shall be avoided.

c.     The overall volumetric composition of new buildings, the choice of their architectural elements, and the relationship between these should determine their character and compatibility with the surrounding urban fabric.

d.     Building masses and building façades shall be designed with simple, harmonious proportions. Arbitrary proportions shall be avoided.

e.     New multi-family buildings shall be designed as simple assemblies of house-scale forms in a variety of unit combinations and massing compositions.

f.      Design shall incorporate building elements such as towers, bays, etc. that can make such buildings memorable places within the immediate neighborhood. Buildings shall be articulated by using bays, insets, balconies, porches, or stoops related to entrances and windows. The majority of a building’s architectural features and treatments such as bays, balconies, or accent materials shall not be restricted to building fronts. Rather, all sides of building shall display a similar level of quality and architectural interest.

2.     Materials and Variety. Subtle variations in color and materials shall be used. Materials shall include a mix of natural or synthetic stone or brick (solid or veneer), integrally colored, textured or glazed concrete masonry units, board and batten, lap siding, and/or stucco or other similar material. Vinyl or recycled wood and composite products may be used as an ancillary material for trim, deck railings and planks, and other accent features. Foam extrusions may be used for decorative building accents or details.

3.     Roofs. On buildings where sloping roofs are the predominant roof type, each building shall have a variety of roof forms. For instance, a gable or hip configuration shall be used with complementary sheds, dormers, and other minor elements. Roof forms shall be designed to correspond and denote building elements and functions such as entrances and arcades.

4.     Windows. Windows should be carefully selected, combined and arranged to establish clear and rhythmic patterns, particularly on the front façades of all buildings. Windows shall be located to maximize the possibility of occupant surveillance of the adjacent streets, parking areas, public parks, and common community areas or buildings.

5.     Site Lighting. Site lighting shall be at a pedestrian scale with light poles and lighting structures being no more than twenty feet in height. Site lighting shall be shielded downward and inward, and should not exceed 1.0 foot-candle beyond the property line. (Ord. 1805 § 3, 2019)

 

18.54.080 Pre-application coordination.
Before filing any application for a mixed-use development, the prospective applicant shall provide to the development review committee (DRC) preliminary plans, and sketches, along with basic site information for consideration and advice. Such plans shall be submitted to the planning division of community development for presentation to the (DRC). (Ord. 1805 § 3, 2019)

 

18.54.085 Application.
A.    Permit Required. Mixed-use developments shall require a mixed-use development permit for each such development. Such permit shall be subject to the regulations and requirements of this title and shall be processed in accordance with the terms of this chapter, including a public hearing before the planning commission and city council.

B.     Application for Permit.

1.     Fee. The fee for an MX overlay zone is the same the planned unit development fee as established pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18.70 shall accompany any application for mixed-use development permit under the provision of this chapter.

2.     Processing. Such application shall be processed by the planning division, which shall make a recommendation to the planning commission for denial, approval, or approval subject to conditions, and shall schedule a public hearing thereon as provided in Section 18.54.090. The application shall then be reviewed by the planning commission and forwarded to the city council with a recommendation for its approval or disapproval, identifying any conditions the planning commission finds appropriate to impose. The city council may approve, disapprove or refer the same back to the planning commission for further consideration. Any such permit is subject to the final approval of the city council.

3.     Application Contents. Every application for a mixed-use development shall be accompanied by the following, in the level of detail required in the city’s application form, available from the city’s planning division, of community development:

a.     A legal description or boundary survey map of the property. (A tentative subdivision map may be substituted for this requirement if the applicant proposes to subdivide the property.)

b.     A plot plan and description of the property involved showing the location of all existing and proposed buildings; plans and descriptions of the proposed use of the property with ground plans and elevations for all proposed buildings;

c.     A general development plan with at least the following details shown to scale and dimensioned:

i.      The proposed land ownerships, the uses, dimensions and locations of all proposed structures and of areas reserved for vehicular and pedestrian circulation, open spaces, landscaping, recreation or other public uses,

ii.     Architectural drawings and sketches showing the design and character of the proposed uses and their relation to one another. A sample material board is to be submitted detailing colors to be used along with samples of the building materials.

iii.    Location and design of automobile parking areas and signs (plans to be in color),

iv.    Type of surfacing proposed for walks and driveways,

v.     A preliminary water quality management plan shall be required to be submitted, which must show the proposed method for control and disposal of water flowing into, across or from the development,

vi.    Tables showing the total number of acres and their distribution by use, and the percentage of the whole designated for dwellings of different types, nonresidential uses, streets, off-street parking, public uses and open spaces,

vii.   Landscape design plans showing the types of planting materials to be used. A plant materials booklet is to be submitted providing photographs of all types of plant materials proposed to be used. The landscape design plan shall include a site elevation scheme accurately showing projected landscape heights at the time of development and a second design showing landscape heights five years after development,

viii.  A time schedule for the proposed development with evidence of the intent and the ability of the applicant to carry out the plan within such time,

ix.    Operational characteristics of proposed use(s), including days and hours of operation, number of employees, etc., if applicable,

x.     A scaled model showing the proposed project and the adjacent areas within five hundred feet of the site.

xi.    Such other pertinent information as staff may reasonably require at the time of submittal or that the planning commission may reasonably require at the time of its consideration of the development in order to complete its evaluation of the intent and impact of the proposal;

d.     A list containing the name and address of each property owner within three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the property involved, verified for accuracy by the person or entity preparing the list. For this purpose the last-known name and address of such owners as shown upon the last assessment roll of the city or county and a radius map depicting all such property owners.

C.     California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). The applicant shall complete and provide the environmental assessment form provided by the planning division. Once an application is submitted and deemed complete, by city staff, staff will notify the applicant of the determination of which environmental document, will be required to be prepared in connection with the proposed mixed-use development. All requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act, including time limits, notice requirements, and review and documentation requirements, shall be complied with by the applicant and staff prior to public hearing on the application. (Ord. 1805 § 3, 2019)

 

18.54.090 Public hearing.
A.    Following the receipt in proper form of any MX permit application, and upon determination by the planning division of a “complete application”, in accordance with the permit streamlining act and applicable California Environments Quality Act (CEQA) requirements a time and place shall be set for a public hearing thereon. Not less than ten days before the date of such public hearing, notice of the date, time, place of hearing and location of the property and the nature of the request shall be given in the following manner:

1.     By publishing once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.

2.     By mailing a notice, postage prepaid, to the applicant, to each member of the planning commission, and to the owners of all property within three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the property involved, using for this purpose the last-known name and address of such owners as shown upon the last assessment roll of the city or county.

B.     Public hearings as provided for in this chapter shall be held before the planning commission and/or the city council at the time and place for which public notice has been given as required in this section. A summary of all pertinent testimony offered at a public hearing, together with the names and addresses of all persons testifying shall be recorded and made a part of the permanent files of the case. Any such hearing may be continued; provided, that prior to the adjournment or recess thereof, the presiding officer at such hearing shall announce the time and place to which such hearing will be continued. (Ord. 1805 § 3, 2019)

 

18.54.095 Planning commission review.
A.    The commission shall not recommend approval of the proposal unless it finds that the Mixed-use development is or may be conditioned to be in full conformance to the general purposes of this chapter, and in particular unless it finds as follows:

1.     That the location, design and proposed uses are compatible with the character of existing with surrounding uses and development patterns;

2.     That the plan will produce, internally, an environment of stable and desirable character, and will not tend to cause any traffic congestion on surrounding or access streets;

3.     That there is on-site compatibility of residential and nonresidential uses;

4.     That the project combines residential with nonresidential uses in the same building or building site in a manner that creates an active street life, enhance the vitality of businesses, and reduces the need for automobile travel;

 

5.     That a meaningful blend of residential and nonresidential uses enhances and builds upon the city’s commercial base;

6.     That the project provides additional housing options for people, who want to live near their workplace and/or near retail and other nonresidential uses;

7.     That it consolidates small parcels into viable, block-size mixed-use development;

8.     That the proposed project complies with all requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act;

9.     That there is substantial compliance with the spirit and intent of this title;

B.     The planning commission shall make a recommendation of approval, approval with conditions, or denial of an application considered by it pursuant to this chapter along with any permits and/or applications considered in conjunction with such application, to the city council for its consideration.

C.     The decision rendered by the planning commission shall be transmitted to the applicant in writing and shall be forwarded to the city clerk for scheduling a public hearing. (Ord. 1805 § 3, 2019)

 

18.54.100 City council review.
A.    After receiving the planning commission’s recommendation on any application(s), the city council shall conduct a public hearing on such application(s), according to the provisions of this chapter. After such hearing, the city council shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny such application(s), taking into account everything submitted to and considered by the planning commission.

B.     The city council shall grant approval of a mixed-use development permit only if it makes all of the required findings considered by the planning commission pursuant to Section 18.54.095.

C.     The granting, either with or without conditions or the denial of such application by the city council shall be final.

D.    Any decision rendered by the city council shall be in writing and shall be transmitted (within forty-eight hours) upon issuance to the permit holder and the property owner. The city council shall issue a written decision within forty-five days after the hearing on such matter. Reference shall be made, in the notice of written decision to the applicant, to the fact judicial review of the decision is governed by the time limits set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. (Ord. 1805 § 3, 2019)

 

18.54.110 Conformance.
The approved mixed-use development project plan along shall be dated and signed by the director of community development or designee. One copy of the adopted ordinance, which includes all the project conditions and/or mitigation measures, shall be mailed to the applicant. No permits shall thereafter be issued for any building, structure or use except in substantial conformance with the approved plan. The director of community development may approve minor modifications provided; they are in keeping with the spirit and intent of the city council. (Ord. 1805 § 3, 2019)

 

18.54.120 Violation.
A.    In the event that the property owner/business operator violates or fails to comply with any of the conditions of approval of this permit, the city may take measures to cure such violations, including but not limited to, administrative citation and full reimbursement of the city for its costs and expenses, includ-

ing, but not limited to, attorney’s fees, in undertaking such corrective action. Reimbursement of enforcement costs shall constitute a civil debt and may be collected by any means permitted by law. In the event that violations of this permit occur, the city shall refrain from issuing further permits, licenses or other approvals until such violations have been fully remedied.

B.     Further, the planning commission or city council may hold a public hearing, and if satisfied that any provision of the mixed-use development ordinance, applicable regulation, development standard, general provision or condition is not being complied with, or if the planning commission or city council finds that a change in conditions on the property or as a result of the use of the property has occurred which makes the continuation of the permit incompatible with the general welfare of the surrounding neighborhood, may do one or more of the following:

1.     Impose additional conditions on the mixed-use development permit;

2.     Revoke any applicable conditional use permits associated with the property;

3.     Revoke and/or preclude the issuance of business licenses associated with the property;

4.     Revoke and/or preclude the issuance of building or demolition permits;

5.     Revoke, preclude, suspend or otherwise render void any other entitlements to use and/or develop the property as is reasonable under the circumstances and serves to ensure future compliance with this chapter and title or the mixed-use development permit, plan or ordinance. (Ord. 1805 § 3, 2019)

 

18.54.130 Expiration.
If construction of an approved MX precise plan has not commenced within two years from the final adoption of the project by the city council, said plan shall expire and become null and void. However, a one year time extension may be approved by the director of community and economic development upon the submission of substantial evidence to support the extension. (Ord. 1805 § 3, 2019)

 

Chapter 18.56 ADULT USES
18.56.010 Definitions.
In addition to the definitions contained in this code, the following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this chapter, be defined as follows, unless it is clearly apparent from the context that another meaning is intended. Should any of the definitions be in conflict with the current provisions of this code, these definitions shall prevail:

“Adult arcade” means any place to which the public is permitted or invited and where coin or slug operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled amusement devices, still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images on a regular or substantial base, where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”

“Adult bookstore” means an establishment having as a regular and substantial portion of its stock in trade, material which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”

“Adult booth/individual viewing area” means a partitioned or partially enclosed portion of an adult business used for any of the following purposes:

1.     Where a live or taped performance is presented or viewed, where the performances and/or images displayed or presented are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”;

2.     Where a live or taped performance by an adult cabaret dancer is presented or viewed;

3.     Where adult arcade devices are located.

“Adult business” means any business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct performs as an adult bookstore, adult theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult cabaret, adult model studio, adult motel or hotel, or sells or distributes adult merchandise or sexually oriented merchandise, or any other business or concern which offers to its patrons products, merchandise, services

        or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical parts,” but not including those uses or activities which are preempted by state law.

“Adult cabaret” means a nightclub, bar or other establishment (whether or not serving alcoholic beverages) which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, or similar entertainers, and where such performances are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”

“Adult cabaret dancer” means any person who is an employee or independent contractor of an “adult cabaret” or “adult business” and who, with or without any compensation or other form of consideration, performs as a sexually-oriented dancer, exotic dancer, stripper, go-go dancer or similar dancer whose performance on a regular and substantial basis focuses on or emphasizes the adult cabaret dancer’s breasts, genitals, and/or buttocks, but does not involve exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or depicting or engaging in “specified sexual activities.” Adult cabaret dancer does not include such a patron.

“Adult dance studio” means any establishment or business which provides for members of the public a partner for dance where the partner, or the dance, is distinguished or characterized by the emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”

“Adult hotel/motel” means a hotel or motel, as defined in this code, which is used for presenting on a regular and substantial basis material which is distinguished or characterized by the emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” through closed circuit or cable television or through video tape recorder where video tapes are provided by the hotel/motel.

“Adult live entertainment” means any physical human body activity, whether performed or engaged in, alone or with other persons, including but not limited to singing, walking, speaking, dancing, acting, posing, simulating, wrestling or pantomiming, in which the performer or performers expose to public view, without opaque covering, “specified anatomical areas,” or depicting, describing, or relating to “specified sexual activities” whether or not the specified anatomical areas are covered.

“Adult oriented merchandise” means sexually oriented implements or paraphernalia, such as, but not limited to: dildos, auto sucks, sexually-oriented vibrators, Ben Wa balls, inflatable orifices, anatomical balloons with orifices, simulated and battery operated vaginas, and similar sexually-oriented devices which are designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sado-masochistic activity.

“Adult theater” means a theater or other commercial establishment with or without a stage or proscenium which is used for presenting, on a regular and substantial basis, material which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”

“Figure modeling studio” means any establishment or business which provides for members of the public, the services of a live human model for the purpose of reproducing the human body, wholly or partially in the nude, by means of photograph, painting, sketching, drawing or other pictorial form.

 

“Material” relative to adult businesses means and includes, but is not limited to, accessories, books, magazines, photographs, prints, drawings, paintings, motion pictures, and pamphlets, or any combination thereof.

“Performer” means any person who is an employee or independent contractor of an adult business, and who, with or without any compensation or other form of consideration, performs adult live entertainment for patrons of an adult business. Performer does not include a patron.

“Residential zone” means any property within the city which carries a zoning designation permitting the location of a residence, including R-1-A, R-1-B, R-1-C, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, R-7, MHP (mobile home park), and in the specific plan for La Habra Boulevard the designations of low density residential, medium density residential, high density and transitional residential/commercial. However, this does not include zones where a residence is permitted pursuant to a conditional use permit or other special permit. Residential shall also include any mixed uses designation or zone that is developed with residential units.

“Special needs housing” means congregate housing, domestic violence shelters, homeless shelters, senior hotels, single room occupancy housing and transitional housing facilities as defined in Chapter 18.30 of this code.

“Specified anatomical areas” means:

1.     Less than completely and opaquely covered:

a.     Human genitals, pubic region;

b.     Buttock; or

c.     Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or

2.     Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

“Specified sexual activities” means:

1.     Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; and/or

2.     Acts of human masturbation, sexual stimulation or arousal; and/or

3.     Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; and/or

4.     Masochism, erotic or sexually-oriented torture, beating, or the infliction of pain; and/or

5.     Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation; and/or

6.     Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast. (Ord. 1803 § 3, 2019; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.56.020 Locational limitations.
A.    Subject to the limitations of this chapter, adult businesses may be located in the C-2 commercial zone; C-2S community shopping center zone; C-3 general commercial zone; PCI planned commercial-industrial zone; and M-1 manufacturing zone.

B.     In those land-use districts where the adult businesses regulated by this chapter would otherwise be permitted uses, it is unlawful to establish any such adult business if the location is:

1.     Within a two hundred seventy-five-foot radius of any residential zone. The distance between a proposed use and a residential zone shall be measured from property line to property line;

 

 

2.     Within one hundred fifty feet of any other adult use regulated under this chapter. The distance between two adult uses shall be measured along the most direct route available for use by the public between the property line housing an adult facility and the closest point of the property line of any other regulated adult use under this chapter;

3.     Within two hundred fifty feet of any source-sensitive uses including schools, churches, parks, day care facilities, special needs housing facilities. The distance between the proposed use and a source-sensitive use shall be measured from property line to property line from the proposed adult-use site to the source-sensitive site, along a straight line extended between the two points.

C.     The establishment of any adult business shall include the opening of such a business as a new business, the relocation of the business, or the conversion of an existing business location to any adult business use. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.56.030 Regulation of adult booth/individual viewing area.
A.    No adult booth/individual viewing area shall be occupied by more than one individual at a time. This restriction shall not apply to an adult booth/individual viewing area where the performer or adult cabaret dancer is completely separated from the area in which the performer or adult cabaret dancer is viewed by an individual by a permanent, floor to ceiling, solid barrier. However, in the scenario where a permanent, floor to ceiling, solid barrier is in place, no performers or adult cabaret dancers shall be allowed to perform inside the portion of the adult booth/individual viewing area where the patron is located, nor can the area be occupied by more than one patron.

B.     Each adult booth/individual viewing area within the adult business shall be visible from the manager’s station(s) in a public portion of the establishment, and shall not be obscured by any door, curtain, wall, two-way mirror or other device which would prohibit a person from seeing the interior of the adult booth/individual viewing area from a manager’s station or stations located in the public portion of the establishment. A manager shall be stationed in each of the manager’s station or stations at all times the business is in operation or open to the public.

C.     No doors are permitted on an adult booth/individual viewing area.

D.    No holes or other openings shall be permitted between adult booths/individual viewing areas. Any such hole or opening shall be repaired within twenty-four hours using “pop” rivets to secure metal plates over the hole or opening to prevent patrons from removing the metal plates.

E.     No beds shall be permitted in an adult booth/individual viewing area. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.56.050 Access provision.
A.    The operator shall not permit any doors on the premises to be locked during business hours and, in addition, the operator shall be responsible to see that any room or area on the premises shall be readily accessible at all times and shall be open to view in its entirety for inspection by any law enforcement officer.

B.     Access to X-rated movies or video tapes shall be restricted to persons over eighteen years of age. If an establishment that is not otherwise prohibited from providing access to persons under eighteen years of age sells, rents, or displays videos that have been rated “X” or rated “NC-17” by the motion picture rating industry (MPAA), or which have not been submitted to the MPAA for a rating, and which consist of images which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas,” said videos shall be located in a specific section of the establishment where persons under the age of eighteen shall be prohibited. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.56.060 Business license.
A person shall not own, operate, manage, conduct or maintain an adult business without first having obtained a business license from the business license clerk. The issuance or denial of the business license shall be made within fifteen days of the applicant’s submitted application. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.56.070 On-site manager—Security measures.
A.    All adult businesses shall have a responsible person who shall be at least eighteen years of age and shall be on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. The individual designated as the on-site manager shall be registered with the city’s planning director by the owner to receive all complaints and be responsible for all violations taking place on the premises.

B.     The adult business shall provide a security system that visually records and monitors all parking lot areas, or in the alternative, security guards to patrol and monitor the parking lot areas. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.56.080 Hours of operation.
A.    It is unlawful for any operator of an adult business to allow such adult business to remain open for business, or to permit any performer or adult cabaret dancer to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service, between the hours of two a.m. and ten a.m. of any particular day.

B.     It is unlawful for any performer or adult cabaret dancer of an adult business to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service, between the hours of two a.m. and ten a.m. of any particular day.

C.     The hours of operation of any adult business which has a permit from the state ABC shall be governed by the provisions of its ABC permit and not by this section. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.56.085 Regulation of public restroom facilities.
If the adult use business provides restrooms for patron use, it shall provide separate restroom facilities for male and female patrons. The restrooms shall be free from sexually oriented materials and sexually oriented merchandise. Only one person shall be allowed in each restroom at any time, unless otherwise required by law, in which case the sexually oriented business shall employ a restroom attendant of the same sex as the restroom users who shall be present in the public portion of the restroom during operating hours. The attendant shall insure that no person of the opposite sex is permitted into the restroom, and that not more than one person is permitted to enter a restroom stall, unless otherwise required by law, and, with the exception of urination, that no persons engage in any specified sexual activity in the public portion of the restroom. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

18.56.090 Adult business offering adult live entertainment—Operating requirements.
No person, association, partnership or corporation shall engage in, conduct or carry on, or permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on the operation of an adult business which offers adult live entertainment unless each and all of the following requirements are met:

A.    It is unlawful for any employee, owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager or permittee of an adult business which offers adult live entertainment to allow any person below the age of eighteen years upon the premises or within the confines of any adult business which offers adult live entertainment if no liquor is served, or under the age of twenty-one if liquor is served.

B.     Intentionally omitted.

C.     Intentionally omitted.

D.    All employees of adult businesses which offer adult live entertainment, other than performers while performing on the permanently fixed stage, shall, at a minimum while on or about the licensed premises, wear an opaque covering which covers their specified anatomical areas.

E.     All adult live entertainment shall occur on a permanently fixed stage which is at least eighteen inches above the level of the floor, and surrounded with a three-foot-high barrier or by a fixed rail at least thirty inches in height. A distance of at least four feet, measured horizontally, shall be maintained between patrons and on stage performers at all times during which said performer(s) are revealing specified anatomical areas and/or depicting or engaging in specified sexual activities. No on stage performer or on stage adult cabaret dancer shall have physical contact with any patron, and no patron shall have physical contact with any on stage performer or on stage adult cabaret dancer.

F.     As to off-stage performances, no performer shall perform adult live entertainment characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or engaging in specified sexual activities off stage. As to an adult cabaret dancer then performing off stage, a distance of at least two feet shall be maintained between the adult cabaret dancer and patron(s) at all times. As to off stage performances, no adult cabaret dancer shall have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical contact with any adult cabaret dancer while the adult cabaret dancer is performing on the premises. This prohibition does not extend to incidental touching.

G.    In addition, while on the premises, no performer or adult cabaret dancer shall have physical contact with a patron and no patron shall have physical contact with a performer or adult cabaret dancer, which physical contact involves the touching of the clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, cleft of the buttocks, perineum, anal region, or female breast with any part or area of any other person’s body either before or after any live entertainment by such performer or adult cabaret dancer. Patrons shall be advised of the no-touching requirements by signs and, if necessary, by employees, performers or adult cabaret dancers of the establishment.

H.    If patrons wish to pay or tip performers or adult cabaret dancers, payment or tips may be placed in receptacles. Patrons shall not throw monies to performers or adult cabaret dancers, hand monies directly to performers or adult cabaret dancers, place monies in the performers’ or adult cabaret dancers’ costumes or otherwise throw monies on the stage. Patrons shall be advised of these tipping and gratuity requirements by signs conspicuously placed on the premises. If necessary, patrons shall also be advised of the tipping and gratuity requirements by employees or independent contractors of the adult business.

I.      The adult use business shall provide an entrance/exit to the premises for entertainers, which is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.56.100 Lighting requirements.
All areas of the adult business shall be illuminated at a minimum of 1.25 foot-candle, minimally maintained and evenly distributed at ground level. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.56.110 Permit—Requirements.
A.    No adult business may be established within the city by right. All persons wishing to establish an adult business within the city must apply for and receive a conditional adult use permit under this chapter.

B.     It is the burden of the applicant to supply evidence to justify the grant of a conditional adult use permit.

C.     Any person desiring to operate an adult business within the city shall file with the planning department a conditional adult use permit application on a standard application form supplied by the planning department. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.56.120 Permit—Contents of application.
A.    The application must be signed by the owner or lessee. If the application is signed by anyone other than the owner, a notarized statement signed by the owner shall accompany the application. Proof of status is required.

B.     Alternatively, the application is acceptable if signed by the applicant and co-signed by the property owner or tenant. Proof of status is required.

C.     The application shall include the applicant’s mailing address, and name and phone number of the person who is responsible for providing access to the proposed use for inspection purposes.

D.    The application shall list the legal form of the applicant; e.g., individual, partnership, corporation:

1.     If the applicant is an individual, the application shall list his or her legal name, any aliases and date of birth;

2.     If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall list the full and complete name of the partnership, the legal names of all partners, dates of birth, and all aliases used by all of the partners, whether the partnership is general or limited; and

3.     If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall list the full and complete corporate name, the date and status of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing, the legal names and dates of birth, and all aliases used, the capacity of all officers, directors and principal stockholders (i.e., all stockholders with ten percent or more of all outstanding shares), and the name and address of the registered officer for service of process.

E.     The application must list whether, preceding the date of application, the applicant or any of the individuals listed pursuant to subsection D of this section, has:

1.     Had a previous permit under this chapter revoked, as well as the date of such revocation;

2.     Whether the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation whose permit under this chapter has been revoked, as well as the date of the revocation;

3.     Whether the applicant, if an individual, or any of the officers or general partners, if a corporation or partnership, have been found guilty or pleaded nolo contendere within the past four years of a misdemeanor or a felony classified by the state as a sex or sex-related offense.

 

F.     The application must include the address of the proposed site, including the assessor’s parcel number and the complete legal description of the property.

G.    The application must include a detailed description of the proposed use, including reference to definitions in this chapter.

H.    The application must include fourteen blue line prints of a plot plan indicating all structures, existing or proposed, parking areas, landscaping, walls, driveways and curb-cuts, signs, easements, topographical features, and any other pertinent items necessary to make a determination.

I.      The application must include fourteen blue line prints showing all four elevations of any proposed structures and listing proposed exterior building materials. One set of elevation prints shall be colored or a materials board shall be submitted. In the case of existing buildings where a change of use is proposed and no structural changes are proposed, photographs may be accepted in lieu of elevation drawings if they show a front and rear elevation of the structure.

J.      All applicants for a conditional adult use permit must also fill out the city’s environmental package for purposes of complying with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

Chapter 18.58 HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITY
18.58.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this section is to establish uniform standards, land use regulations and a permit process for controlling the location, design, maintenance and safety of off-site hazardous waste facilities and to implement general plan policies regarding hazardous waste management facilities pursuant to State Assembly Bill 2948—Tanner, 1986 and Senate Bill 477—Greene, 1987 (Section 6.5 of the California Health and Safety Code) and Program A-3 in the Orange County Hazardous Waste Management Plan. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.58.020 Applicability.
A.    The specific requirements of this chapter are applicable to the siting and development of off-site hazardous waste treatment, storage, transfer and disposal facilities as defined in Section 18.58.120.

B.     The offsite facilities definition does not apply to:

1.     Transportable treatment units (TTU), which are designed to be moved either intact or in modules and which are intended to be operated at a given location for a limited period of time; or

2.     Permanent on-site hazardous waste facilities at locations where hazardous waste is produced, and which are owned by, leased to, or under the control of the producer of the waste. All such facilities shall require state licensing to install and operate. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.58.030 Procedure.
The following procedures are for the purpose of identifying the steps for processing an application for a specified off-site hazardous waste facility. These procedures include the steps to be taken by the applicant, the state and the city.

A.    At least ninety days before filing an application with the city for a land use decision for a specified hazardous waste facility project, the applicant shall file with the Office of Permit Assistance (OPA) in the State’s Office of Planning and Research, and with the city, a notice of intent to make an applica-

        tion. The notice of intent shall contain a complete description of the nature, function and scope of the project. The OPA shall immediately notify the affected state agencies of the notice of intent. The city shall publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the area affected by the proposed project, shall post notices in the location where the project is proposed, and shall notify, by a direct mailing, the owners of property within three hundred feet of the proposed site, as shown in the latest equalized assessment roll. The city shall impose a fee upon a project applicant equal to the cost of notification required by this section.

B.     Within ninety days after a notice of intent is filed with the OPA, the OPA shall convene a public meeting within the city to inform the public on the nature, function and scope of the proposed facility project and the procedures that are required for approving applications for the project. The city should contact OPA regarding the location and time of the meeting and should have representatives attend.

C.     Within ninety days after receiving a notification of the filing of a notice of intent, the city shall appoint a seven-member local assessment committee (LAC) pursuant to the provisions of Section 18.58.060 of this chapter.

D.    The city shall notify the OPA within ten days after an application for a land use decision for a specified hazardous waste facility project is accepted as complete by the city and within sixty days after receiving this notice, the OPA shall convene a meeting of the lead and responsible agencies for the project, the applicant, the LAC and the interested public, for the purpose of determining the issues which concern the agencies that are required to approve the project and the issues which concern the public. The meeting shall take place within the city limits.

E.     Following the meeting as specified in subsection D of this section, the applicant and the LAC of the city shall meet and confer on the specified hazardous waste facility project proposal for the purpose of establishing the terms and conditions under which the project will be acceptable to the community.

F.     At the request of the applicant, the city shall, within sixty calendar days after the city has determined that an application for a land use decision for a hazardous waste facility is complete, issue an initial written determination on whether the hazardous waste facility project is consistent with both the city general plan and zoning ordinances in effect at the time the application was received, and the Orange County Hazardous Waste Management Plan.

G.    The applicant for a specified hazardous waste facility project shall pay a fee, established by the OPA, equal to the cost of hiring independent consultants to review the project. The OPA shall deposit these fees in the local agency technical assistance account, created within the State General Fund. The moneys in that account may be expended by the OPA, upon appreciation by the Legislature, to make technical assistance grants to the LAC to enable the LAC to hire an independent consultant to assist the LAC in reviewing the project and negotiation terms and conditions with the applicant. The city may request technical assistance from any state agency which authorizes permits for hazardous waste facilities projects.

H.    An applicant may file an appeal of a land use decision made by the city for a specified hazardous waste facility project with the Governor or the Governor’s designee. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.58.040 Application requirements.
The following information is required for submittal of a hazardous waste facility siting permit application:

A.    A completed application form;

 

B.     A completed environmental application form;

C.     Property owner verification/permission for request;

D.    A deposit/fee as established by the city council;

E.     A plot and development plan drawn in sufficient detail to clearly describe the following:

1.     Physical dimensions of property and structures,

2.     Location of existing and proposed structures,

3.     Setbacks,

4.     Methods of circulation,

5.     Ingress and egress,

6.     Utilization of property under the requested permit,

7.     The distance from the project property lines to the nearest residential structure,

8.     Proximity of the project to one hundred-year floodplain areas,

9.     Proximity of the project to any known earthquake fault zones,

10.   The relationship of the proposed project to all above-ground water supplies as well as known underground aquifers that could conceivably suffer contamination,

11.   Topographic description of the property and surrounding area,

12.   Existing and proposed utilities which service or will be needed to service the facility,

13.   Identification of surrounding zoning and land uses; and

14.   Other information as required by the director of planning;

F.     A preliminary geological study of the property and surrounding area which comprehends as deep a soils analysis as there are known aquifers, regardless of the potability of those aquifers;

G.    Identification of all wastewater, treated and untreated, generated by the proposed facility and the method and place of final discharge;

H.    Identification of the amounts (tonnage) and types of hazardous wastes to be treated at the proposed facility; the sources of these wastes; the ultimate disposition of the wastes; and the anticipated life of the facility. Information shall be provided on the amounts, sources and types of hazardous wastes to be treated based on an actual survey of the industries to be served and, thereby, be representative of the wastes that will be processed at the facility;

I.      A plan that clearly delineates all public involvement with the proposed project prior to any formally advertised and scheduled public hearings. The plan will provide for adequate public testimony on the project in an effort to mitigate all public concerns prior to the public hearing;

J.      A plan that identifies an ongoing monitoring program to ensure no unintentional release of any hazardous substance from the site. This shall include any ongoing monitoring necessary by other permitting agencies such as the Southern California Air Quality Management District, Environmental Protection Agency, Air Resources Board, Regional Water Quality Control Board, etc.;

K.    A preliminary contingency plan for emergency procedures designed to minimize hazards to human health or the environment from fires, explosions or any unplanned sudden or non-sudden release of hazardous waste or hazardous waste constituents to air, soil or surface water. The plan shall provide for

        its immediate implementation whenever there is a fire, explosion or release of hazardous waste or hazardous waste constituents which could threaten human health or the environment. The preliminary contingency plan shall address the requirements included in Section 18.58.110(D); and

L.     Other information as required by the director of planning to demonstrate compliance with the facility siting criteria as outlined in Section 18.58.100. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.58.050 Environmental review.
A.    The project shall be subject to environmental analysis according to city established procedures pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act.

B.     The environmental analysis shall address but not be limited to the following:

1.     Describe at least two reasonable alternatives to the project which shall be reviewed pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act;

2.     An analysis of visual, noise and any olfactory impacts associated with the project and recommended mitigation measures;

3.     An analysis of all anticipated air quality impacts associated with the project and proposed mitigation to ensure no degradation of air quality in the area;

4.     A health and safety assessment that analyzes in detail all probabilities of accidents or spills at the site, as well as, transportation-related accidents from the point of origin to the facility. Such analysis shall identify mitigation measures to reduce identified risks. The health and safety assessment shall identify the most probable routes for transporting hazardous wastes to the facility within Orange County;

5.     An analysis of traffic impacts associated with the project and recommended mitigated measures;

6.     An analysis of all anticipated water quality impacts associated with the project and proposed mitigation to ensure no degradation of water quality in the area;

7.     Other information as required by the California Environmental Quality Act. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.58.060 Local assessment committee.
Pursuant to Section 18.58.030(C) of this chapter, the city shall appoint a seven-member local assessment committee (LAC).

A.    The membership of the LAC shall:

1.     Be broadly constituted to reflect the makeup of the community and shall include three representatives of the community at large, two representatives of environmental or public interest groups, and two representatives of affected businesses and industries. Members of the LAC shall have no direct financial interest, as defined in Section 87103 of the California Government Code, in the proposed specified hazardous waste facility project;

2.     Negotiate with the applicant for the proposed hazardous waste facility project on the detailed terms of, provisions of, and conditions for project approval which would protect the public health, safety and welfare, and the environment of the city and its surroundings and would promote the fiscal welfare of the city through special benefits and compensation;

3.     Represent generally, in negotiation with the applicant, the interests of the residents in the city and the interests of adjacent communities;

4.     Receive and expend the technical assistance grants made available as specified in Section 18.58.030(G) of this chapter;

5.     Adopt rules and procedures which are necessary to perform its duties as outlined in this section;

6.     Advise the city of the terms, provisions and conditions for project approval which have been agreed upon by the LAC and the applicant and of any additional information which the LAC deems appropriate. The planning commission and city council may use this advice for its independent consideration of the project;

7.     Cease to exist after final administrative action has been taken by the state and local agencies on the permit applications for the project for which the LAC was formed.

B.     The city shall provide staff resources to assist the LAC in performing its duties.

C.     If the LAC and the applicant cannot resolve any differences through the meetings specified in subsection E of Section 18.58.030, the OPA may recommend the use of a mediator. The applicant shall pay one-half of the costs for this mediation and the maintaining costs shall be paid, upon appropriation by the Legislature, from the State General Fund. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.58.070 Public hearings.
A.    Notice of Public Hearing.

1.     Notice of a public hearing shall be given not less than ten days prior to the date of the hearing.

2.     Notices shall contain information on the project, including a brief description of the proposal, the environmental review status, and the hearing date, time and location.

3.     Notices shall be mailed out to all names on the list required by subsection (A)(1) of this section.

4.     Notices shall be displayed on the property and at public posting sites designated by the city council and/or published in a newspaper of general circulation.

B.     Public Hearings.

1.     The planning director shall set the time and place of public hearings required to be held by the planning commission.

2.     The planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing and shall approve, deny or conditionally approve the request by resolution based on the findings in Section 18.58.080.

C.     Time Limits. A hazardous waste facility permit shall become valid ten days after the date of the decision unless appealed. If appealed and then approved by the city council, it shall become valid on the date of city council approval. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.58.080 Findings.
At a minimum, the following findings shall be made in writing by the planning commission prior to granting a hazardous waste facility permit:

A.    The project will be consistent with the general plan.

B.     The project will not be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of the community.

C.     The project site is or will be adequately served by roads and other public or private service facilities.

D.    The project will be consistent with the regional fair share facility needs assessment and siting policies established in the hazardous waste management plan.

E.     The project will comply with the facility siting criteria set out in Section 18.58.100. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.58.090 Appeals.
A.    Any decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council within ten working days of the date of the decision as follows:

1.     Hazardous Waste Facility Siting Permits. An appeal of the planning commission decision may be filed by the applicant or any interested person as defined in Section 18.58.120.

2.     Appeals shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be accompanied by a letter stating the reasons for the appeal. The city clerk shall schedule the appeal for a hearing within ten working days of receipt of the appeal.

3.     An appeal shall be accompanied by a fee as established in Chapter 18.70 of this title.

4.     The city council shall hold at least one public hearing on any appeal in accordance with Section 18.58.070(C).

5.     The city council may affirm or modify the decision of the planning commission. The decision of the city council shall be final unless appealed pursuant to subsection B of this section.

B.     An applicant or an interested person may file an appeal of a land use decision made by the city council to the Governors Appeals Board within thirty days after the date the local agency takes final action on the land use decision pursuant to the California Health and Safety Code Section 25199.9. Procedures for filing an appeal are outlined in Sections 25199.9 through 25199.14 of the California Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.58.100 Facility siting criteria and permitting requirements.
A.    Health and Safety Assessment.

1.     All Facilities. Facilities shall be sited so as not to create significant risks or cause adverse impacts to the health and safety of populations in surrounding public and private areas, as determined by a health and safety assessment.

a.     Assessment. A health and safety assessment by a qualified preparer is required for a proposed facility prior to approval of a local permit, to provide technical and environmental evaluation of the proposed facility, site, and surrounding area. A health and safety assessment will provide the information and analysis needed to demonstrate compliance of the proposed facility with the siting criteria.

The scope of the assessment property will vary according to the size, type and proposed location of the facility. It is not intended that the health and safety assessment duplicate information developed for environmental impact reports or risk assessments required under local, state or federal regulations. When environmental impact reports and health risk assessments are required, their scopes should provide the information and analysis required, and thereby suffice for the health and safety assessment.

 

b.     The health and safety assessment shall evaluate, at minimum the area within two thousand feet of the site, which is designated a sensitive area, and shall evaluate the potential impact on sensitive populations. Sensitive populations include residential populations, employment populations and immobile populations such as those in schools, hospitals, convalescent homes, jails and other similar facilities within the area of potential impact. The health and safety assessment must consider the quantities and the physical and chemical characteristics of the specific types of waste that would be handled, the facility design features and planned operational practices. The need and distance for any buffering of the facility from residential areas or other sensitive land uses will be identified. The assessment must include a hydrologic evaluation, and must assess risks due to physical hazards such as flooding and earthquakes and potential water or air pollution. The assessment will detail credible potential accidents, including the distance over which effects would carry, a variety of options for reducing risks, and procedures for dealing with the effects. The assessment will identify the capabilities (including equipment and trained personnel) and response times of existing emergency services with regard to accidents at the facility, and will provide an emergency evacuation plan. If existing emergency services are deemed inadequate, the local agency may require the developer to supplement those services with on site trained personnel and equipment.

c.     Avoidance or mitigation of potential significant health or safety risks must be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the local permitting agency and the California Department of Health Services.

B.     Distance from Populations.

1.     Treatment, Recycling and Collection Facilities. Facilities shall comply with local minimum zoning code setbacks, unless a greater buffer distance from other uses is deemed necessary, based on a required health and safety assessment.

2.     Residuals Repositories. A minimum buffer distance of two thousand feet from residences and other sensitive land uses is required for a hazardous waste residuals repository per Health and Safety Code Section 25202.5(b) and (d). The size of the buffer zone necessary to protect public health and safety will be identified based on a required health and safety assessment.

C.     Floodplains.

1.     All Facilities. Facilities must be designed, constructed, operated and maintained to preclude failure due to flooding, per flood control authorities and requirements. Provisions must be made to contain and test storm runoff prior to discharge in areas subject to contamination by waste or treated material. The required health and safety assessment will address flooding risks associated with the facility.

2.     Treatment, Recycling and Collection Facilities. Facilities may be located in areas subject to one hundred-year flooding only if protected by offsetting engineered improvements, such as berms or raising the facility above flood levels. This includes areas subject to flooding by dam or levee failure and natural causes such as river flooding, flash floods, rainfall or snowmelt, tsunamis (tidal waves), seiches (earthquake-induced waves in lakes) and coastal flooding. A structural analysis or engineering design study must be provided which shows methods to prevent inundation or washout.

3.     Residuals Repositories. Repositories are prohibited from locating in floodplain areas subject to one hundred-year flooding from natural causes or dam failure, even with protection, per Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Title 40, Section 264.18 (b), and California Code of Regulations (CCR), Title 22, Section 6639(a)(11)(b).

D.    Earthquakes—All Facilities. Facilities must have a minimum two-hundred-foot setback from active or recently active earthquake faults, per the California Code of Regulations (CCR), Title 22, Section 6391(a)(11)A(1) and (2). The required health and safety assessment will address earthquake safety of the facility.

E.     Unstable Soils.

1.     Treatment, Recycling and Collection Facilities. Facilities are prohibited from locating in areas of potential rapid geologic change, unless the facility and its containment structures have engineering design features to assure structural stability. This includes areas with unstable soils, steep slopes, and areas subject to liquefaction, subsidence or other severe geologic constraints. The required health and safety assessment will include a geologic report defining any such constraints and engineered solutions.

2.     Residuals Repositories. Repositories are prohibited from locating in areas of potential rapid geologic change, subsidence, or liquefaction per California Code of Regulations, Title 23, Subchapter 15, Section 2531(e). The required health and safety assessment will include a geologic report.

F.     Containment and Groundwater Monitoring.

1.     All Facilities. Facilities shall be fully enclosed by containment structures of impermeable materials which would contain any unauthorized release of hazardous material.

2.     Facilities shall be equipped with leak detection and spill control and recovery capability. Groundwater monitoring wells must be located around each facility to determine background vadose zone and groundwater quality, and to detect leaks and spills from the facility, unless demonstrated to be safe without them through the health and safety assessment. An ongoing groundwater monitoring program should be developed in consultation with local, state and water district representatives.

G.    Water Quality.

1.     All Facilities. Facilities shall not be sited within watershed areas tributary to open reservoirs or aqueducts that contain drinking water supplies. Facilities shall locate such that domestic water supply wells cannot be adversely affected from unauthorized releases of contaminants. As a guideline, facilities should locate at least one mile from domestic supply wells in the Forebay area (principal recharge area to the Orange County groundwater basin), and at least one-half mile from domestic supply wells in the pressure area of the Orange County groundwater basin, unless demonstrated to be safe at closer proximity through the health and safety assessment. Facilities shall not locate within wellhead protection zones as identified by EPA guidelines or municipal water supply agencies and local water districts, unless demonstrated to be safe at closer proximity through the health and safety assessment. Facilities shall not impact the quality of surface waters (lakes, rivers, streams, creeks, etc.) or groundwater resources which have been identified for beneficial uses by the regional water quality control board basin plan (per State Water Resources Control Board Policy Resolution 88-63). The required health and safety assessment will identify water quality issues. Facilities must meet federal, state and local water quality requirements.

2.     Treatment, Recycling and Collection Facilities. Facilities are encouraged to locate outside of structured recharge areas to regional aquifers as defined in local or state plans, including the Forebay area. Facilities may locate in the following only with increased engineered design features such as horizontal and vertical containment and monitoring systems to ensure protection: (a) major aquifer recharge areas, (b) areas of permeable strata and soils, and (c) areas where the existing groundwater has beneficial uses as described in the basin plan. Facilities with subsurface storage or treatment must be sited, designed and operated to ensure that hazardous materials will be above the tension-saturated zone.

3.     Residuals Repositories. Repositories are prohibited from locating in principal recharge areas to regional aquifers as defined in local or state plans, including the Forebay area. Repositories are prohibited in areas of high permeability (such as sand and gravel) per the requirements of the State Water Quality Control Board and California Code of Regulations, Title 23, Subchapter 15, Section 253(b). Repositories may locate only where the uppermost water-bearing zone or aquifer is presently mineralized (by natural or man-induced conditions) to the extent that it is not considered for beneficial use by the basin plan. Repositories must be sited, designed and operated to ensure that hazardous materials will always be above the tension-saturated zone.

H.    Wastewater—All Facilities. Facilities generating wastewater should locate in areas with adequate industrial sewer capacity. The quality of wastewater must meet all federal, state and local sewering agency discharge requirements and the facility must obtain a valid industrial wastewater discharge permit.

I.      Air Quality Nonattainment and PSD Areas—All Facilities. Facilities are prohibited in Class I areas as identified in the Clean Air Act, and within wilderness, national parks, memorial areas and similarly dedicated areas. Facilities may be sited in other nonattainment and PSD (prevention of significant deterioration) areas only if they meet the requirements of the South Coast Air Quality Management District. The required health and safety assessment will identify air emissions, impacts and mitigations associated with the facility.

J.      Wetlands—All Facilities. Facilities are prohibited from locating in wetlands such as saltwater, fresh water and brackish marshes, swamps and bogs, as defined in local, regional and state plans and policies (generally, areas inundated by surface water or groundwater with a frequency to support, under normal circumstances, a prevalence of vegetative or aquatic life which requires saturated soil conditions for growth and reproduction).

K.    Animal and Plant Habitats—All Facilities. Facilities are prohibited from locating within critical or significant habitat areas of animal and plant species (including threatened or endangered species), as defined in local, regional or state plans and policies.

L.     Prime Agricultural Lands—All Facilities. Facilities are prohibited from locating on prime agricultural lands, as defined in California law and local plans, unless an overriding public need is served and demonstrated.

M.    Recreational, Cultural and Aesthetic Resources.

1.     Collection Facilities. Low-volume transfer and storage facilities may locate in protected, recreational, cultural or aesthetic resource areas, as defined by local, regional, state or national plans or policies, only if necessary to handle hazardous wastes generated by workers, residents or visitors in these areas.

 

2.     Treatment and Recycling Facilities and Residuals Repositories. Facilities are prohibited from locating in protected recreational, cultural and aesthetic resource areas, as defined by local, regional, state or national plans or policies.

N.    Mineral Resource Areas—All Facilities. Facilities are prohibited from locating on lands containing significant mineral deposits, as classified by local plans or California’s mineral land class maps and reports, if the extraction of the mineral deposit would be precluded.

O.    Military Lands—All Facilities. Facilities are prohibited from locating on military lands by the policy of the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD).

P.     Proximity to Waste Generation Areas.

1.     Treatment, Recycling and Collection Facilities. Facilities should locate close to sources of hazardous waste generation (generally industrial areas) to minimize the risks of transportation.

2.     Residuals Repositories. Repositories may be located more distance from the sources of hazardous waste generation than other facilities because of the need for larger land areas and buffer zones.

Q.    Proximity and Access to Major Routes—All Facilities. Facilities shall locate to minimize distance from major transportation routes. Facilities must have good access by roads designed to accommodate heavy vehicles. Travel routes from facilities to major transportation routes shall not pass through residential neighborhoods, shall minimize residential frontages, and shall be demonstrated as safe with regard to road design and construction, accident rates, excessive traffic, etc. The required health and safety assessment will evaluate risks associated with transportation of hazardous wastes.

R.     Consistency with General Plan—All Facilities. Facilities must be consistent with local planning policies, including the city or county general plan and zoning ordinances.

S.     Fiscal Impact—All Facilities. A facility’s fiscal impact to the city or county must be demonstrated.

T.     Socioeconomic Impacts—All Facilities. The city or county may require the facility developer to fund an independent study on socioeconomic impacts of the facility.

U.    Consistency with Hazardous Waste Management Plan—All Facilities. Facilities shall be consistent with the goals and policies of this plan, and must demonstrate compliance with the siting criteria established in this section. Facilities shall be consistent with the fair share principal, and with any interjurisdictional agreements on hazardous waste management. Local needs are to be the primary basis for facility siting criteria decisions, along with regional commitments; facilities are to be designed and sized primarily to meet the hazardous waste management needs of Orange County, or to meet the county’s broader regional commitments under an interjurisdictional agreement. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.58.110 Special development requirements.
The city may impose conditions on the granting of a hazardous waste facility permit in order to achieve the purposes of this chapter and the general plan and to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the community. These may include but are not limited to the following:

A.    Safety and Security.

1.     The owner or operator shall prevent the unknowing entry, and to minimize the possibility for the unauthorized entry, of persons or livestock onto any portion of the facility.

 

2.     The operator shall provide a twenty-four-hour surveillance system (e.g., television monitoring or surveillance by guards or facility personnel) which continuously monitors and controls entry onto the facility.

3.     An artificial or natural barrier (e.g., a fence in good repair or a fence combined with a cliff) shall be constructed which completely surrounds the facility.

4.     All gates or other entrances into the facility shall be provided with adequate means to control entry at all times. Signs with the legend “Danger—Hazardous Waste Area—Unauthorized Personnel Keep Out,” shall be posted at each entrance to the facility, and at other locations, in sufficient numbers to be seen from any approach. The legend shall be written in English, Spanish and any other language predominant in the area surrounding the facility, and shall be legible from a distance of at least twenty-five feet. Existing signs with a legend other than “Danger—Unauthorized Personnel Keep Out” may be used if the legend on the sign indicates that only authorized personnel are allowed to enter the active portion, and that entry onto the active portion can be dangerous.

B.     Contingency Plan.

1.     Every hazardous waste facility is required to have a contingency plan designed to minimize hazards to human health and the environment from fires, explosions, or unplanned release of hazardous waste to air, soil or surface water. The plan shall be carried out immediately whenever a fire, explosion or unplanned release occurs.

2.     The contingency plan shall include:

a.     The actions employees must take in response to a fire, explosion or unplanned release of hazardous waste;

b.     Arrangements agreed to by local emergency response officials;

c.     The names, addresses and telephone numbers (office and home) of all persons qualified to act as emergency coordinator. If more than one name is listed, the order in which they may assume authority shall be given, with one person designated as primary coordinator. The emergency coordinator shall be available to respond to an emergency and shall have the responsibility for coordinating all emergency response measures. The emergency coordinator shall be familiar with all aspects of the contingency plan, all operations and activities of the facility, the location and characteristics of wastes handled, and general facility layout. The emergency coordinator shall have the authority to commit the resources needed to carry out the contingency plan;

d.     A listing of all emergency equipment at the facility, including its location and an outline of its capabilities;

e.     An evacuation plan for employees where evacuation may be necessary, including signals used to begin evacuation, primary evacuation routes and alternate routes;

3.     Facility emergency coordinator responsibilities shall be identified in the contingency plan to include, at minimum, the following:

a.     In event of emergency (imminent or natural) fire, the emergency coordinator shall immediately activate facility alarms to notify employees and shall contact appropriate state or local emergency response agencies.

b.     In the event of a fire, explosion or release of any hazardous material, the emergency coordinator shall immediately identify the character, exact source, amount and real extent of any released materials. Concurrently, the emergency coordinator shall assess possible hazards both direct and indirect, to human health or the environment that may result from the emergency.

c.     If the emergency coordinator determines that the facility has had a release, fire or explosion which could threaten human health and the environment outside the facility, the emergency coordinator shall report his/her findings as set out in subsections D and E of this section.

d.     If evacuation is necessary, local officials shall be so notified.

e.     The emergency coordinator shall, in every situation, notify the State Office of Emergency Services at 1-800-852-7550 providing the following information:

i.      Name and telephone of person reporting;

ii.     Name and address of facility;

iii.    Time and type of incident;

iv.    Name and quantity of material(s) involved;

v.     Extent of injuries; and

vi.    Possible hazard to human health and the environment outside facility.

f.      During the emergency, the emergency coordinator shall take all reasonable measures to ensure that fires, explosions and releases do not occur or spread, including such measures as:

i.      Stopping operations;

ii.     Collecting and containing released waste; and

iii.    Removing or isolating containers.

g.     If the facility stops operations during an emergency, the emergency coordinator shall monitor for leaks, pressure buildups, gas generation, or ruptures in valves, pipes or other equipment as appropriate.

h.     Immediately after an emergency, the emergency coordinator shall provide for treating, storing or disposing of recovered waste, contaminated soil or surface water, or any other material resulting from a release, fire or explosion.

i.      Other activities required of the emergency coordinator after an emergency are:

i.      No wastes incompatible with the release material is handled until cleanup is completed; and

ii.     Emergency equipment is cleaned and ready for use before operations are resumed.

4.     Responsibilities of the owner/operator shall be identified in the contingency plan to include, at minimum, the following:

a.     Notify the State Department of Health Services and appropriate state and local authorities that the above requirements have been met before operations are resumed in the affected area.

b.     Record the time, date and details of any incident which requires implementing the contingency plan.

c.     Within fifteen days submit a written report on the incident to the State Department of Health Services. The report shall include:

i.      Name, address and telephone number of the owner, operator;

ii.     Name, address and telephone number of the facility;

iii.    Date, time and type of incident;

iv.    Name and quantity of materials involved;

v.     Extent of any injuries;

vi.    Assessment of actual or potential hazards to human health or the environment, where applicable; and

vii.   An estimate of the quantity of material recovered and its disposition.

d.     A copy of the contingency plan shall be maintained at the facility. A copy shall be sent to local police, fire, hospital and county environmental health.

e.     The contingency plan shall be reviewed and amended when any of the following occur:

i.      The facility permit is revised;

ii.     Applicable regulations are revised;

iii.    The plan fails in an emergency;

iv.    Operations at the facility change in a way that materially increases the potential of fire, explosion or unplanned release of hazardous waste;

v.     The list of emergency coordinators changes;

vi.    The list of emergency equipment changes.

C.     Monitoring.

1.     Upon reasonable notice, city officials, their designated representatives, and representatives of other affected regulatory agencies may enter a parcel on which a hazardous waste facility permit has been granted for the purpose of monitoring the operation of the facility.

2.     The holder of a hazardous waste facility permit shall report quarterly to the city the amount, type and disposition of all wastes processed by the facility. Included in the report will be copies of all manifests showing the delivery and types of hazardous waste materials. The report should also include a map showing the exact location (coordinates and elevation) by quantity and types of materials placed in repositories or otherwise stored or disposed of on-site.

3.     All structures shall remain accessible for inspection purposes.

D.    Closure Plan. The owner or operator of a hazardous waste management facility shall submit a written closure plan. A copy of the approved plan and all revisions to the plan shall be kept at the facility until closure is completed. The plan shall identify steps necessary to completely or partially close the facility at any point during its intended operating life and to completely close the facility at the ends of its intended operating life. The closure plan shall include at least:

1.     A description of how and when the facility will be partially closed, if applicable, and finally closed. The description shall identify the maximum extent of the operation which will be open during the life of the facility.

2.     An estimate of the maximum inventory of wastes in storage and in treatment at any time during the life of the facility.

3.     A description of the steps needed to decontaminate facility equipment during closure.

4.     a.     An estimate of the expected year of closure and a schedule for final closure. The schedule shall include a minimum, the total time required to close the facility and the time required for intervening closure activities which will allow tracking of the progress of closure.

b.     The owner or operator may amend his/her closure plan at any time during the active life of the facility. (The active life of the facility is that period during which wastes are periodically received.) The owner or operator shall amend the plan whenever changes in operating plans or facility design affect the closure plan, or whenever there is a change in the expected year of closure. When the owner or operator requests a permit modification to authorize a change operating plans or facility design, he/she shall request a modification of the closure plan at the same time.

5.     The plan shall clearly indicate an effective and ongoing use for the facility after closure. The plan will identify how the subject property will be used after the anticipated life of the project; the nature and type of reclamation; provisions for maintenance of the project; and finally the requirements for long-term monitoring of the reclaimed area to ensure no hazardous materials are leaking from the site.

6.     The plan shall indicate financial arrangements (irrevocable trust or other form of security arrangement) for the purpose of providing funds for the closure of its site and its long-term post-closure monitoring maintenance, as set out in subsection (E)(3) of this section.

E.     Financial Responsibility. Prior to issuance of an occupancy permit to begin the use identified in this permit, the applicant shall show proof of liability insurance as follows:

1.     The types, amounts, periods of coverage and provisions for periodic review as to adequacy of coverage shall be specified in the conditions of approval. Required insurance shall include, but not be limited to: general liability insurance, automotive liability insurance, environmental impairment liability insurance, and architect’s and engineer’s professional liability insurance. All such insurance shall name the (city/county) as an additional insured and shall be maintained for the life of the site and such additional periods as shall be specified in the conditions of approval.

2.     Additionally, coverage will be provided for workers compensation insurance and such other insurance as may be required. Such insurance will name the city as either additional insured or as an additional loss payee. Certificates of insurance will be submitted to the city annually.

3.     An irrevocable trust will be established to provide funds for closure of the site and its long-term post-closure and monitoring and maintenance. Funds for this trust would be provided by the owner/operator of the facility quarterly based on quantity and types of hazardous wastes received and processed or percentage of gross income. The terms of the trust would be as agreed upon by the project owner/operator and the city. The terms will be reviewed annually in regards to the amount of funds in the trust and anticipated closure monitoring and maintenance costs. The applicant shall provide a bond in an amount to be determined by the city for purposes of closure of the site.

 

4.     The applicant shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents, servants, and employees from all claims, actions or liabilities arising out of the issuance of this permit, operations at the facility and transportation of wastes to and from the facility.

F.     Use of Permit.

1.     A hazardous waste facility permit shall be granted for only those substances and quantities identified in the conditions of approval. No additional types of wastes or increases in the quantity of approved wastes shall be allowed beyond those specified in the approved facility permit, unless a separate application is made therefore which shall satisfy the same procedures and contents as those required in an initial application.

2.     a.     Any off-site hazardous waste facility permit that is granted shall be used within one year from the effective date thereof, or within such additional time as may be set in the conditions of approval, which shall not exceed a total of two years; otherwise, the permit shall be null and void. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the permittee may, prior to the permit’s expiration, request an extension of time in which to use the permit. A request for extension of time shall be made to the planning commission on forms provided by the planning department and shall be filed with the planning department, accompanied by the appropriate fee.

b.     The planning director or his/her designee shall set the matter as an advertised public hearing on the regular agenda of the planning commission who shall review the application and make a recommendation thereon. An extension of time may be granted by the planning commission upon a determination that valid reason exists for permittee not using the permit within the required period of time. If an extension is granted, the total time allowed for use of the permit shall not exceed a period of six months, from the effective date of the planning commission action. A maximum of two time extensions shall be allowed. The term “use” means, at a minimum, of having active building permits for which construction must thereafter be pursued diligently to completion.

3.     Permit Review and Renewal. Permit review and renewal shall be determined at the time of approval. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.58.120 Definitions.
Unless otherwise stated, the following definitions pertain to this ordinance.

“Applicant” means any person applying to the city for a permit or a land use decision concerning a specified hazardous waste facility, as defined under the term “proponent” of State Health and Safety Code Section 25199.1(i).

“General Fund” means the state of California General Fund.

“Governor’s Appeal Board” means a board formed to review the appeal by an “applicant,” as defined herein, of a specified hazardous waste facility land use decision disapproved by the city or county or of one or more conditions of approval placed on an approved specified hazardous waste facility or an appeal by an “interested person,” as defined in this section, based solely on the grounds that the conditions imposed do not adequately protect the public health, safety or welfare. The Governor’s Appeal Board’s membership, purpose and procedures are defined by State Health and Safety Code Section 25199.9 through 25199.14.

 

“Hazardous waste” means a waste or combination of wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration, toxicity, corrosiveness, mutagenicity or flammability, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible illness; or pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of, or otherwise managed.

“Health and safety assessment” means a technical and environmental evaluation of a proposed facility, site and surrounding area prior to approval of a local permit. The assessment will consider the qualities and the physical and chemical characteristics of the specific types of waste that would be handled. The assessment will include a hydraulic evaluation as well as risks due to flooding, earthquakes and potential water or air pollution. It is not intended that the health and safety assessment duplicate information developed for environmental impact reports or risk assessments required under local, state or federal regulations.

“Immobile populations” means schools, hospitals, convalescent homes, prisons, facilities for the mentally ill and other similar facilities.

“Interested person” means a person who participated in one or more public meetings or hearings held to consider an application for a land use decision for a specified hazardous waste facility project. “Participation” as defined in State Health and Safety Code Section 25199.1(c) includes, but is not limited to, the giving of oral or written testimony at a meeting or hearing, submission of questions at a meeting or hearing or attendance at the meeting or hearing.

“Land use decision” means a discretionary decision of the (city/county) concerning a specified hazardous waste facility including the issuance of a land use permit, a conditional use permit, the granting of a variance, the subdivision of property, and the modification of existing property lines pursuant to Title 7 (commencing with Section 65000) of the Government Code.

“Local assessment committee (LAC)” means a state-required committee of locally appointed representatives, designed to negotiate with the proponents of a proposed hazardous waste facility. The membership, duties and mission of the committee are defined by State Health and Safety Code Section 25199.7(d), as reiterated herein by Section 18.58.060.

“Off-site hazardous waste facility” means any structures, other appurtenances and improvements on the land, and all contiguous land serving more than one producer of hazardous waste and used for the treatment, transfer, storage, resource, recovery, disposal, or recycling of hazardous waste including but not limited to:

1.     Incineration facility (i.e., rotary kiln, fluid bed, etc.);

2.     Residual repository (receives only residuals from hazardous waste treatment facilities);

3.     Stabilization/solidification facilities;

4.     Chemical oxidation facilities;

5.     Neutralization/precipitation facilities; or

6.     Transfer/storage facilities.

“Office of Permit Assistance (OPA)” means the State of California Office of Permit Assistance.

“Office of Planning and Research (OPR)” means the State of California Office of Planning and Research.

“Planning director” means the city planning director.

“Residuals repository” means a waste disposal facility specifically restricted to receiving only residuals from hazardous waste treatment facilities.

“Specified hazardous waste facility” means a specific offsite facility project proposal. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

Chapter 18.60 HOME OCCUPATION
18.60.010 Applicability.
In addition to the requirements for each zone district, the following performance and development standards shall apply to the establishment and operation of home occupations in any zone district in which they are permitted. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.60.020 Purpose.
These regulations are provided so that certain incidental and accessory uses may be established in residential neighborhoods under conditions that will insure their compatibility with the neighborhood. They are intended to protect the rights of the residents to engage in certain home occupations that are harmonious with a residential environment. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.60.030 Permitted.
Home occupations are permitted when conducted as an accessory use to a residential use in any zone district that specified home occupations as a permitted use, subject to the requirements of Section 18.60.040 of this chapter. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.60.040 General requirements.
Before any home occupations are established and conducted, an application, accompanied by a filing fee as set by city council resolution, shall be submitted to and approved by the director of planning subject to the following criteria:

A.    No more than two persons other than a member of the immediate family occupying such dwelling shall be employed.

B.     There shall be no signs other than those permitted by the zone district regulations.

C.     The establishment and conduct of a home occupation shall not alter the appearance of the structure or cause the premises to differ from its residential character either by the use of colors, materials, construction, lighting, signs or the emission of sounds, noises, vibrations, odors or fumes.

D.    The conduct of any home occupation including but not limited to the storage of goods and equipment, shall not reduce or render unusable, areas provided for off-street parking, setbacks and yard areas as required by the zone district regulations.

E.     Electrical or mechanical equipment which creates visible or audible interference in radio or television receivers or causes fluctuations in line voltage outside the dwelling unit or which increases noise or fire hazards not normally associated with residential uses shall be prohibited.

F.     No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, nor shall the use require additional parking spaces than provided on site.

G.    There shall not be any regular commercial delivery to or from the dwelling where a home occupation is being conducted. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.60.050 Appeal.
If the director of planning denies an application for a home occupation permit or if the applicant disagrees with the conditions imposed on the granting of a home occupation permit if any, the applicant may file for an appeal. The appeal shall be in accordance with the established fee and procedures required of any appeal of a development application excepting that a public hearing will be conducted by the planning commission, and property owners within a hundred-foot radius of the subject site shall be notified of such hearing. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.60.060 Revocation.
A home occupation permit granted in accordance with this chapter may be terminated if any requirements set forth in Section 18.60.040 is violated or if the permit was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud; or that the use has become detrimental to the public health or safety or is deemed to constitute a nuisance. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.60.070 Nontransferable.
A home occupation permit granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall not be transferred, assigned or used by any person other than the permittee, nor shall each permit authorize such home occupation at any location other than the one for which the permit is granted. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 18.62 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 18.62.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the land use zone, location, height, appearance, and placement of commercial antennas. The regulations contained herein are designed to protect and promote the public health, safety, welfare and aesthetic quality of the city. (Ord. 1807 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1806 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 18.62.020 Definitions.
“Antenna” means an apparatus designed for the purpose of emitting radio frequency radiation, to be operated or operating from a fixed location pursuant to FCC authorization, for the transmission of writing, signs, signals, data, images, pictures, and sounds of all kinds, including the transmitting device and any on-site equipment, switches, wiring, cabling, power sources, shelters or cabinets associated with that antenna and added to a wireless communications facility, structure, or building as part of the original installation of the antenna. For most services, an antenna will be mounted on or in, and is distinct from, a supporting structure such as a wireless communications facility, structure or building. However, in the case of AM broadcast stations, the entire wireless communications facility or group of wireless communications facilities constitutes the antenna for that station. Antenna shall also include, but not be limited to:

1.     “Dish antenna,” a dish-like antenna used to link communications sites together by wireless transmission of voice or data. Also called microwave antenna or microwave dish antenna.

2.     “Panel antenna,” an antenna or array of antennas designed to concentrate a radio signal in a particular area. Panel antennae are typically flat, rectangular devices approximately six square feet in size. Also called directional antennae.

3.     “Whip antenna,” an antenna that transmits signals in three hundred sixty degrees. Whip antennae are typically cylindrical in shape and are less than six inches in diameter and measure up to eighteen feet in height. Also called omnidirectional, stick, or pipe antennas.

“Base station” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 1.40001 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations.

“Cell site” means a geographical area with a radius of up to eight miles that contains both transmitting and receiving antennae.

“Clustering” means locating one or more providers facilities in the same geographical area.

“Co-location” or “collocation” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 1.40001 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations and shall include locating wireless communication equipment for more than one provider on a single site.

“Interference” means disturbances to reception caused by radio frequency waves or other electronic fields.

“Monopole” means a structure composed of a single spire used to support communications equipment.

“Substantially change the physical dimensions” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 1.40001 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations.

“Tower” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 1.40001 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations.

“Wireless communications facilities” means equipment and network components such as towers, utility poles, transmitters, base stations, and emergency power systems that are integral to providing wireless telecommunications services. (Ord. 1807 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1806 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1748 § 3, 2013; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 18.62.030 Applicability.
A.    Existing Facilities. All commercial antennas for which applications were approved and/or building permits issued prior to the adoption date of this section shall not be subject to the application of these regulations and guidelines contained in this chapter, unless an alteration or intensification of use is requested in which case the provisions of this section shall apply.

B.     Proposed Facilities. All commercial antennas for which applications were received by the community development department, but not approved prior to the adoption date of this section, shall be subject to the provisions of this section. (Ord. 1807 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1806 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 18.62.040 Permit required.
A.    The placement of all wireless communication facilities within the city shall require the approval of a conditional use permit per the procedure established in Chapter 18.66 of this title. Additionally, the applicant shall submit:

1.     A copy of the appropriate portions of the lease agreement indicating that no exclusive agreements have been made to prevent future carriers to co-locate on the same site or facilities.

2.     A design plan which does not preclude potential additional users.

3.     A map of all their existing and proposed facilities (to the extent known) within the city and the surrounding cities indicating the type of facility, design, height, and its coverage area.

4.     An additional processing fee for each additional hour of staff time expended at the hourly rate established in the adopted master fee schedule. A one thousand dollar deposit shall be paid at the time of application to cover these additional costs. All unexpended funds will be returned to the applicant upon completion of the public hearing process.

5.     Photo simulations showing the proposed completed wireless facility superimposed onto the existing property development, shown from a minimum of four angles.

6.     Any other information, studies and/or other documentation determined necessary by the city engineer or the director of community and economic development, particularly when there may be the creation of radio interference with existing communications systems such as the police 800 mHz system and other emergency systems.

B.     Prior to the installation of wireless communication facilities on public property, the applicant shall first obtain a permit from the city engineer.

C.     Exception. The approvals provided for in subsection A of this section shall not apply to modifications of existing wireless communications facilities that do not substantially change the physical dimensions of the communication facility, as provided for in Section 18.62.055. (Ord. 1807 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1806 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1748 § 3, 2013; Ord. 1727 § 3, 2011)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 18.62.050 Location.
A.    Placement. Wireless communication facilities may be located in all zones, with the exception of properties developed with a residential dwelling unit. In addition, it is preferred that these facilities be roof or wall mounted on existing structures or co- located on existing conforming facilities.

B.     Views. Wireless communication facilities are to be located in a manner that preserves the view corridors of the surrounding residential and commercial developments.

C.     Co-location. The applicant is to cooperate with other communication companies in co-locating additional antennas on the tops of buildings, on existing monopoles, and/or clustering facilities. If co-location or clustering is not possible in the case of a particular proposal the permittee shall provide a written explanation as to why it is not possible as part of the conditional use permit submittal package. (Ord. 1807 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1806 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1727 § 3, 2011; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 18.62.055 Modifications of existing wireless facilities.
A.    A request for a modification of an existing wireless tower or base station for the collocation of new transmission equipment or removal or replacement of existing transmission equipment shall be approved ministerially, without the processing of a conditional use permit, provided that such modification does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station from the dimensions approved as part of the original discretionary permit for the tower or base station.

B.     Any modification to a wireless tower or base station which substantially changes the physical dimensions of either the tower or base station, and any other modification to a wireless telecommunications facility that does not qualify as a wireless tower or base station (as defined in this section) shall be subject to the permits and authorizations required by this code. (Ord. 1807 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1806 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1748 § 3, 2013)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 18.62.060 Standards of development.
A.    Height. Any proposed wireless communication facility shall not exceed the height specification established for the zone in which it is being located.

B.     Setbacks. All wireless communication facilities shall meet all the front, side, and rear setback standards for the zone in which it is being located. Exception: In no case shall an undisguised monopole be located closer than one hundred feet to any residentially zoned property.

 

C.     Design. Monopoles shall be a stealth design and disguised as an architectural or landscape feature. Examples include, but are not limited to, clock towers, steeples, palm trees, pine trees, eucalyptus trees, etc. The placement of undisguised monopoles shall require approval of a zone variance, per the procedure established in Chapter 18.74 of the La Habra Municipal Code.

D.    Screening. All facilities are to be designed to be unobtrusive and shall be in context with the immediate surroundings in addition to being architecturally compatible with the existing structures on-site.

1.     Base stations are to be screened from public view, to be located preferably within a building, or if located outside a building to be placed behind the structure, and screened within a landscape planter or placed underground.

2.     All roof-mounted antennae are to be screened or visually neutralized with materials that are designed to blend with and/or match the existing building in type, shape, size, and color.

E.     All wireless communication facilities are to be installed and maintained in compliance with the applicable sections of the city’s building code, electrical code and noise ordinance.

F.     In the event that a wireless communication facility is identified as causing interference or disturbance with radio or television reception of residents, or is in conflict with the city’s communication system, the operator shall cease operation immediately, until the cause of the interference is eliminated. Failure to cease such operation shall result in automatic suspension of the underlying use permit. Exception: A new facility shall be allowed a twenty-four-hour cure period.

G.    All wireless communication facilities are required to operate in accordance with the current American National Standards Institute (ANSI) requirements and to meet all health standards set by applicable federal agencies.

H.    The operator shall provide a “single point of contact” person in its engineering and maintenance departments to insure continuity on all interference issues. The name, telephone number, fax number and e-mail address of that person shall be provided to the police chief upon activation of the facility. (Ord. 1807 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1806 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1748 § 3, 2013; Ord. 1727 § 3, 2011; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 18.62.070 Removal.
A.    Abandonment. A facility that is inoperative or unused for a period of six continuous months shall be deemed abandoned. Written notice of the city’s determination of abandonment shall be provided to the operator of the facility and the owner(s) of the premises upon which the facility is located. Such notice may be delivered in person, or mailed to the address(es) stated on the facility permit application, and shall be deemed given at the time delivered or placed in the mail. A written notice of the city’s determination of abandonment shall be mailed or delivered to the operator of the facility at the address stated in the relevant permit application.

B.     Removal of Abandoned Facility or Hearing. The operator of the facility and the owner(s) of the property on which it is located shall, within thirty days after notice of abandonment is given either: (1) remove the facility and restore the premises to its original condition; or (2) provide the planning department with written objection to the city’s determination of abandonment and request an appeal hearing before the planning commission. If a written objection is timely received and a hearing is properly requested, the procedures for hearings, notices and related fees set forth in this code shall apply. The operator and/or owner shall be given the opportunity to provide evidence that the facility was in use during the relevant six-month period and that it is presently operational. The planning commission shall review all evidence, determine whether or not the facility was properly deemed abandoned, and provide the operator notice of its determination.

C.     Removal by City. The city may remove the abandoned facility, repair any and all damage to the premises caused by such removal, and otherwise restore the premises as is appropriate to be in compliance with applicable sections of the zoning code at any time: (1) after thirty days following the notice of abandonment; or (2) following a notice of decision by the planning commission. The city may, but shall not be required to, store the removed facility (or any part thereof). The owner of the premises, upon which the abandoned facility was located, and all prior operators of the facility, shall be jointly liable for the entire cost of such removal, repair, restoration and storage, and shall remit payment to the city promptly after demand therefor is made. The city may, in lieu of storing the removed facility, convert it to the city’s use, sell it, or dispose of it in any manner deemed by the city to be appropriate.

D.    City Lien on Property. Until the cost of removal, repair, restoration and storage is paid in full, a lien shall be placed on the abandoned personal property and any real property on which the facility was located, for the full amount of the cost of removal, repair, restoration and storage. The planning manager shall cause the lien to be recorded in the Orange County recorder’s office. (Ord. 1807 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1806 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

Chapter 18.63 SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
18.63.010 Purpose.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide a uniform and comprehensive set of regulations and standards for the permitting, development, siting, installation, design, operation and maintenance of wireless communications facilities in the city’s public right-of-way. These regulations are intended to prescribe clear and reasonable criteria to assess and process applications in a consistent and expeditious manner, while reducing the impacts associated with wireless communications facilities. This chapter provides standards necessary: (1) for the preservation of the public right-of-way in the city for the maximum benefit and use of the public; (2) to promote and protect public health and safety, community welfare, visual resources and the aesthetic quality of the city consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the general plan; and (3) to provide for the orderly, managed and efficient development of wireless communications facilities in accordance with the state and federal laws, rules and regulations. (Ord. 1807 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1806 § 2, 2019)

 

18.63.020 Definitions.
“Accessory equipment” means any equipment associated with the installation of a communication facility, including, but not limited to, cabling, generators, fans, air conditioning units, electrical panels, equipment shelters, equipment cabinets, equipment buildings, pedestals, meters, vaults, splice boxes, and surface location markers.

“Administrative review” means ministerial review of an application by the city relating to the review and issuance of a permit, including review by the city engineer to determine where the issuance of a permit is in conformity with the applicable provisions of this chapter.

“Antenna” for this chapter means that part of a communication facility designed to radiate or receive radio frequency signals and/or electromagnetic waves.

“Cellular” means an analog or digital wireless telecommunications technology that is based on a system of interconnected neighboring cell sites.

“Collocation” for this chapter shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 1.6100 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations. It also means locating wireless communication equipment for more than one provider on a single site.

“Communication facility,” “facility” or “facilities” or “wireless communications facilities” mean any facility or facilities that transmits and/or receives electromagnetic waves. It includes, but is not limited to, an-

tennas and/or other types of equipment for the transmission or receipt of such signals, telecommunications towers or similar structures supporting such equipment, related accessory equipment, equipment buildings, parking areas, and other accessory development. Exceptions: The term “communication facility” does not apply to the following:

1.     Government owned and operated telecommunications facilities.

2.     Emergency medical care provider-owned and operated telecommunications facilities.

3.     Mobile services providing public information coverage of news events of a temporary nature.

4.     Any wireless telecommunications facilities exempted from this code by federal law or state law.

5.     Police and fire communications.

“Communications service” means telecommunications service, as defined in Title 47 of the United States Code (i.e., 47 USC) Section 153(53), including wireless broadband internet service.

“Communications service provider” or “provider” means a provider of a communications service.

“Construction codes” means California Building, Electrical, Fire, Green, Plumbing, and/or Mechanical Codes adopted by the city.

“Director” means the director of public works, or designee.

“Discretionary review” means review of an application by the city relating to the review and issuance of a permit that is other than an administrative review.

“Distributed antenna system” or “DAS” means a network of spatially separated antenna nodes connected to a common source via a transport medium that provides wireless service within a geographic area or structure.

“Eligible facilities request” means the same as is set forth in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.6100(b)(3), or any successor provision.

“Feasible” means capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, legal, social, and technological factors.

“FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission.

“Interference” means disturbances to reception caused by radio frequency waves or other electronic fields.

“Laws” means, collectively, any and all federal, state, or local laws, statutes, common law, codes, construction codes, rules, regulations, orders, and/or ordinances.

“Located within the public right-of-way” includes any facility, which in whole or in part, itself or as part of another structure, rests upon, in, over or under the public right-of-way.

“Master agreement” or “master license” means an agreement between the city and a permittee authorizing the installation and maintenance of one or more small wireless facilities.

“Modification” means a change to an existing communication facility that involves any of the following: collocation, expansion, alteration, enlargement, intensification, reduction, or augmentation, including, but not limited to, changes in size, shape, color, visual design, or exterior material. “Modification” does not include repair, replacement or maintenance if those actions do not involve a change to the existing facility involving any of the following: collocation, expansion, alteration, enlargement, intensification, reduction, or augmentation.

“Mounted” means attached or supported.

“Permit” means a written authorization (in electronic or hard copy format) to install a small wireless facility at a specified location in the public right-of-way. A permit may also consist of a master agreement between the applicant and city to install and maintain one or more small wireless facilities in the public right-of-way.

“Permittee” means an applicant that has received a permit under this chapter.

“Person” means an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization, including a governmental entity.

“Pole” means a single shaft of wood, steel, concrete or other material capable of supporting the equipment mounted thereon in a safe and adequate manner and as required by provisions of this chapter. A pole does not include a tower or support structure.

“Public right-of-way” or “right-of-way” means a strip of land acquired and/or held by the city of La Habra intended to be or is presently occupied by a road, sidewalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary sewer, storm drain, bikeway, pedestrian walkway, or other public use.

“Radio frequency” or “RF” is a measurement representing the oscillation rate of electromagnetic radiation spectrum, or electromagnetic waves, from frequencies ranging from 300 GHz to as low as 9 kHz.

“Replace” or “replacement” means, in connection with an existing pole, support structure or tower, to replace same with a new structure, substantially similar in design, size and scale to the existing structure and in conformance with this chapter and any other applicable city code provisions, in order to address limitations of the existing structure to structurally support collocation of a communications facility.

“Sensitive uses” means any residential use, public or private school, day care, playground, and retirement facility.

“Small wireless facility” or “SWF” shall have the same meaning as described in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.6002(l).

“Support structure” means a structure in the public right-of-way other than a pole or a tower to which a wireless facility is attached at the time of the application.

“Telecommunications tower” or “tower” means a freestanding mast, pole, monopole, guyed tower, lattice tower, freestanding tower or other structure designed and primarily used to support communication facility antennas.

“Utility pole” means any pole made of wood or steel, owned by any utility company that is primarily used to support wires or cables necessary to the provision of electrical or other utility services regulated by the California Public Utilities Commission. “Wireless facility” means the equipment at a fixed location or locations in the public right-of-way that enables wireless services. The term does not include: (1) the support structure, tower or pole on, under, or within which the equipment is located or collocated; or, (2) coaxial, fiber-optic or other cabling that is between communications facilities or poles or that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with a particular antenna. An SWF is one type of wireless facility.

“Wireless telecommunications services” means the provision of services using a communication facility or a wireless telecommunications collocation facility, and shall include, but not be limited to, the following services: personal wireless services as defined in the federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 at 47 USC Section 332(c)(7)(C) or its successor statute, cellular service, personal communication service, and/or data radio telecommunications. (Ord. 1807 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1806 § 2, 2019)

18.63.030 Administration.
A.    Reviewing Authority. The city engineer or its designee is responsible for administering this chapter. As part of the administration of this chapter, the city engineer may:

1.     Interpret the provisions of this chapter;

2.     Develop and implement standards governing the placement and modification of wireless facilities consistent with the requirements of this chapter, including regulations governing collocation and resolution of conflicting applications for placement of wireless facilities;

3.     Develop and implement acceptable designs and development standards for wireless facilities in the public rights-of-way, taking into account the zoning districts bounding the public rights-of-way;

4.     Develop forms and procedures for submission of applications for placement or modification of wireless facilities, and proposed changes to any support structure consistent with this chapter;

5.     Establish deadlines for submission of information related to an application, and extend or shorten deadlines where appropriate and consistent with state and federal laws and regulations;

6.     Issue any notices of incompleteness, requests for information, or conduct or commission such studies as may be required to determine whether a permit should be issued;

7.     Require, as part of, and as a condition of completeness of any application, notice to members of the public that may be affected by the placement or modification of the wireless facility and proposed changes to any support structure;

8.     Subject to appeal as provided herein, determine whether to approve, approve subject to conditions, or deny an application;

9.     Publish a Wireless Application Policy and Guidelines to serve as further regulatory guidance and clarification. The policy and guidelines may be updated at the discretion of the city engineer to adjust for new technologies and regulations, and compliance therewith is a condition of approval in every SWF permit;

10.   Grant an administrative variance from the strict locational or physical requirements of this chapter may be granted when it is shown to the city engineer’s satisfaction based on substantial evidence that, because of special, unique circumstances, an installation cannot meet those standards; and

11.   Take such other steps as may be required to timely act upon applications for placement of wireless facilities, including issuing written decisions and entering into agreements to mutually extend the time for action on an application.

B.     Appeal.

1.     Any aggrieved person or entity may appeal a decision by the city engineer to the director of public works, which may decide the issues de novo, and whose written decision will be the final decision of the city. An appeal by a wireless infrastructure provider must be taken jointly with the wireless service provider that intends to use the personal wireless services facility.

2.     Where the city engineer grants an application based on a finding that denial would result in a prohibition or effective prohibition under applicable federal law, the decision shall be automatically appealed to the director of public works. All appeals must be filed within five business days of the written decision of the city engineer, unless the city engineer extends the time therefore. An extension may not be granted where extension would result in approval of the application by operation of law.

3.     Any appeal shall be conducted so that a timely written decision may be issued in accordance with applicable law.

C.     Regulations. The wireless regulations and decisions on applications for placement of wireless facilities in the right-of-way shall, at a minimum, ensure that the requirements of this chapter are satisfied, unless it is determined that applicant has established that denial of an application would, within the meaning of federal law, prohibit or effectively prohibit the provision of personal wireless services, or otherwise violate applicable laws or regulations. If that determination is made, the requirements of this chapter may be waived, but only to the minimum extent required to avoid the prohibition or violation. (Ord. 1807 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1806 § 2, 2019)

 

18.63.040 Scope.
A.    In General. There shall be a type of permit entitled an “SWF permit,” which shall be subject to all of the requirements of this chapter. Unless exempted, every person who desires to place a wireless facility in the public rights-of-way or modify an existing wireless facility in the public rights-of-way must obtain an SWF permit authorizing the placement or modification in accordance with this chapter. Except for small wireless facilities, facilities qualifying as eligible facilities requests, or any other type of facility expressly allowed in the public right-of-way by state or federal law, no other wireless facilities shall be permitted pursuant to this chapter.

B.     Exemptions. This chapter does not apply to:

1.     The placement or modification of facilities by the city or by any other agency of the state solely for public safety purposes.

2.     Installation of a “cell on wheels,” “cell on truck” or a similar structure for a temporary period in connection with an emergency or event, but no longer than required for the emergency or event, provided that installation does not involve excavation, movement, or removal of existing facilities.

C.     Pre-Existing Facilities in the Right-of-Way. Any wireless facility already existing in the right-of-way as of the date of this chapter’s adoption shall remain subject to the provisions of the city code in effect prior to this chapter, unless and until an extension of such facility’s then-existing permit is granted, at which time the provisions of this chapter shall apply in full force going forward as to such facility. The review of any request for a renewal of a permit for such pre-existing facilities shall be conducted pursuant to this chapter, rather than the portion(s) of the city code under which it was previously reviewed.

D.    Public Use. Except as otherwise provided by California law, any use of the right-of-way authorized pursuant to this chapter will be subordinate to the city’s use and use by the public. (Ord. 1807 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1806 § 2, 2019)

 

18.63.050 Installation requirements for small wireless facilities.
A.    Site Selection.

1.     Preferred Locations. The preferred location for a small wireless facility (SWF) shall be on existing infrastructure such as utility poles or streetlights. The infrastructure selected should be located at public alleys, streets and/or near property line prolongations. If the SWF is not able to be placed on existing infrastructure, the applicant shall provide a map of existing infrastructure in the service area and describe why each such site was not feasible.

2.     Master License Agreement. When existing infrastructure sites have been exhausted or there is no available infrastructure in the proposed location, the city will consider entering into a master license agreement with an applicant on mutually, agreeable terms, but which may require that the applicant dedicate new infrastructure such as a street light, on which the SWF can be installed. The installation shall be subject to any of the size, attachment, and other physical restrictions set forth in subsections 1 and 3, below, as determined necessary by the city engineer. The city engineer shall approve all plans and specifications, including the means of providing electrical power and fiber optic.

3.     Prohibited Locations. The city engineer has determined that in order to ensure protection of the public health and safety, no SWF may be installed or maintained: (a) where any hazard to normal traffic flow could occur or exist, such as obscuring of drivers’ visibility or sight lines; or (b) which would result any obstruction or restriction of pedestrian movement or risk to pedestrian safety; or (c) which would or could result in violation of any law, including any Americans with Disability Act (ADA) standard; or (d) which would or could result in violation of any applicable federal, state, county or local standard including standards of the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. Additionally, mid-strand facilities are not permitted.

4.     Security. Each facility shall be designed to be resistant to, and minimize opportunities for, unauthorized access, climbing, vandalism, graffiti and other conditions that would result in hazardous situations, visual blight or attractive nuisances. The director may require the provision of warning signs, fencing, anti-climbing devices, anti-graffiti texture or other techniques to prevent unauthorized access and vandalism when, because of their location and/or accessibility, a facility has the potential to become an attractive nuisance.

B.     Existing Infrastructure Requirements.

1.     Street Light.

a.     The antenna shall be the smallest possible volume but in no case greater than three cubic feet. The antenna must be enclosed in an RF transparent screen unless a whip style antenna is used. Antenna installations will be located at the top of pole mount and shall not increase the height of the underlying streetlight by more than ten percent or ten feet, whichever is greater, over other streetlights in the immediate vicinity. The antenna shall be as small as technically possible, and RF screen and/or color treatment shall be utilized to camouflage the installation.

b.     Equipment, other than antennas, shall be mounted as prescribed by the city engineer in one of the manners described herein.

i.      Underground Vault. Underground equipment shall be placed in vaults. Vault vents shall be flush to the ground. Wires and cables shall run in conduit underground from the vault to the pole. Underground entry into the pole through the foundation shall be required. Wires and cables shall run in conduit inside the pole.

 

ii.     Base Shroud. Equipment shall be mounted in a base shroud of approved design to be retrofitted to an existing light standard. The base shroud shall be coated or painted with an approved color to match the existing pole.

iii.    Integrated Base Shroud. The applicant may propose or the city may require that the existing light standard be replaced with a city-approved pole that is manufactured with a base shroud designed to accept wireless equipment and integrated RF screen to accept a wireless antenna.

iv.    Alternative Infrastructure. The city engineer may consider and allow the use of other infrastructure not described above and not otherwise prohibited herein, when it is determined that the proposed alternate infrastructure: (1) is substantially similar in physical characteristics to the improvements identified in subsection B. ii.; (2) the visual impact that would be suffered by the public is no greater than the impact if installed on a structure per subsection B. iii.; and (3) the proposed alternative infrastructure can accommodate the proposed SWF without creating any risk to the public health or safety. Any approved alternate infrastructure shall be subject to all requirements for SWFs set forth in this chapter.

2.     Utility Pole.

a.     All installations on utility poles shall fully comply with the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) general orders (GOs), including, but not limited to, GO 95. None of the following design standards are meant to conflict with or cause a violation of GO 95, including, but not limited to, its standards for a safe installation on a utility pole. Accordingly, size limits can be adjusted at the city engineer’s discretion to ensure compliance with CPUC rules on safety.

b.     The antenna shall be the smallest possible volume but in no case greater than three cubic feet and shall be mounted at the top of the pole or on the side of the pole with a bracket. When mounted with a bracket the bracket may extend no more than eighteen inches from the surface of the pole and will be coated or painted to match the existing pole. The antenna must be enclosed in an RF transparent screen unless a whip style antenna is used. The antenna shall be as small as technically possible, and RF screen and/or color treatment shall be utilized if possible to camouflage the installation.

c.     Equipment, other than antennas, shall be mounted as prescribed by the city engineer in one of the manners described herein.

i.      Underground Vault. Equipment is to be placed in an underground vault. Vault vents shall be flush to the ground. Wires and cables shall run in conduit underground from the vault to the pole and then up the pole to the antenna(s). The conduit shall be painted to match the pole. If the existing utility pole already has more than two existing risers/drops (i.e. conduit), the pole must be replaced with a metal pole that allows the new cable and wires to be located inside the pole, in conduit. The existing drops will also be relocated inside the new pole and underground entry into the pole through the foundation is required.

ii.     Alternative Infrastructure. The city engineer may consider and allow the use of other infrastructure not described above and not otherwise prohibited herein, when it is determined that the proposed alternate infrastructure: (1) is substantially similar in physical characteristics to the improvements identified in subsection B. ii.; (2) the visual impact that would be suffered by the public is no greater than the impact if installed on a structure per subsection B. iii.; and (3) the proposed alternative infrastructure can accommodate the proposed SWF without creating any risk to the public health or safety. Any approved alternate infrastructure shall be subject to all requirements for SWFs set forth in this chapter.

3.     Replacement Poles. These poles should be placed as close to the location of the existing pole as is technically feasible. Replacement poles should be designed to match the aesthetics (e.g., color, materials, and appearance) of the existing pole.

4.     New Poles. A waiver is required for permission to install a new pole. The design should match the dimensions and appearance (e.g., colors, materials, and size) of existing poles in the area. New wooden poles are discouraged. (Ord. 1807 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1806 § 2, 2019)

 

18.63.060 Permit required.
A.    Pre-Submittal Requirements.

1.     Prior to application submittal, the applicants may schedule and attend a pre-submittal conference with public works department staff to receive informal feedback on the proposed location, design and application materials as well as a master plan of improvements within the city. The pre-submittal conference is intended to identify potential concerns and streamline the formal application review process after submittal. Public works department staff will endeavor to provide applicants with an appointment within approximately ten business days after receipt of a written request.

2.     Application Submittal Appointment. All applications must be submitted to the public works department at a pre-scheduled appointment. City staff will endeavor to provide applicants with an appointment within ten business days after receipt of a written request.

B.     Permits. An SWF permit must be obtained from the city before an SWF may be installed or maintained in the public right-of-way. An encroachment permit shall also be required as a condition of SWF permit approval. An SWF permit is conditionally valid for six months from the date of issuance. To ensure the greatest availability to other applicants of preferred locations for SWFs, installation of each SWF for which the permit is issued shall be completed within six months of issuance. Upon a showing of good cause not based on fault of the permittee, the city engineer may extend the time to complete the installation under an SWF permit, for an additional six months. Upon a failure of a permittee to complete installation in the required period of time, the permit shall be deemed void and the proposed SWF location shall be made available to other SWF applicants. In the event that an application is deemed granted by rule of law or court decision, all conditions and design guidelines set forth in this chapter are still applicable to the installation.

An application for a permit to install an SWF shall be made in writing on such forms as the city engineer prescribes, and shall comply with the following minimum requirements, in addition to all other information and documentation determined to be necessary by the city engineer to effectuate the purpose and intent of this section. A review of an application for an SWF that complies in all respects with this chapter shall be deemed an administrative review. Any proposed wireless facility not satisfying all requirements of this chapter for SWFs, or for any kind of facility that is not an SWF, shall be subject to discretionary review.

The application form shall specify the number, size and format of the project plans and application materials to be provided, including, but not limited to, electronic format. The city engineer may waive certain submittal requirements or require additional information based on specific project factors. Unless an exemption or waiver applies, all applications shall include all of the following and will not be accepted if any submittal material is missing or not fully completed. An application shall not be deemed complete by the city unless all required information, submittals, and documentation has been submitted to the city as follows:

1.     Complete Application. A fully completed and executed city application form for the type of approval sought, and all information, materials, fees, attachments, submittals, and proof of insurance specified in the city approved application form, must be submitted. Where the city determines that it requires expert assistance in evaluating an application, the city may hire a consultant and the fee charged by the consultant shall be reimbursed to the city by the applicant regardless of the outcome of the application.

2.     Executed Under Penalty of Perjury. All applications shall be signed under penalty of perjury under the laws of the state of California by an authorized representative of the applicant.

3.     Applicant Information. Complete legal name and contact information for the facility owner, facility operator, agent (if any), and property owner (for any collocation facility on any existing SWF or shared utility pole), and related letter(s) of authorization if the owner is other than the city.

4.     Detailed Description of the SWF. A full written description of the proposed facility, its purpose, and specifications. Special requirements pertain to the following installations:

a.     Fiber Only. Applicants shall not be permitted to install fiber only and subsequently seek to install antennas and accessory equipment pursuant to an SWF permit at a later date. The applications for all installations in the public right-of-way shall simultaneously request fiber installation or other cable installation when applying for an SWF permit.

b.     Distributed Antenna System. Applications for an SWF permit for a DAS shall be submitted as a single SWF application for the entire project. Each individual location within the system shall be processed and considered for approval separately. Permitting fees will be applied to each site. Each location will be evaluated and must comply with the all design and development standards as defined by this chapter.

c.     Utility Pole Attachments. For any SWF proposed to be collocated on a pole or structure owned by a public or private utility, the application shall include written evidence of the utility’s approval of applicant’s specific proposed attachment including any and all applicable terms and conditions, and detailed description of the approved SWF. An SWF authorized by law and approved by the utility company for attachment to a utility owned pole or structure, shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter except to the extent any such provisions are preempted by state or federal law related to utility pole attachments by wireless providers.

5.     Inventory. An inventory list and map of the applicant’s existing SWFs, including, but not limited to, collocations, operated by the applicant within two miles of the proposed site (“service area”), and longer range conceptual plans for a period of five years shall also be provided, if available. The inventory list must include specific information as to location, height, and design of each facility. The city may share such information with other applicants seeking to locate SWFs within the service area, in order to encourage collocation.

6.     Geographic Service Area. A written description identifying the geographic service area for the subject installation, accompanied by a five-year master plan of anticipated future installations and/or modifications, including maps.

7.     Report on Alternatives. A report explaining why the SWF is needed at the requested location, including a written statement explaining the rationale for selecting the proposed site, and, in the event the proposed location is not proposed for a preferred location set forth in Section 18.63.050(A)(1), how locating the proposed SWF in a preferred location would material limit the applicants provision of wireless service in the proposed service area. Said statement shall include all existing structures and/or alternative sites evaluated for potential installation of the proposed SWF and why said alternatives are not a viable option. If the city has requested that the applicant collocate its SWF on a site, the applicant shall explain why collocation is not feasible, including efforts made to develop such an alternative.

8.     SWF Plans. Detailed engineering plans of the proposed SWF installation showing all equipment and antennas, including height, shape, size and nature of construction in accordance with the requirements established by the city engineer. The plans shall include, but are not limited to, a fully dimensioned diagram of the proposed SWF and antennas, including height, diameter, design, shape, size, structural integrity, power output and frequency, back-up power source (if any), nature of construction, purpose of the facility, and technical engineering specifications, economic and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design, together with evidence that demonstrates that the proposed facility has been designed to the minimum height and diameter required from a technological standpoint for the proposed site.

The plans for any new freestanding structure must provide sufficient detail to demonstrate that the structure will be able to accommodate at least one other similar telecommunications provider in addition to the applicant. The plans shall include a diagram showing the separation between the proposed SWF and any existing facility or facilities on the same support structure or site, if collocation is planned.

In order to minimize visual impact of equipment boxes/vaults, every applicant seeking to collocate with another SWF shall utilize its best efforts to arrange with the existing SWF operator to share equipment enclosures. The collocating wireless provider shall provide a written description of its efforts made to share any equipment enclosure. If unable to achieve a sharing arrangement, the applicant’s written description shall clearly state the reasons why.

9.     Site Plans. A fully-dimensioned site plan that includes, at a minimum, the following information: specific placement of the proposed equipment shelters, antenna(s), and any other SWF on the site; setbacks from adjacent property lines, offset from street centerline and curb face, show sidewalk width and clearances around all new equipment; the location of existing structures, trees, and other significant site features; the type and locations of materials proposed to screen SWF antennas and other components; the proposed materials and color(s) for the SWF, street improvements, and all other information required by the director.

10.   Photographs and Visual Analysis. Photo-simulations showing views of the proposed SWF from surrounding properties and adjoining public right-of-way at varying distances and angles with a map indicating the locations used for the analysis and their distances from the site.

11.   Documentation of Federal and State Compliance. Copies of all applicable licenses, permits and/or other approvals required by the FCC, CPUC, and any other federal, state, and/or local agency with authority to regulate SWFs, and documentation of compliance with all conditions imposed in conjunction with such licenses or approvals. The required documentation shall include, but is expressly not limited to, the following:

a.     Engineering calculations demonstrating that the proposed SWF will comply with all applicable FCC rules, regulations, and/or specifications.

b.     Completion of the radio frequency (RF) emissions exposure guidelines checklist contained in Appendix A to the Federal Communications Commission’s (FCC) “Local Government Official’s Guide to Transmitting Antenna RF Emission Safety”, or any successor regulations, to determine whether the SWF will be “categorically excluded”, as that term is used by the FCC.

c.     For an SWF that is not categorically excluded under the FCC regulations for RF emissions, the applicant shall submit an RF exposure compliance report prepared and certified by an RF engineer acceptable to the city that certifies that the proposed SWF, as well as any SWFs that contribute to the cumulative exposure in the subject area, will comply with applicable federal RF exposure standards, exposure limits and emission levels. The RF report must include the actual frequency and power levels (in watts, effective radiated power “ERP”) for all existing and proposed antennas at the site and exhibits that show the location and orientation of all transmitting antennas and the boundaries of areas with RF exposures in excess of the uncontrolled/general population limit (as that term is defined by the FCC) and also the boundaries of areas with RF exposures in excess of the controlled/occupational limit (as that term is defined by the FCC). Each such boundary shall be clearly marked and identified for every 
transmitting antenna at the project site.

12.   Any environmental documentation required to obtain such federal and/or state license, permit or other approval.

13.   CPUC. A copy of the certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the California Public Utilities Commission (“CPUC”) to the applicant, and a copy of the CPUC decision that authorizes the applicant to provide the wireless telecommunications service for which the facilities are proposed to be constructed in the public right-of-way. Any applicant that, prior to 1996, provided telecommunications service under administratively equivalent documentation issued by the CPUC may submit copies of that documentation in lieu of a certificate of public convenience and necessity.

14.   Environmental Compliance. A completed environmental assessment and documentation establishing that all applicable environmental mitigation measures imposed by the CPUC, city and any other federal or state environmental determinations: (a) have been met; (b) will be met as part of the proposed SWF; or (c) are not applicable.

15.   Noise Compliance. A statement made under penalty of perjury that the level of noise emitted by the proposed SWF will comply with this noise standards contained in the applicable section of the La Habra Municipal Code.

16.   Traffic Control Plan. A traffic control plan will be necessary when the proposed installation will require use of any active traffic lane on any street. It may require the plan to be stamped by a traffic or civil engineer.

17.   Any other information, studies and/or other documentation determined necessary by the city engineer, particularly when there may be the creation of radio interference with existing communications systems such as the police 800 mHz system and other emergency systems.

C.     Findings; Decisions; Consultants.

1.     Findings Required for Approval.

a.     Except for facilities requests, the city engineer or the director of public works, as the case may be, shall approve an application if, on the basis of the application and other materials or evidence provided in review thereof, it finds the following:

i.      The facility is not detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare;

ii.     The facility complies with this chapter and all applicable design and development standards; and

iii.    The facility meets applicable requirements and standards of state and federal law.

b.     For eligible facilities requests, the city engineer or the director of public works, as the case may be, shall approve an application if, on the basis of the application and other materials or evidence provided in review thereof, it finds the following:

i.      That the application qualifies as an eligible facilities request; and

ii.     That the proposed facility will comply with all generally applicable laws.

2.     Decisions. Decisions on an application by the city engineer or the director of public works shall be in writing and include the reasons for the decision.

3.     Independent Consultants. The city engineer or the director of public works, as the case may be, is authorized, in its discretion, to select and retain independent consultant(s) with expertise in telecommunications in connection with the review of any application under this chapter. Such independent consultant review may be retained on any issue that involves specialized or expert knowledge in connection with an application, including, but not limited to, application completeness or accuracy, structural engineering analysis, or compliance with FCC radio frequency emissions standards.

D.    Conditions of Approval. In addition to any supplemental conditions imposed by the city engineer or the director of public works, as the case may be, all permits granted pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the following conditions, unless modified by the approving authority:

1.     Construction Requirements. Every permitted SWF shall be constructed/installed in strict compliance with the approved plans and specifications, provisions of this chapter, all laws, and all written policies and direction of the city engineer related to installation of utilities and/or other physical encroachments into the public right-of-way. All cabling and wiring must be either contained in conduit, inside a metal pole or affixed directly to the face of a wood pole, for as long as it is technically feasible. No exposed slack or extra cable will be allowed. No visible electrical meters will be allowed. The applicant shall negotiate directly with the electric utility to determine a flat rate for installation. The applicant is responsible for the cost of all electrical usage.

All work shall be done in accordance with latest city’s Standards, Caltrans, California Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devises, Work Area Traffic Control Handbook, County and Federal Standards and Specifications or as otherwise required by the city engineer. It is the contractor’s responsibility to obtain the city Standards before starting work. Any work done without inspection or not conforming to said standards and specifications shall be subject to removal and replacement in the presence of a city public works inspector.

2.     Permit Duration. An SWF permit shall be valid for a period of ten years, unless pursuant to another provision of the code or these conditions, it expires sooner or is terminated. At the end of ten years from the date of issuance, such permit shall automatically expire, unless an extension or renewal has been granted. A person holding a wireless encroachment permit must either: (a) remove the facility within thirty days following the permit’s expiration (provided that removal of support structure owned by the city, a utility, or another entity authorized to maintain a support structure in the right of way need not be removed, but must be restored to its prior condition, except as specifically permitted by the city); or (b) at least ninety days prior to expiration, submit an application to renew the permit, which application must, among all other requirements, demonstrate that the impact of the wireless facility cannot be reduced. The wireless facility must remain in place until it is acted upon by the 
city and all appeals from the city’s decision exhausted.

3.     Insurance and Indemnity. As a condition of approval of every SWF permit, and by accepting such permit, the permittee, to the fullest extent permitted by law, agrees to and shall indemnify, defend and pay reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs, and hold harmless the city of La Habra, its elected officials, officers, employees, attorneys, contractors, agents, and volunteers, with respect to any and all claims, liabilities, and legal actions, allegedly or actually arising out of or related to, the acts and/or omissions of the applicant, its owners, officers, employees, contractors, agents, and any other person or entity acting on behalf of the applicant, in the exercise of rights and/or performance of obligations, in connection with any SWF or other permit issued to the applicant pursuant to this chapter.

Prior to entering any public right-of-way pursuant to an SWF permit, the permittee shall procure, provide satisfactory evidence of, and maintain commercial general auto liability, and workers compensation insurance in such form and with such limits as required by the city’s risk manager or otherwise as required as a condition of the issuance of a city encroachment permit. Unless approved in writing by the city risk manager, self-insurance shall not be deemed to satisfy the requirements of this chapter.

4.     Repair Obligations. The permittee shall repair, at its sole cost and expense, any damage including, but not limited to, subsidence, cracking, erosion, collapse, weakening, or loss of lateral support to city streets, sidewalks, walks, curbs, gutters, trees, parkways, street lights, traffic signals, improvements of any kind or nature, or utility lines and systems, underground utility line and systems, or sewer systems and sewer lines that result from any activities performed in connection with the installation, use, and/or maintenance of a communication facility in the public right-of-way. The permittee shall restore such areas, structures and systems to the condition in which they existed prior to the installation or maintenance that necessitated the repairs. The permittee shall complete such repair within the number of days stated on a written notice by the city engineer. Such time period for correction shall be based on the facts and circumstances, danger to the community and severity of the disrepair. Should the permittee not make said correction within the time period allotted, the city engineer shall cause such repair to be completed at permittee’s sole cost and expense

5.     Written Policy and Guidelines. Compliance with any additional Wireless Application Policies and Guidelines issued by the city engineer is required.

6.     RF Exposure Compliance. All facilities must comply with all standards and regulations of the FCC and any other state or federal government agency with the authority to regulate RF exposure standards. After transmitter and antenna system optimization, but prior to unattended operations of the facility, permittee or its representative must conduct on-site post-installation RF emissions testing to demonstrate actual compliance with the FCC OET Bulletin 65 RF emissions safety rules for general population/uncontrolled RF exposure in all sectors. For this testing, the transmitter shall be operating at maximum operating power, and the testing shall occur outwards to a distance where the RF emissions no longer exceed the uncontrolled/general population limit

7.     Abandonment. Whenever a wireless permittee intends to abandon a wireless facility, including any SWF, the permittee must notify the city engineer in writing of its planned abandonment. A wireless facility including an SWF shall be removed within ninety days of abandonment with attainment of all required permits. Any wireless facility not in use for a period of six months shall be considered abandoned and shall be removed within ninety days. (Ord. 1807 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1806 § 2, 2019)

 

18.63.070 Fees.
Each applicant/permittee shall pay one-time and recurring fees, per each SWF, in amounts: (1) not less than those amounts deemed presumptively reasonable under then-in effect federal law or regulations; or (2) established by the city by resolution as a reasonable, non-discriminatory approximation of the city’s costs; or (3) agreed upon by the city and a permittee in a master agreement. All the applicable fees shall be paid as established in the city of La Habra Master Schedule of Fees. (Ord. 1807 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1806 § 2, 2019)

 

18.63.080 Conflicting code provisions superseded.
The provisions of this chapter shall govern and supersede any conflicting provisions of the code with respect to the permitting and regulation of SWFs in the public right-of-way. (Ord. 1807 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1806 § 2, 2019)


Article IV. Administrative
Chapter 18.64 COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION
18.64.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A.    “Applicant” means the owner or subdivider with a controlling proprietary interest in the condominium conversion project, or the person or organization making application under this chapter.

B.     “Application date” means that date on which the completed application for conversion was received by the city.

C.     “Association” means the organization of persons who own a lot, parcel, area, condominium or right of exclusive occupancy in a condominium conversion project.

D.    “Capital improvement fund” means a fund set aside to defray the expenses of major repairs, reconstruction or maintenance. The fund shall not be used for the routine maintenance of ground or other common areas.

E.     “Community apartment project” means a project in which an undivided interest in land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any apartment located therein.

F.     “Condominium” means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property, together with a separate interest in space in a residential, commercial, or industrial complex located on such real property. A “condominium” may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of such real property.

G.    “Conversion” means the development of land and existing structures as either a condominium, stock cooperative or community apartment project. “Conversion” does not include development of previously undeveloped land to a condominium, stock cooperative or community apartment project. “Conversion” does not include development of previously undeveloped land to a condominium or stock co-

        operative nor shall “conversion” include the redevelopment of previously developed land in such forms when all of the structures will be removed from the land prior to the redevelopment.

H.    “Organizational documents” means the declaration of restrictions, articles of incorporation and bylaws of the association.

I.      “Stock cooperative” means a corporation formed primarily for the purpose of holding title to, either in fee simple or for a term of years, improved real property if all or substantially all of the shareholders of such corporation received a right of exclusive occupancy in a portion of the real property, title to which is held by the corporation, which right of occupancy is transferable only concurrently with transfer of the shares of stock in the corporation held by the person having such right of occupancy.

J.      “Tenant” means the person or persons who have signed a rental/lease agreement with the landlord and any persons living with this person in compliance with that rental agreement. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.64.020 Where permitted.
Subject to obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and subject to any requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and any local ordinances adopted pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act, conversions shall be allowed in all zones in which the use is otherwise proper. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.64.030 Pre-application submittals.
Before filing any application for a condominium conversion, the applicant shall submit to the planning coordinating committee, as established in Section 18.52.100, preliminary plans, sketches and basic site information for consideration and advice as to the relation of the proposal to the general development objectives to be attained in the area and as to the policies of the planning commission and city council with reference thereto. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.64.040 Application—Contents.
A.    An application for a conditional use permit for a conversion shall be filed with the director of planning per Chapter 18.66 and shall include site plans, floor plans and architectural plans per Section 18.68.030.

B.     The applicant shall also submit the following:

1.     A description of all common areas, facilities and amenities which are to be provided for the enjoyment and use of unit owners;

2.     A report, in content and in form satisfactory to the director of community development, showing the extent to which the proposed conversion will not comply fully with the building code of the city and this title, existing as of the date of application and also as of the date of the issuance of any building permit of the original construction of the building;

3.     A property report describing the condition and useful life of the roof, foundation, mechanical and electrical, plumbing and structural elements of all existing buildings and structures. This report shall be prepared by either a registered civil or structural engineer or a licensed general building contractor or a general engineering contractor;

4.     A structural pest report prepared by a licensed structural pest control operator indicating the presence or absence of wood-destroying pests or organisms;

5.     A proposed annual operating budget for the project once converted which shall be reasonably calculated to provide for the accumulation of funds necessary to pay for major anticipated maintenance, repair and replacement expenses;

6.     The proposed organizational documents for the project;

7.     Application for a variance from any of the requirements of Section 18.74.080 with which the applicant feels he/she cannot reasonably comply;

8.     A list of the names and mailing addresses of each tenant occupying any unit proposed to be converted, together with a statement designed to be mailed to tenants, which statement shall advise them of the applicant’s wish to convert. This statement shall indicate the applicant’s proposed program for relocation of tenants, shall advise tenants of their rights pursuant to Government Code Section 66247 as applicable, shall set forth the anticipated timing of the proposed conversion if it is approved, and shall indicate a telephone number at which the applicant will be available during business hours to discuss the proposed conversion with tenants. The statement shall also include a blank space for the insertion of the date of any planning commission hearing;

9.     Such other information as may be deemed necessary by the director of community development. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.64.050 Application—Filing fee.
For each application for a conditional use permit for condominium conversion, the city shall charge a fee as established by resolution to defray the expenditures incidental to the proceedings prescribed in this chapter. This fee shall not preclude the payment of other applicable fees. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.64.060 Application—Processing.
The application shall be processed pursuant to Chapter 18.66, except that all occupants of the complex shall be notified in the same manner as described in Section 18.66.050. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.64.070 Other laws and regulations.
Notwithstanding the provisions defined in this chapter, no provision shall be construed as to limit the enforcement of any other applicable laws or regulations. Where a conflict may exist the more restrictive provisions shall apply. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.64.080 Zoning provisions.
The planning commission shall take into account the requirements of this title when considering an application pursuant to this chapter. The planning commission may waive or modify such requirements only if it deems that compliance to them would be an unreasonable condition. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.64.090 Required standards—Residential.
No application for a conditional use permit for a residential conversion can be approved unless each of the following standards are met or a variance from them granted:

A.    Parking. See Chapter 18.14.

B.     Minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be equal to or greater than applicable to the zone in which the proposed conversion is located.

C.     No parcel shall have less than one thousand square feet of usable yard area. The minimum required usable yard areas shall not be less than two hundred square feet for each dwelling unit, either as private usable open space or a combination of private and common open space with at least thirty percent of the total number of dwelling units having a private usable open space area. Such yard area shall be developed pursuant to Section 18.26.040(E).

D.    Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum floor area equal to or greater than that required by the provisions of this code applicable to the zone in which the proposed conversion is located.

E.     Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a minimum of one hundred fifty square feet of storage space within an enclosed, locked cabinet or closet. This space shall be in excess of any closet space within the unit.

F.     The exterior walls and walls separating adjoining dwelling units shall attenuate sound in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Building Code as amended and adopted by the city in effect at the time of the application.

G.    Each dwelling unit for a residential conversion shall comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Code as adopted and amended by the city in effect at the date of application.

H.    The applicant shall provide to the homeowners’ association an amount equal to one percent of the sales price for the first fifteen units and one-half percent of the sales price for each additional unit in order to ensure the ability of the association to maintain the common areas of the development. This amount shall be deposited in a separate capital improvement fund at the time of the closing of each escrow. The organization documents shall require the establishment of this fund.

I.      The applicant shall provide to any tenant whose tenancy is terminated as part of the conversion process with reasonable moving expenses not to exceed one month’s rent.

J.      In addition, with respect to any tenant over the age of sixty-five years or any handicapped tenant whose tenancy is terminated as part of the conversion process, the applicant shall provide the person with reasonable packing expenses not to exceed one month’s rent. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.64.100 Correction of deficiencies.
Any deficiencies identified in the reports submitted pursuant to this chapter shall be corrected unless specifically waived by the planning commission or city council. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.64.110 Approved rental developments.
After the planning commission and/or city council have approved a rental development, no application shall be accepted for a condominium conversion within three years of the issuance by the building department of the certificate of occupancy. Any request received during this time shall comply with all requirements of a condominium development. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.64.120 Grant of permit.
If the standards set forth in Section 18.64.080 are met or variance granted to them, the planning commission or the council may grant the conditional use permit subject to such conditions as it deems appropriate and necessary if it determines that the conversion as conditioned is consistent with the public health, safety and convenience in light of all relevant factors. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

Chapter 18.66 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
18.66.010 Applicability.
A.    The regulations set out in this chapter shall apply to the granting of conditional use permits. Uses may be permitted by the planning commission in zones from which they are prohibited by this chapter where such uses are deemed essential or desirable to the public convenience or welfare, and are in harmony with the various elements or objectives of the comprehensive general plan.

B.     Any use which is distinguished or characterized by matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities” shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter and shall instead be subject to the provisions of Chapter 18.56 et seq., of this code. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.66.020 Application—Contents.
Applications for conditional use permits shall be accompanied by the following information:

A.    A plot plan and description of the property involved showing the location of all existing and proposed buildings; plans and descriptions of the proposed use of the property with ground plans and elevations for all proposed buildings;

B.     A reference to the provisions of this title under which application is sought;

C.     A verified list of the name and address of each property owner within three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the property involved, using for this purpose the last-known name and address of such owners as shown upon the last assessment roll of the city or county. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.66.030 Application—Filing.
A.    Applications for conditional use permits shall be made in writing to the planning commission in such form as is approved by the planning commission. The planning commission may provide forms for such purposes and may prescribe the type of information to be provided thereon. No petition shall be received unless it complies with such requirements.

B.     Applications filed pursuant to this chapter shall be numbered consecutively in the order of their filing and shall become a part of the permanent official records of the planning commission, and there shall be attached thereto copies of all notices and actions pertaining thereto. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.66.040 Applications—Investigation.
The planning commission shall cause to be made by its own members, or members of its staff, such investigation of facts bearing upon such application as will serve to provide all necessary information to assure that the action on each such application is consistent with the intent and purpose of this title and with previous actions of the commission and city council. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.66.050 Public hearing—Scheduling—Notice.
Following the receipt in proper form of any such application, the secretary of the planning commission shall fix a time and place of public hearing thereon. Not less than ten days before the date of such public hearing, notice of the date, time, place of hearing and location of the property and the nature of the request shall be given in the following manner:

A.    By publishing once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city;

B.     By mailing a notice, postage prepaid, to the applicant, to each member of the planning commission, and to the owners of all property within three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the property involved, using for this purpose the last-known name and the address of such owners as shown upon the last assessment roll of the city or county. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.66.060 Public hearing—Conduct.
Public hearings as provided for in this chapter shall be held before the planning commission at the time and place for which public notice has been given as required in Section 18.66.050. The planning commission may establish its own rules for the conduct of such hearings. A summary of all pertinent testimony offered at a public hearing, together with the names and addresses of all persons testifying shall be recorded and made a part of the permanent files of the case. Any such hearing may be continued; provided, that prior to the adjournment or recess thereof, the presiding officer at such hearing shall announce the time and place to which such hearing will be continued. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.66.070 Planning commission action.
A.    Within thirty-five days after the conclusion of a public hearing, the planning commission shall render its decision on the matter so heard. The failure of the planning commission to render such decision within thirty-five days after the conclusion of the hearing shall be deemed to constitute a denial.

B.     The planning commission shall announce and record its actions by formal resolution, and such resolution shall recite the findings of the planning commission upon which it bases its decision.

C.     The planning commission shall make the following required findings before any conditional use permit may be approved:

1.     The granting of such conditional use permit will not be detrimental to the public welfare and will not unreasonably interfere with the use, possession and enjoyment of surrounding and adjacent properties and will not impair the character of the zone in which it is to be located.

2.     The subject site is physically suitable for the type of land use being proposed.

3.     The use is conditionally permitted within the subject zone and complies with the intent of all applicable provisions of this title.

4.     The granting of this conditional use permit is consistent with the comprehensive general plan. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.66.080 Appeal.
A.    The granting, either with or without conditions or the denial of such application by the planning commission shall be final unless within ten working days from the date of the decision of the planning commission the applicant, or any other person aggrieved, appeals there from in writing to the city council by presenting such appeal to the city clerk. The city clerk, after the filing of such appeal, shall set a date for a public hearing; giving of notice and conduct of the hearing shall be consistent with the provisions of the chapter for hearing by the planning commission, except that at the commencement of the public hearing set for the appeal before the city council, the appealing party shall set forth the basis for any such appeal and any evidence or argument in support of the appeal. Thereafter, any person or applicant in response to the appeal may set forth any evidence or argument to rebut the appeal. The decision appealed from shall be affirmed unless reversed by a vote of not less than a majority of the voting members of the city council.

B.     No permit or license shall be issued for any use involved in an application for a conditional use permit until the permit has become final by reason of the failure of any person to appeal or by reason of the action of the city council. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.66.090 Term—Extension.
A.    If the use authorized by any conditional use permit is or has been unused, abandoned or discontinued for a period of one year, the conditional use permit shall become null and void and of no effect.

B.     The planning commission or the city council may, upon their own initiative or upon the request of the applicant, extend the use authorized by the conditional use permit for a period not to exceed one year. Such action shall be initiated prior to the original expiration date of the conditional use permit. This action shall be by administrative procedure and shall not require a public hearing. A maximum of one extension may be granted. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.66.100 Violation.
A.    Upon violation of any applicable provision of this title or, if granted subject to conditions, upon failure to comply with conditions, or due to a change in conditions occurring after the original grant of the conditional use permit which change in conditions makes the continuation of the permit incompatible with the general welfare of the surrounding neighborhood, a conditional use permit shall be suspended automatically.

B.     The planning commission shall hold a public hearing within forty days in accordance with the procedures prescribed in this chapter for appeals, and if not satisfied that the regulation, general provision or condition is being complied with, may revoke the conditional use permit or take such action as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the regulation, general provision or condition. Within fifteen days following the date of a decision of the planning commission revoking a conditional use permit, the secretary shall transmit to the city council written notice of the decision. The decision shall be final thirty

        days following the date on which the conditional use permit was revoked unless an appeal has been filed. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

Chapter 18.68 DESIGN REVIEW
18.68.010 Generally.
Design review is established in order to ensure that site design, buildings, structures, signs, and landscaping will be in harmony with other structures and improvements in the vicinity of the proposed development and consistent with the general plan and the zoning. (Ord. 1744 § 2, 2013; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.68.020 Applicability.
Before any building or structure which requires design review is erected on any lot, design plans shall be submitted to and approved by the planning commission subject to the provisions of this chapter. Exception: patio roofs, shade structures and minor out buildings in residential zones may be approved as an administrative adjustment at the discretion of the director of community development. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.68.030 Application.
Applications for design review shall be made in writing to the planning commission in such form as is approved by the director of community development. Applications filed pursuant to this chapter shall be numbered consecutively in the order of their filing and shall become a part of the permanent official records of the planning commission, and there shall be attached thereto copies of all notices and actions pertaining thereto. Applications for design review shall be accompanied by the following:

A.    All the applicable fees as established in the City of La Habra Master Schedule of Fees.

B.     Eighteen printed sets and one digital set of design plans which include a fully dimensioned plot plan and description of the property involved showing the location of all existing and proposed buildings along with floor and elevation plans of all the proposed building and structures. The plans shall be drawn to a standard architectural or engineering scale (i.e., 1/4″ = 1′, 1/8″ = 1′, 1′ = 20″, etc.) and shall indicate clearly with full dimensions the following information:

1.     Location and design of all off-street parking and circulation areas;

2.     Location of the points of ingress and egress for pedestrians and vehicles;

3.     Location and nature of reflective devices (lighting);

4.     Location of landscape areas;

 

5.     Location and design of all trash storage areas and related screen walls;

6.     Location of all public utilities installations including: poles, transformers, vaults and meters;

7.     Location of all external mechanical equipment;

8.     Location, height and materials of all walls and fences;

9.     Calculations showing the percentage of land coverage, the parking requirements, and the landscape area provided;

10.   Relationship of property to public streets and alleys, and any required street dedications and improvements;

11.   Surface drainage patterns and structure;

12.   Exterior finish materials and colors;

13.   Roofing materials and pitches.

C.     Material board.

D.    Color Elevations. One printed set and one digital set of all building elevations fully rendered in color.

E.     Color Photographs. One printed set and one digital set of the subject property showing the existing conditions along with any photo simulations (if applicable) of the proposed improvements.

F.     Sign Plan. One printed set and one digital set of plans showing the design, colors and location of all signs.

G.    Landscape Plan. One printed set and one digital set of a conceptual landscape plan which show all the proposed landscape areas and materials.

H.    A complete description and operational characteristics of the proposed project.

I.      An environmental assessment of the proposed project in such form as approved by the director of community development along with any other environmental analysis that may be required under the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).

J.      A verified list of the name and address of each property owner within three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the property involved, utilizing at a minimum the last-known name and address of such owners as shown upon the last assessment roll of the city or county.

K.    Developments that result in the employment of two hundred fifty employees or more shall submit a transportation demand management plan (TDM) per the requirements of Chapter 18.20 of this title. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.68.040 Public hearing.
Upon receipt of a completed application, a public hearing before the planning commission shall be conducted as provided herein. The secretary of the planning commission shall fix a time and place of public hearing thereon. Not less than ten days before the date of such public hearing, notice of the date, time, place of hearing and location of the property and the nature of the request shall be given in the following manner:

A.    By publishing once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city; and

B.     By mailing a notice, postage prepaid, to the applicant, to each member of the planning commission, and to the owners of all property within three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the property

        involved, using for this purpose the last-known name and address of such owners as shown upon the last assessment roll of the city or county.

C.     Public hearings as provided for in this chapter shall be held before the planning commission at the time and place for which public notice has been given as required in this section. The planning commission may establish their own rules for the conduct of such hearings. A summary of all pertinent testimony offered at a public hearing, together with the names and addresses of all persons testifying shall be recorded and made a part of the permanent files of the case. Any such hearing may be continued; provided, that prior to the adjournment or recess thereof, the presiding officer at such hearing shall announce the time and place to which such hearing will be continued.

D.    Within thirty-five days after the conclusion of a public hearing, the planning commission shall render its decision on the matter so heard. The failure of the planning commission to render such decision within thirty-five days after the conclusion of the hearing shall be deemed to constitute a denial.

E.     The planning commission shall announce and record its actions by formal resolution, and such resolution shall recite the findings of the planning commission upon which it bases its decision. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.68.050 Findings.
In order for the planning commission to approve a design plan, the following finding must be made:

A.    The proposed plan is consistent with the city’s general plan.

B.     The proposed plan is consistent with the city’s zoning ordinance.

C      The proposed plan is in the best interests of the public health, safety, and welfare of the community.

D.    The nature of the proposed land uses and the design is appropriate for the proposed location is compatible to the surrounding land uses and improvements.

E.     The project complies with all requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.68.060 Appeal.
The applicant or any other aggrieved person may appeal, in writing, setting forth his/her reason for such appeal, to the city council. Such appeal and the fee therefore shall be filed with the city clerk within ten working days after the planning commission decision. The city clerk, after the filing of such appeal, shall set a date for a public hearing; giving of notice and conduct of the hearing shall be consistent with the provisions of the chapter for hearing by the planning commission, except that at the commencement of the public hearing set for the appeal before the city council, the appealing party shall set forth the basis for any such appeal and any evidence or argument in support of the appeal. Thereafter, any person or applicant in response to the appeal may set forth any evidence or argument to rebut the appeal. The decision appealed from shall be affirmed unless reversed by a vote of not less than a majority of the voting members of the city council. The decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.68.070 Conformance.
The approved design plans including any conditions shown thereon or attached thereto shall be dated and signed by the planning manager. One copy of the adopted resolution shall be mailed to the applicant. No permits shall thereafter be issued for any building, structure or use except in substantial conformance with the precise plan. Minor modification may be approved by the director of community development. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.68.080 Violation.
Upon violation of any applicable provision of this title or, if granted subject to conditions, upon failure to comply with conditions of an approved design plan, the property owner shall be subject to the administrative citations process per Chapter 1.20 of the La Habra Municipal Code. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.68.090 Expiration—Extension.
A.    If no development is commenced under the approved design plan within twelve months after the date of approval and no time extension has been approved by the planning commission, the design plan shall become null and void, and the approval of a new design plan shall be required.

B.     For purposes of this section, “development” shall mean commencement of construction on the site consistent with the design plan, which shall not include the commencement of any predevelopment work on the site, including surveying, preliminary construction staking, installation of erosion control measures or construction fencing, but which shall include review and approval by the city of proposed building plans and the issuance of building permits authorizing construction to commence, and actual construction shall have commenced on the site, such as final grading, pouring of footings and/or foundation, or similar activities. Should the building permit expire and no time extension has been approved by the planning commission, the design plan shall become null and void, and the approval of a new design plan shall be required.

C.     The planning commission or the city council may, upon their own initiative or upon the request of the applicant, extend the approved design plan for a period not to exceed one year. Such action shall be initiated prior to the original expiration date of the design review. This action shall be by administrative procedure and shall not require a public hearing. A maximum of one extension may be granted. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

Chapter 18.70 FEES
18.70.010 Designated.
Before accepting any application for filing, the city shall charge and collect fees as established by resolution for the purpose of defraying expenditures incidental to the proceedings prescribed in this title. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

Chapter 18.72 ENFORCEMENT
18.72.010 Responsibility generally—Right of entry.
The provisions of this title shall be interpreted and administered by the department of building and safety, whose inspectors or authorized representatives shall have the right to enter upon any premises affected by this title for purposes of inspection. Any such interpretations and administrative decisions may be appealed to the planning commission. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.72.020 Conformance of permits and licenses.
All departments, officials and public employees of the city, vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses, shall conform to the provisions of this title and shall issue no permit or license for uses, buildings or purposes in conflict with this title, and any such permit or license issued in conflict with this chapter shall be null and void. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.72.030 Violation—Nuisance.
Any building or structure erected or maintained, or any use of property, contrary to this chapter is unlawful and a public nuisance and the city attorney shall immediately commence actions and proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law, and shall take such other steps, and shall apply to any court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such building, structure or use and restrain and enjoin any person from erecting or maintaining such building or structure, or using any property contrary to this title. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.72.040 Violation—Injunction.
This title may also be enforced by injunction issued out of the Superior Court upon the suit of the city or the owner or occupant of any real property affected by such violation or prospective violation. This method of enforcement shall be cumulative and in no way affect the penal provisions of this code. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

Chapter 18.74 NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION, CODE ENFORCEMENT AND ABATEMENT
18.74.010 Purpose and alternative actions.
A.    In order to further the stated goals of the city, and, more particularly, for the stabilization of the economic and social aspects of a neighborhood, and the promotion of aesthetic considerations and to protect its citizens and their property, the city council has determined that an ordinance is necessary to effectively abate conditions or activities in this city which constitute a public nuisance. The purpose of this chapter is to require the maintenance of property on commercial, industrial and residentially zoned property. The city council recognizes that the use of property for residential use includes those customary activities which make the home more comfortable and enjoyable, such as gardening, certain recrea-

        tional activities, and the enjoyment of certain hobbies. The scope of such activity is circumscribed only insofar as it may not assume a commercial or public character, or constitutes a health hazard or safety hazard, or is detrimental to other properties in the neighborhood. Any zoning restrictions contained herein are intended to retain the highest residential and aesthetic value to the property owners and the city.

B.     It is the intention of the city council, in adopting the ordinance codified in this chapter, to set forth general guidelines for determining what conditions/activities constitute a nuisance; to establish a method for giving notice of the conditions and an opportunity to correct them; and finally, in the event the nuisance is not corrected, to provide a procedure which allows the property owner reasonable notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard on the issues of (1) whether a nuisance exists on the property; and (2) whether in fairness and in justice there is no other way to eliminate the nuisance.

C.     It is the purpose of the provisions of this chapter to provide a just, equitable and practical method, to be cumulative with and in addition to any other legal remedy, criminal or civil, established by law which may be pursued to address violations of this municipal code. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the city from at any time commencing a civil or criminal proceeding to abate a public nuisance or from pursuing any other means available to it under provisions of applicable ordinances or state law to correct hazards or deficiencies in real property in addition to or as alternatives to the proceedings herein set forth.

D.    This chapter does not affect or alter nuisance abatement procedures established or which may be established in other chapters of this municipal code. This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of property maintenance. It shall be supplemental and in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore or hereinafter enacted by the city, state of California, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction.

E.     In addition to the abatement procedures provided herein, this chapter defines what conditions or activities constitute a public nuisance. The city council declares that any condition or activity caused, maintained or permitted to exist in violation of any provisions of this code which is offensive or annoying to the senses, or is detrimental to property values or community appearance, or is injurious so as to pose a serious threat to the public’s health, safety or welfare, shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated consistent with the procedures provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.74.020 Administration and enforcement.
A.    The community preservation technicians, building officials, and the manager shall have the authority to issue citations should there be no response to the initial notice of an incident constituting a nuisance as defined in this chapter as opposed to the general policy of first issuing correction notices.

B.     The issuance of citations to enforce provisions as contained in this chapter shall be governed by Title 1 of this code.

C.     Any person authorized by the manager to administer this chapter may, with the consent of the property owner or the person in possession thereof, enter upon private property at all reasonable times for the purposes specified in this chapter including, but not limited to, entry for inspection and for enforcement of this chapter, to examine vehicles or parts thereof, obtain information as to the identity of the vehicle, and remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursu-

        ant to this chapter. Where consent is refused or cannot be obtained, a judicial warrant which authorizes entry into the property to inspect and abate must be obtained.

D.    When such entry is to be made in an area which is fenced or posted and which is within the “curtilage” area immediately surrounding the residence the following procedures shall apply in the absence of state legislation creating an abatement warrant procedure:

1.     An attempt shall be made to obtain the written consent of the property owner to enter the property and to abate the nuisance. An initial request for entry within ten days, utilizing a stamped and addressed return addressed envelope shall be mailed to the property owner at the address shown on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current. If consent to enter enclosed private property for purposes of this chapter is refused by the property owner or occupant, the city attorney shall, at his/her option, send a second demand letter. If again entry is refused or if the city attorney determines that a second demand letter is not feasible, the city attorney shall, utilizing an inspection warrant procedure detailed in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1822.50 et seq., apply to a judicial officer for a warrant which authorizes entry onto property for the purposes of abatement in connection with issuing the warrant.

2.     If exigent circumstances exist which pose an immediate threat to public health and safety or if facts and circumstances exist to reasonably justify a failure to seek consent from the property owner, the city attorney shall seek relief from the court and cause the issuance of a forcible warrant by the court pursuant to Section 1822.56 of the California Code of Civil Procedure. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.74.030 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, words and phrases designated herein have the following meanings:

“Abandoned,” in addition to such other definitions that may be provided in law, means and refers to any item of property which has been given up absolutely, without reference to any particular person; or some overt act or failure to act which carries an implication that the owner neither claims nor retains any interest. In determining whether one has abandoned his/her property, the following factors shall be considered:

1.     Present operability and functional utility, although mere nonuse is not necessarily an abandonment;

2.     The date of last effective use accompanied by acts manifesting an intent to abandonment;

3.     The physical condition of disrepair or damage;

4.     The last time an effort was made to repair or rehabilitate the item;

5.     The status of registration or licensing of the item;

6.     The age of the item and degree of obsolescence;

7.     The cost of rehabilitation or repair of the item versus its market value;

8.     The nature of the area and location of the item;

9.     The physical location of the owner.

“Appeals board” means the planning commission, which shall hear appeals arising from all abatement proceedings arising from enforcement of this chapter.

“Director” means the director of planning of the city or authorized agents, assistants, deputies or representatives.

“Highway” means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. Highway includes streets and alleys.

“Manager” or “city manager” means the city manager of the city of La Habra or designee.

“Nuisance” means any activity or condition which poses a danger and serious threat to health or safety, or may be injurious to the public health, if not suppressed or regulated, or is indecent or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any public park, square, street or highway.

“Occupant” means any person or entity having possessory rights, who can control what goes on premises, whether as a tenant or owner.

“Officer” or “designated officer” means any officer of the city selected by the manager, or if the manager elects to contract for a hearing officer, that individual selected by the manager authorized to administratively adjudicate public nuisance proceedings.

“Owner” means any person or entity owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any real or personal property in the city. Owner as applied to real property is the legal owner, one in whom that legal title of real estate is vested.

“Planning commission” or “commission” means the planning commission of the city of La Habra.

“Polluted water” means water contained in a swimming pool, pond or other body of water which is abandoned, unattended, unfiltered or not otherwise maintained resulting in the water becoming polluted which includes but is not limited to bacterial growth, algae, remains of insects, remains of deceased animals, reptiles, rubbish, refuse, debris, papers and any other foreign matter or material which because of its nature, amount or location constitutes an unhealthy, unsafe or unsightly condition.

“Premises” means an estate, including land and buildings thereon, encompassing a definite and distinct locality, such as a room, shop, building, structure or other definite area, or a distinct portion of real estate.

“Private nuisance” means every nuisance other than a public nuisance.

“Public nuisance” means any nuisance which affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon individuals may be unequal.

“Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle, boat, vessel or other type of portable structure, with or without a mode of power, and without permanent foundation, which can be towed, hauled, sailed, flown or driven, and is designed, used, or maintained primarily for recreational purposes, such as, but not limited to, travel trailers, tent trailers, camping trailers, motor homes, buses converted to recreational or other noncommercial uses, vans, trucks with or without camper shells, campers, motorcycles, off-road vehicles, aircraft, boats or other vessels.

“Refuse and waste” means unused or discarded matter and material having no substantial market value and which consists of such matter and material as: rubbish, refuse, debris and matter of any kind including but not limited to rubble, asphalt, concrete, plaster, tile, rocks, bricks, soil, boxes, appliances, furniture, inoperative vehicles and parts thereof, trimmings from plants and items which are offensive or odor-

        ous. Refuse and waste matter, which by reason of its location and character is unsightly and interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of property by neighbors, or which would materially hamper or interfere with the prevention or suppression of fire upon the premises.

“Vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, excepting a device moved exclusively by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.74.040 Declaration of nuisance.
It is declared a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises in the city to maintain upon such premises or to permit, cause or allow to exist on such premises, any condition which constitutes a public nuisance as defined by this chapter or a condition that is determined to be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare. Such conditions shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:

A.    Landscape Areas.

1.     Maintenance of Dead/Overgrown Vegetation. To maintain vegetation, including, but not limited to, trees, shrubbery, weeds and grass greater than six inches in height, cultivated or uncultivated, which is overgrown, dead, decayed or diseased such that it is likely to harbor rats, vermin, insects, other animals, or other nuisances which are dangerous to the public health, safety or general welfare; or

2.     Maintenance of Adverse Topography. To maintain land, the topography, geology or configuration of which causes erosion, subsidence or surface water runoff problems of such magnitude as to be injurious or potentially injurious to the public health, safety or general welfare; or

3.     Maintenance of Uncompacted Fill. To maintain on the property or premises any accumulation of uncompacted fill over three feet in height over predominant grade and contrary to adjacent contour for any period when such accumulation would seriously endanger public health or safety; or

4.     Maintenance of Excavations and Piles of Dirt. To maintain excavations and piles of dirt such that they constitute a hazard to unwary passersby or to minor children, and are detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare; or

5.     Maintenance of Underground or Aboveground Storage Tanks. To fail to remove underground or aboveground storage vessels or tanks within six months after the use of such tanks or vessels ceases pursuant to the Uniform Fire Code Section 79.115 or to maintain underground tanks contrary to the provisions of the California State Health and Safety Code Sections 25280 through 26299.6 inclusive; or

6.     Maintenance of Vacant Lots. To fail to maintain a vacant lot in the city in accordance with the requirements of Section 18.74.040(E); or

7.     Maintenance of Artificial Turf. The property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of all artificial turf at all times. The property owner shall be responsible for the replacement/repair of artificial turf due to the following issues, but not limited to: fading; unnatural appearance; stains; rips; tears; weeds; debris; impressions; has improper water drainage forming small ponds that could be attractive to vectors; lumps or rolls causing an unsecure or unsafe surface; or graffiti.

 

B.     Main Building and Accessory Structures.

1.     Maintenance of Dilapidated Structures. To maintain buildings or structures, or portions thereof, which are damaged, dilapidated, or inadequately or improperly maintained such that they are structurally unsafe, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or which are otherwise dangerous to human life or which in relation to existing use constitute a serious threat to the public’s health, safety and general welfare. This includes any building, structure or

        property which has been constructed or is maintained in violation of any specific regulation applicable to a building, structure or property contained in the building codes of this city, or any law of the city or state relating to the condition, location, maintenance or construction of buildings or property. Such buildings or structures shall include those which are abandoned, hazardously or inadequately boarded up, partially destroyed, or in an unreasonable state of partial construction. An unreasonable state of partial construction is defined as any unfinished building or structure which has been in the course of construction two years or more, and where the appearance and other conditions of the unfinished building or structure substantially detracts from the appearance of the immediate neighborhood or reduces the property values in the immediate neighborhood; or

2.     Maintenance of Hazardous Conditions. To maintain some activity or condition that would seriously endanger public health or safety and which is related to buildings, structures or appendages, walls, fences or landscaping which requires immediate correction, repair or adequate and proper maintenance, including but not limited to the existence of broken glass in doors or windows which are located in an area of public access; surfaces showing evidence of excessive dry rot, warping or termite infestation; absence of paint, stain, varnish or similar coating intended to protect the weatherability of any structural member; doors, aisles, passageways, stairways or other means of exit which do not provide a safe and adequate means of exit; any wall or other vertical structural member which lists, leans or is buckled to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base; or any other condition which because of a lack of proper sanitation or soundness, or as a result of dilapidation, decay, damage or faulty construction or arrangement, may be injurious to the public health and safety if not suppressed or regulated; or

3.     Abandoned Buildings. To abandon or vacate any building or structure so that it becomes readily available to unauthorized persons; or

4.     Violate Land Use Ordinance, Licensing and Building Codes. To construct, erect, alter, move or maintain any building or structure contrary to the provisions of the La Habra land use ordinance, or to use any property contrary to such ordinance, or fail to comply with any condition attached to the granting of a conditional use permit, variance, or site plan; or to conduct or operate a commercial activity in any zone without a business license and in direct violation of zoning, licensing and building codes regarding location, compatibility and occupancy; or

5.     Violate Sign Ordinance. Any sign or sign structure maintained in violation of Chapter 15.40 of this code; or

6.     Maximum Percentage of Front Yard to be Covered with Impervious Materials. The coverage of more than sixty percent of the front yard of residential properties by pavement or other hardscape (impervious) material which may be used for the temporary parking of vehicles is prohibited. When practical difficulties exist that require a greater front yard coverage than allowed by this section, approval of a zone variance is required in order to obtain permission to increase the percentage of front yard coverage. The planning commission may, upon sufficient showing of need by the applicant, increase the front yard coverage to a maximum of eighty percent. In consideration of such an increase, the planning commission shall be guided by a review of the size and configuration of the proposed coverage as compared with other similar developments in the same zone or vicinity.

C.     Supplemental Conditions.

 

1.     Maintenance of Detrimental Property Conditions. To maintain or fail to maintain property, or any building or structure thereon, in such condition so that it is defective, unsightly, or in such condition of deterioration or disrepair that it causes or will cause a health or safety hazard or in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance as defined in California Civil Code Section 3480, including, but not limited to, anything dangerous to human life or detrimental to human health, or any habitation that is overcrowded with occupants or that lacks adequate ventilation, sanitation or plumbing facilities, or that constitute a fire hazard; or

2.     Maintenance of Unharmonious Uses. To use or maintain, or fail to use or maintain the property, or any building or structure thereon, in such a manner or condition so out of harmony or conformity with the use or maintenance standards of adjacent properties as to cause substantial diminution of the enjoyment, use or property values of such adjacent properties; or

3.     Maintenance of Hazardous Pools, Ponds, Polluted Water and Excavations.

a.     To maintain ponds, pools, polluted water or unenclosed or empty swimming pools such that they constitute a hazard to unwary passersby or to minor children, and are detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare,

b.     Further, to maintain excavations, ponds, pools, or unenclosed or empty swimming pools contrary to the provisions of Chapter 15.32 of the La Habra Municipal Code; or

4.     Maintenance of Miscellaneous Conditions or Activities which Are Detrimental to Property Values or Community Appearances. To place, maintain, hang, dry, or air clothing, household fabric or laundry on or from any manmade or natural device, including, but not limited to, clotheslines, fences, open windows, balconies, trees or shrubbery in a front or side yard that abuts a public street; or

5.     Storage of Construction Material/Equipment in Residential Zone. To park or store on any street or property within a residential zone construction equipment, buses, limousines, tow trucks, flatbed trucks, grading equipment, tractors trailers, truck tractors, any other commercial vehicle over twenty-two feet long or eight feet in height or ninety inches wide, supplies, materials or machinery of any type or description. Commercial vehicles, for the purpose of this section, shall be defined as any motorized or nonmotorized vehicle used or maintained to transport property or goods for profit, or persons for hire or compensation. This section shall not apply to lawfully placed construction vehicles, machinery, equipment, supplies or materials during the period in which a valid building permit exists for the on-site construction, rehabilitation, remodel, or refurbishment of a residential property on which or in front of which the construction vehicles, machinery, equipment, materials and supplies are parked or stored; provided, that said work is progressing normally and diligently and the vehicles, machinery, equipment, materials and supplies are just those needed for the particular work being performed; or

6.     Storage of Discarded Materials. To store refuse and waste in such a manner or in such condition as to be detrimental to the public health, safety, or general welfare or which is detrimental to nearby property values or community appearance; or

7.     Storage of Trash/Garbage Containers. To store trash or garbage cans, bins, boxes or other such containers in any single-family residential yard area, parking area, front or side yard, such that they are visible from a highway as defined herein on other than regularly scheduled pick up days and which are detrimental to nearby property values, improvements or the public health, safety or general welfare. Refuse containers may be placed at the collection location in public view between four p.m. on the day preceding collection until ten p.m. on the day of collection. Dumpsters or storage bins may be located in front yard areas with an active building permit that covers excavation, construction or demolition operations, or for a period not to exceed seventy-two hours for general cleanup of the subject property; or

8.     Storage of Hazardous Materials.

a.     To improperly store, discharge, hold, handle, maintain, use or otherwise deal with hazardous or extremely hazardous wastes as defined by California Health and Safety Code Sections 25115, 25117, 25117.5 and 25124 respectively. Hazardous shall be defined by Health and Safety Code Section 25116.5 which states, in part, “causing or significantly contributing to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible illness or posing a substantial present or potential risk to human health or the environment,”

b.     This includes the discharge or deposit of any source of hazardous, infectious or extremely hazardous waste into any sewer, storm drain or similar facility which will or may cause or result in the pollution of any underground or surface water. Examples include but are not limited to petroleum products, laboratory wastes, specimens (pathological or surgical) or equipment,

c.     Furthermore, any violation of federal, state, or local laws or regulations, including but not limited to California Health and Code Sections 25100 through 25185 and Section 4-3 of the Orange County Code, and all their respective amendments, shall constitute a public nuisance under this part; or

9.     Fences and Walls. To maintain fences, walls or similar structures which are not structurally intact or that are damaged, dilapidated or in nonconformance with specific provisions contained in zoning ordinances; or

10.   Driveways, Walkways and Potholes. To maintain driveways or walkways in such a condition so as to be injurious or potentially injurious to the public health, safety or general welfare; or

11.   Animals, Reptiles or Insects. To keep any animal, reptile or insect in such a manner as to pose a threat, disturbance or menace to persons or property of another or in a public right-of-way; or

12.   Machinery Dust, Exhaust, Noise or Fumes. To keep, operate or maintain any machinery which by reason of its dust, exhaust, noise or fumes creates a health or safety hazard; or

13.   Buildings or Structures with Broken Windows. To maintain buildings or structures in such a condition so as to allow broken windows to remain unboarded longer than twenty-four hours from the date of the first “Notice of Correction,” or so as to allow any construction material utilized in the boarding up process to remain attached or affixed to the building or structure for longer than any five-day period or to maintain buildings or structures in such a condition so as to allow broken windows to be injurious or potentially injurious to the public health.

D.    Vehicles—Living in Recreational Vehicle. To use a parked or stored recreational vehicle as temporary or permanent living space.

E.     Vacant Lots. To fail to maintain a vacant lot, located in a residential, commercial or industrial zones of the city, in accordance with the following minimum landscape requirements:

1.     Vacant Lots With No Previous Development. Vacant lots where no previous development has taken place, and where none currently exists, shall not permit vegetation to be over six inches in height in accordance with Section 18.74.040(A)(l).

2.     Vacant lots where previous development existed and structures were/are removed. Vacant lots which were previously developed, but where all, or substantially all, of the structures on the property have been removed, shall be maintained as follows:

a.     The number of trees and size to be provided along the street setback area(s) shall be in accordance with Section 18.16.040(A)(4). The entire lot, including parkways, shall be improved with sod or other ground planting material as approved by the director of community development. The property, including parkways, shall be improved with an irrigation system to maintain the installed landscaping in good condition. All approved landscaping shall be maintained in good condition at all times.

b.     In addition to complying with any and all county, state and federal requirements, lots that have been deemed contaminated by the Orange County Health Department or any other governmental agency, shall be landscaped in the following manner:

i.      Where the ground water table is twenty feet or less from surface grade, palm trees shall be utilized along the street setback in accordance with the requirements in Section 18.16.040(A)(4). The entire lot shall be improved with a drought tolerant groundcover variety. The irrigation system shall be designed utilizing drip irrigation techniques. All approved landscaping shall be maintained in good condition at all times.

ii.     Where the groundwater table is twenty-one feet or more from surface grade, the property owner shall maintain the lot in accordance with the requirements of subsection (E)(2)(a), noted above, in addition to complying with the remaining requirements of subsection (E)(2).

c.     Within thirty days of a lot becoming vacant within the meaning of this section or before issuance of demolition permits, the property owner shall submit a landscape and irrigation plan in compliance with the requirements of this section, along with a schedule for implementation for the proposed improvements, to the director of community development for his/her approval. Upon the approval of the plan, full improvements to the property shall be completed within thirty days. A reasonable extension of time may be granted by the director of community development in those situations where the director, in his/her sole discretion, determines that a good faith effort is being made by the property owner to comply with the ordinance.

d.     The director of community development, in his/her discretion, may require that any lot covered by this section be secured with a fence, to preclude illegal dumping on the property, or to otherwise protect the health, safety or welfare of the public. The director of community development must approve any such fence prior to installation. The fence shall be a wrought iron fence, and shall allow clear visibility of all portions of the lot, unless written permission is obtained to the contrary from the director of community development. An alternate type of fence material may be allowed if the condition of the property and surrounding developments warrant such a change. The fence shall not exceed a height limit of six feet and may not be placed within the required front or street setback areas.

 

e.     Vacant unimproved lots existing at the time of this code amendment shall be brought into compliance with the code within one hundred and eighty days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. A reasonable extension of time may be granted by the director of community development in those situations where the director, in his or her sole discretion, determines that a good faith effort is being made by the property owner to comply with this section.

3.     Lots Improved With Vacant Structures. Lots improved with structures that become vacant shall be maintained as follows:

a.     All existing landscaping shall be maintained in good condition at all times, including parkways.

b.     All structures shall be maintained in good condition at all times in accordance with requirements of Section 18.74.040.

c.     The director of community development, in his or her discretion, after a structure has become vacant for thirty days, may require that any lot covered by this section be secured with a fence, to preclude illegal dumping on the property, or to otherwise protect the health, safety or welfare of the public. The director of community development must approve any such fence prior to installation. The fence shall be a wrought iron fence, and shall allow clear visibility of all portions of the lot, unless written permission is obtained to the contrary from the director of community development. An alternate type of fence material may be allowed if the condition of the property and surrounding developments warrant such a change. The fence shall not exceed a height limit of six feet and may not be placed within the required front or street setback areas.

d.     Vacant lots improved with structures at the time of this code amendment shall be brought into conformance within sixty days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. A reasonable extension of time may be granted by the director of community development in those situations where the director, in his or her sole discretion, determines that a good faith effort is being made by the property owner to comply with this section.

4.     Noncompliance. Failure to comply with the requirements of subsection E, Vacant Lots, shall constitute a nuisance in accordance with Section 18.74.040(A)(6), and may be abated as permitted in this chapter. (Ord. 1727 § 3, 2011; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.74.050 Unlawful property nuisances.
It is unlawful for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any property in the city to maintain such property in such manner that any of the conditions set forth in Section 18.74.040 shall exist. The procedures for abatement set forth in this chapter shall not be the exclusive means by which such conditions may be abated and shall not in any manner limit or restrict the city from enforcing other city ordinances or provisions of the municipal code or from abating public nuisances in any other manner provided by law. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.74.060 Owners’ responsibility for property maintenance.
A.    Every owner of real property within the city, whether commercial, industrial or residential, is required to maintain such property in a manner so as not to violate the provisions of this code and such owner remains liable for violations thereof regardless of any contract or agreement with any third party regarding such property.

B.     Every occupant, lessee, or holder of any interest in property other than as owner thereof is required to maintain such property in a manner consistent with the standards described in Section 18.76.040. California Civil Code Section 1941 requires the lessor of a building intended for human occupancy to maintain the building in a condition which is fit for such occupation and to repair all dilapidation which render it untenantable. Accordingly, this section is intended to and shall be interpreted in a manner which is consistent with California Civil Code Section 1941 and any amendments thereto.

C.     An occupant of property who is not the legal owner shall not be liable for any nuisance (as defined by Section 18.74.030) which the occupant did not create, and which the occupant did not knowingly maintain or permit to continue. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.74.070 Finding of nuisance.
A.    When the conditions which are found to constitute a nuisance are determined not to pose an immediate threat to the public peace, health, safety or welfare, a correction notice shall be personally served, delivered by mail or certified mail to each (one) of the following:

1.     The owner of record of the premises on which the nuisance is maintained as shown on the most recent county assessor’s parcel roll; and

2.     The person, or persons, if any, occupying or in real or apparent charge and control of the premises involved.

B.     Such notice shall describe in detail the conditions or activities which render the building, structure, premises or portion thereof a public nuisance, set forth a reasonable date and time by which the violation(s) shall be abated, and may contain a brief concise statement of the proposed methods of abatement.

C.     An extension of time in which to correct the violations may be given based upon a showing of extenuating circumstances; however, in no event shall the extension exceed thirty days without written authorization of the planning commission. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.74.080 Abatement options.
A.    If the manager finds that any premises or any portion thereof continues to constitute a public nuisance after the owner/occupant has failed to voluntarily correct those certain enumerated conditions as written in the correction notice, he or she may direct the city attorney or an authorized legal representative to seek judicial relief from a court of competent jurisdiction in order to abate the nuisance. Nothing in this chapter shall ever be construed to prevent the city from commencing an action at law or in equity for abatement thereof in the manner provided by law in addition to, or in conjunction with, the proceedings set forth in this chapter, nor shall anything in this chapter ever be deemed to prevent the city from commencing a criminal action with respect to the nuisance in addition to, alternatively to, or in conjunction with, the proceedings set forth in this chapter; or

B.     If the manager finds that any premises or any portion thereof continues to constitute a public nuisance after the owner/occupant has failed to voluntarily correct those certain enumerated conditions as written in the correction notice, he or she may direct an officer of the city to initiate abatement proceedings, without judicial procedure, pursuant to the due process provisions contained herein, at the expense of the person(s) creating, causing, committing, or maintaining the nuisance. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.74.090 Initiation of abatement proceedings.
The designated officer shall prepare or cause to be prepared a “Notice to Abate Nuisance,” stating in detail the conditions or activities which render the building, structure, premises or portion thereof a public nuisance. The notice of such public hearing shall:

A.    Describe the premises involved by setting forth the street address, if applicable, or if a street address is not known or applicable, the notice shall set forth the location of the nuisance, and a description sufficient for general identification of the building, structure, premises or portion thereof. The location of the nuisance shall be identified utilizing the assessor’s parcel number and a legal description of the real property; and

B.     Contain a brief description of the materials, activities and conditions constituting the nuisance; and

C.     Contain a brief concise statement of the proposed methods of abatement. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.74.100 Notice to abate nuisance—Persons to be served.
A.    The officer shall cause the notice to abate to be served upon each of the following:

1.     The owner or agent of record of the premises on which the nuisance is maintained as shown on the most recent equalized tax assessment rolls; and

2.     The person, if any, occupying, in possession of or in real or apparent charge and control of the premises involved.

B.     “Owner” as used in this section also means any person, mortgagee or beneficiary having or claiming to have any legal or equitable interest in said premises when known by the city to have an ownership or leasehold interest in the premises, as disclosed by a current title search from any accredited title company.

C.     The notice may be served personally upon, or may be sent by mail or may be sent by prepaid certified U.S. mail to the occupant and the owner or agent of such premises. Service by mail shall be deemed completed upon deposit of the mail in a U.S. mailbox. The notice shall also be posted on the premises in a conspicuous manner at the same time at least ten days before the time fixed for abatement. The failure of any person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of the proceedings hereunder.

D.    In addition to the notice required by this section, the planning director may, in his or her discretion, give notice of the abatement in any manner to any real property owners adjacent from the site of the alleged nuisance or to the affected property owner. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.74.110 Effect of failure to abate.
A.    Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of Section 18.74.080, if the nuisance is not abated within the period given in the notice to abate, the manager may proceed with summary abatement pursuant to subsection B of Section 18.74.080. When he or she orders summary abatement, the designated officer shall give a second notice in the same manner as set forth in Section 18.74.100.

 

B.     The second notice shall inform the persons that the city will commence summary nuisance abatement proceedings at the expense of the person(s) creating, causing, committing, or maintaining the nuisance and that the cost of abating the nuisance upon each lot or parcel of land shall constitute a special assessment against each such lot or parcel of land and shall also become the personal obligation of the owner of each such lot or parcel of land. This notice shall also inform the persons that they may appear before the commission or such other person as the manager specifies in the notice, at a stated time and place and show cause why the nuisance should not be summarily abated, provided the following appeal procedures are followed. When a person files an appeal, the order of abatement shall be suspended pending the review of the determination.

C.     Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of Section 18.74.120 shall constitute a waiver of the right to an administrative hearing. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.74.120 Appeal procedures.
A.    Upon receipt of the second notice, any person entitled to service under subsection A or B of Section 18.74.080 may appeal from the notice and order of the designated officer under this chapter by filing with the planning secretary a written appeal containing at a minimum:

1.     A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the appellants in the building or the land involved in the notice and order;

2.     A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific order or action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellant;

3.     A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief sought and the reasons why it is claimed the protested order or action should be reversed, modified or otherwise set aside;

4.     The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their official mailing addresses;

5.     The verification (by declaration under penalty of perjury) of at least one appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal.

B.     The request for appeal shall be filed within thirty days from the date of service of such order or action of the designated officer; provided, however, that if the building or structure is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or adjacent property and is ordered vacated and is posted in accordance with the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings (as adopted pursuant to Section 15.08.010 of this code), such appeal shall be filed within ten days from the date of the service of the notice and order of either the designated officer or a building official.

C.     Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant shall be considered in the hearing appeal.

D.    Upon receipt of any appeal filed pursuant to this section, the planning secretary shall present it at the next regular meeting of the planning commission.

E.     As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal, the planning secretary shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing of the appeal by the commission. Such date shall not be less than ten days nor more than sixty days from the date the appeal was filed with the planning secretary.

F.     Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant by the secretary of the commission either by causing a copy of such no-

        tice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing first class, or by certified, a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at the address shown on the appeal.

G.    A written notification of the commission’s decision will be given to the appellant either personally after the hearing, or by first class mail delivered to the appellant within ten days following the hearing. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.74.130 Form of notice of public hearing.
The second notice given shall be provided in substantially the following format:

 

Notice of Hearing on Abatement of Public Nuisance

 

1.     A hearing will be held at _______________ on _______________ at City Hall, _______________, La Habra, before _______________ to receive testimony from any person having any interest in the property described below, and to show cause, if any they have, why certain unsafe, dangerous, hazardous or obnoxious materials and/or conditions existing on the premises/property at _______________ shall not be declared a public nuisance.

2.     The materials and/or conditions found to constitute the public nuisance are as follows: _________________________.

3.     The public hearing may be avoided if the following corrections are made at least two (2) days before the date set for the hearing: _________________________.

4.     If it is determined by the ____________________ that the premises/property herein described is currently being maintained in such manner as to constitute a public nuisance as defined by Section 18.77.030, said nuisance may be abated by the removal or repair of said unsafe, dangerous, hazardous or obnoxious materials and/or conditions.

5.     If the owner of record has not completed the corrective action, the materials and/or conditions found to constitute the public nuisances will be removed and repaired and the nuisances will be abated by the municipal authorities of the City of La Habra, in which case the cost of such removal or repair shall be assessed upon the lot(s) and land upon which said unsafe, dangerous, hazardous or obnoxious materials and/or conditions exist, and such cost will constitute a lien upon such lot(s) or land until paid.

(Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.74.140 Service of notice of public hearing—Proof.
When personally delivered, proof of service of the notice and posting thereof shall be documented at the time of service by a declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the person effecting service, declaring the time and manner in which such notice was given and posted. He shall file such declaration in the planning office and therewith any receipt card which may have been returned to him in acknowledgment of the receipt of such notice by certified mail, or any return by first class regular mail. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.74.150 Conduct of hearing—Content of testimony.
At the time stated in the notice, the commission or designated officer shall hear and consider all relevant testimony or evidence offered by the director, manager, or other officials or employees of the city or other qualified witnesses, including but not limited to the owner of record or his/her authorized representatives, a responsible person in charge or control of the affected premises, a mortgagee or beneficiary under any trust deed, lessee, or any other person having any estate or interest in such premises. The commission or designated officer is authorized to grant reasonable extensions, not to exceed thirty days, on the time period for the hearing based upon a proper showing of extenuating circumstances made before the date stated in the notice. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.74.160 Conduct of hearing—Procedure.
A.    The hearing shall be conducted informally, and the technical rules of evidence shall not apply, notwithstanding the fact that the rights to confrontation, opportunity to be heard, cross-examination and the opportunity to rebut ex parte evidence are presumed to exist. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the sort of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of the evidence over objection in civil actions except that unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.

B.     During the course of the hearing, the commission or designated officer may visit and inspect any premises involved in the proceedings and may therewith receive oral testimony of any sworn or unsworn witnesses. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.74.170 Conduct of hearing—Decision.
A.    Upon conclusion of the hearing, the commission or designated officer shall consider the evidence presented and shall make written findings of fact, based upon the evidence, to support the decision and by such same findings shall make a determination and conclusion with respect to the alleged public nuisance. If a determination is made that a public nuisance exists, the commission or designated officer shall declare such premises to be a public nuisance and order the abatement of the same by the property owner within a specified time not to exceed thirty days. The order shall set forth a statement of the particulars which render the premises a public nuisance. Such decision shall contain a detailed and precise list of needed correction or abatement methods and a statement that the occupant, lessee or another person in possession or charge or any mortgagee, beneficiary under any deed of trust, or other person having an interest or estate in such premises, may at his/her own risk, abate the nuisance. The commission or designated officer is authorized to grant reasonable extensions, not to exceed thirty days, on the time period for abatement based upon a proper showing of extenuating circumstances made before the date of the order of abatement.

B.     Failure of the owner or other persons having any interest in the affected premises to appear at or be represented at the hearing shall in no way affect the validity or the prescribed conduct of the hearing. A copy of the order of abatement shall be posted upon the premises involved and shall be served upon the owner of record in the same manner as the notice to abate pursuant to Section 18.74.100. The city clerk shall immediately, after passage of said order, cause to be filed in the office of the county recorder of Orange County a certified copy of said order of abatement.

C.     The decision of the commission or designated officer shall be considered the final and conclusive action in the matter.

D.    The city council reserves the right upon its own motion to conduct a de novo review of any determination of the commission or designated officer. When the council passes such a motion, the order of abatement shall be suspended pending the review of the determination. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.74.180 Immediate hazards.
Any activity or condition which poses a serious threat to the public’s health or safety shall be determined and declared by the city manager, police chief or fire chief to be an immediate hazard which would, if not immediately suppressed, seriously endanger public health or safety. In such event, the city manager, police chief or fire chief may take immediate action to abate the hazard, without notice to the owner, lessee, person having custody or charge of the premises involved, or any other interested person, and without the necessity of a hearing thereon by the planning commission. However, such immediate action shall be limited to such action as is reasonably necessary to eliminate the immediate hazard. Any further action to abate a nuisance which does not pose an immediate serious threat to public health and safety shall be taken only in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.74.190 Costs—Report.
The director, city manager or any private contractor authorized to abate the nuisance, shall keep an account of the cost (including incidental expenses) of abating any nuisance or immediate hazard on each separate lot or parcel of land where the work has been done, and upon completion of the abatement, shall cause to be prepared and filed with the city clerk an itemized report specifying the following:

A.    The work performed; and

B.     The cost of the work by rehabilitation, demolition, or repair of the property, buildings or structure, including any salvage value relating thereto and incidental expenses; and

C.     A description of the real property, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, upon which the nuisance or immediate hazard was located; and

D.    The names and addresses of the persons entitled to notice pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; and

E.     The assessment against each lot or parcel of land proposed to be levied to pay the cost thereof. Any such report may include work performed on any number of parcels of property, whether or not contiguous to each other. The term “incidental expenses” includes, but is not limited to, the expenses and costs of the city in the preparation of notices, specifications and contracts, inspection of the work, reports of title search and the costs of printing, mailing and serving papers required under this chapter. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.74.200 Costs—Notice of hearing.
Upon filing of the report by the director, or city manager with the city clerk, the city clerk shall transmit it to the city council and the city council shall fix the day, hour and place when it will hear and pass upon the report, together with any objections or protests which may be raised by any property owner liable to be assessed for the cost of such abatement, and any other interested persons. At least ten days before the date set for hearing, the city clerk shall cause copies of the report and a notice of the filing of the report, containing a description of the property sufficient to enable the persons served to identify it and specifying the day, hour and place when the city council will hear and pass upon the report, and any objections or protests thereto, to be posted and served in the manner and upon the persons set forth in Sections 18.74.100 and 18.74.120. Proof of posting shall be made by affidavit of the city clerk or assistant city clerk. A copy of the notice shall be published once at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing in a daily newspaper published and circulated within the city. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.74.210 Costs—Hearing.
Any person interested in and affected by the proposed assessment may file written protests or objections with the city clerk at any time prior to the hour and date set for the hearing on the report. Each such protest or objection must contain a description of the property in which the signer thereof is interested and the grounds of such protest or objection. Upon the day and hour fixed for the hearing, the city council shall hear and pass upon the report, together with any objections or protests which may be raised by any property owner liable to be assessed for the cost of abatement, and other interested persons. The city council may make such correction, revision or modification in the report as it may deem just, and when the city council is satisfied with the correctness of the assessment, the report as submitted, or as revised, corrected or modified, together with the assessment, shall be confirmed by resolution. Prior to recordation of the lien, notice shall be given to the owner of record of the parcel of land on which the nuisance is maintained, based upon the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is the most current. If the owner of record, after diligent search, cannot be found, the notice may be served by publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation published in Orange County pursuant to Section 6062 of the Government Code. The decision of the city council on the report and the assessment and on all protests or objections shall be final and conclusive. The city council may adjourn the hearing from time to time. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.74.220 Special assessments.
The amount of the cost of abating the nuisance or the immediate hazard upon each lot or parcel of land, including incidental expenses, as confirmed by the city council, constitutes a special assessment against each such lot or parcel of land, and as thus made and confirmed shall also become the personal obligation of the owner of each such lot or parcel of land. Such confirmed cost shall thereafter bear interest at the legal rate of interest until paid. Such confirmed special assessment, after notice and recordation, shall also constitute a special lien against such property for the amount of such assessment until paid. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.74.230 Notice of lien.
Upon confirmation of the assessment, the city clerk shall cause to be filed in the office of the county recorder, Orange County, California, a notice of lien in substantially the following form:

 

Notice of Nuisance Abatement Lien
Claim of the City of La Habra

 

        Pursuant to the authority contained in Chapter_____ of the La Habra Municipal Code, the City Council of the City of La Habra did the following: 1) Issued an abatement order on the_____ day of __________, 20_____; 2) Caused a nuisance to be abated on the real property hereinafter ascribed on the_____ day of __________, 20_____; and 3) Assessed the cost of such abatement upon said real property hereinafter described by adopting Resolution No._____ on the_____ day of __________, 20_____. Of said costs, there remains unpaid to the City of La Habra the sum of __________ Dollars ($__________), and therefore the City of La Habra does hereby claim a special lien upon said real property in the amount of $__________ together with interest calculated thereon at the legal rate of interest from the _____ day of __________, 20_____. Until said amount has been paid in full and this lien discharged of record.

          The real property hereinabove mentioned and upon which a lien is hereby claimed is that certain parcel or parcels of real property situated in the City of La Habra, Orange County, California, and more particularly described as follows:

   _________________________

   (Street Address)

   _________________________

   (Legal Description)

   _________________________

   (Assessor’s Parcel Number)

  The name and address of the record owner of the parcel on which the lien is imposed is as follows:

  _________________________

        (Owner’s Name)

_________________________

        (Owner’s Address)

  Dated this_____ day of __________, 20_____, at City of La Habra, California.

        By:_________________________

        City Manager

        Attest:

        _________________________

        City Clerk

  (Notarial Acknowledgement)

 

(Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.74.240 Collection of costs of abating the nuisance.
The cost of abating a nuisance and related administrative expenses, including but not limited to any costs incurred regarding the processing and recording of the lien and providing notice to the property owner as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien, may be collected by either of the following means:

A.    After the confirmation and recordation of such report of costs and assessment, a certified copy of such confirmed special assessment, which remains unpaid, shall be filed with the assessor and tax collector of Orange County acting for the city in order that such officials may enter the amount of the assessment on the appropriate assessment book opposite the description of the particular parcels of land and respective lots. Thereafter such assessment shall be collected at the same time in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and interest, and the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency, as provided by law for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws and ordinances applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes are made applicable to such special assessment. However, if any real property to which the        cost of abatement relates has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrance for value has been created and attaches thereon, prior to the date on which the first installment of taxes would become delinquent, then the cost of abatement shall not result in a lien against the real property but instead shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection.

B.     After the confirmation of such report of costs and assessment, a certified copy of the cost of abatement and related administrative expenses shall be recorded in the grantor/grantee index of the county recorder’s office of Orange County, which shall have the force, effect and priority of a judgement lien. This method of collection is only available when service was effectuated in accordance with Section 18.76.100 of this chapter. The lien may also be foreclosed by a judicial or other sale in the manner and means provided in Government Code Section 38773.1 or otherwise provided for by law.

C.     Instead of making the cost of abating a nuisance a lien upon the real property, the city may make the cost the personal obligation of the property owner, tenant or other person creating, causing, committing or maintaining the nuisance. In such a case, all of the procedures of this chapter shall apply except those specifically related to the assessment of the property. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.74.250 Discharge, release or satisfaction of lien.
In the event that the lien is discharged, released or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge containing the information specified in Section 18.76.220 shall be recorded by the city clerk. The nuisance abatement lien and the release of the lien shall be indexed in the grantor/grantee index. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.74.260 Second or subsequent civil or criminal judgement.
Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgement within a two-year period finding that an owner of property is responsible for a condition that may be abated, except for conditions abated pursuant to Section 17980 of the Health and Safety Code, the court may order the owner to pay treble the costs of the abatement. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.74.270 Unlawful interference.
It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, agent or employee of the city or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in any premises, or any portion thereof, upon which there is a nuisance which has been ordered to be abated, or with any person to whom such premises have been lawfully sold pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, when any such officer, agency employee, purchaser or person having an interest or estate in such premises is engaged in abating a nuisance or immediate hazard thereon, or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work, or authorized or directed pursuant thereto. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.74.280 Removal of tax benefit.
If, after declaration of a public nuisance, the manager or his/her designee finds the subject property to contain substandard housing and this housing is generating revenue income, he/she may, within the time period and in the manner specified, pursuant to Section 24436.5 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, file a notice of noncompliance with the taxpayer and later with the State Franchise Tax Board in an effort to eliminate tax deductions. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

18.74.290 Code enforcement fees.
A.    There is imposed upon each person who receives a notice of violation, notice of correction, notice and order, demand letter, or letter of correction of any provision or ordinance codified in this code, adopted building codes, or state law, a reinspection fee, in such amounts as set forth from time to time by resolution of the city council, which may be addressed for each inspection or reinspection conducted when the particular violation for which an inspection or reinspection is scheduled is not fully abated or corrected as directed by, and within the time and manner as directed by, and within the time and manner specified in the notice or letter.

B.     The fee shall not apply to the original inspection to document the violations and shall not apply to the first or second scheduled compliance inspection made after the issuance of a notice or letter, whether or not the correction has been made. If a notice or letter has been previously issued for the same violation and the property has been in compliance with the law for less than six months, then the violation shall be deemed a continuation of the original case and all inspections or reinspection including the first inspection for the repeated offense shall be charged a reinspection fee.

C.     This fee is intended to compensate for administrative costs for unnecessary inspections, and not for enforcement of the law. Any reinspection fees imposed shall be separate and apart from any fines or penalties imposed for violation of the law, or costs incurred by the city for the abatement of a public nuisance. As used herein the term “administrative costs” is intended to include staff time involved in conducting inspections. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.74.300 Violation—Penalty.
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be an infraction, and punishable as such, notwithstanding the fact that at the discretion of the city attorney or the district attorney, the violation of any section of this chapter may be filed as a misdemeanor. The complaint charging such violation shall specify whether the violation is a misdemeanor or an infraction. Each day a violation of any provision of this chapter shall continue it shall be a new and separate violation. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

Chapter 18.76 VARIANCES
18.76.010 Initiation.
When practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships or results inconsistent with the general purposes of this title occur by reason of a strict interpretation of any of the provisions of this title, the planning commission upon its own motion may, or upon the verified application of any interested person shall, in specific cases, initiate proceedings for the granting of a variance from the provisions of this title under such conditions as may be deemed necessary to assure that the spirit and purposes of this title will be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.76.020 Variances not amendments.
All acts of the planning commission and city council under the provisions of this chapter shall be construed as administrative acts performed for the purpose of assuring that the intent and purpose of this title apply in special cases, as provided in this chapter, and shall not be construed as amendments to the provisions of this title or the zoning map specified in Section 18.06.020. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.76.030 Requirements.
Before a variance may be granted, all of the following findings shall be made:

A.    That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the property involved, or to the intended use of the property, that do not apply generally to the property or class of use in the same zone or vicinity;

B.     That the granting of such variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in such zone or vicinity in which the property is located;

C.     That such variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant possessed by other property in the same zone and vicinity;

D.    That the granting of such variance will not adversely affect the comprehensive general plan. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

18.76.040 Application—Contents.
Applications for variances shall be accompanied by the following information:

A.    A plot plan and description of the property involved showing the location of all existing and proposed buildings; plans and descriptions of the proposed use of the property with ground plans and elevations for all proposed buildings;

B.     A reference to the provisions of this title under which application is sought;

C.     A verified list of the name and address of each property owner within three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the property involved, using for this purpose the last known name and address of such owners as shown upon the most recent assessment roll of the city or county. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.76.050 Application—Filing.
A.    Applications for variances shall be made in writing to the planning commission in such form as is approved by the planning commission. The planning commission may provide forms for such purposes and may prescribe the type of information to the provided thereon. No petition shall be received unless it complies with such requirements.

B.     Applications filed pursuant to this chapter shall be numbered consecutively in the order of their filing and shall become a part of the permanent official records of the planning commission, and there shall be attached thereto copies of all notices and actions pertaining thereto. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.76.060 Investigation.
The planning commission shall cause to be made by its own members, or members of its staff, such investigation of facts bearing upon such application as will serve to provide all necessary information to assure that the action on each such application is consistent with the intent and purpose of this title and with previous variances. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.76.070 Public hearing—Scheduling—Notice.
Following the receipt in proper form of any such application, the secretary of the planning commission shall fix a time and place of public hearing thereon. Not less than ten days before the date of such public hearing, notice of the date, time, place of hearing and location of the property and the nature of the request shall be given in the following manner:

A.    By publishing once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city;

B.     By mailing a notice, postage prepaid, to the applicant, to each member of the planning commission, and to the owners of all property within three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the property involved, using for this purpose the last known name and the address of such owners as shown upon the last assessment roll of the city or county. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.76.080 Public hearing—Conduct.
Public hearings as provided for in this chapter shall be held before the planning commission at the time and place for which public notice has been given as required in Section 18.76.070. The planning commission may establish its own rules for the conduct of such hearings. A summary of all pertinent testimony offered at a public hearing, together with the names and addresses of all persons testifying, shall be recorded and made a part of the permanent files of the case. Any such hearing may be continued; provided, that prior to the adjournment or recess thereof, the presiding officer at such hearing shall announce the time and place to which such hearing will be continued. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.76.090 Planning commission action—Exempt uses.
A.    Within thirty-five days after the conclusion of a public hearing, the planning commission shall render its decision on the matter so heard. The failure of the planning commission to render such decision within thirty-five days after the conclusion of the hearing shall be deemed to constitute a denial.

B.     The planning commission shall announce and record its actions by formal resolution, and such resolution shall recite the findings of the planning commission upon which it bases its decision.

C.     Any use which is distinguished or characterized by matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities” shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter and shall instead be subject to the provisions of Chapter 18.56 et seq. of this code. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.76.100 Appeal.
A.    The granting, either with or without conditions, or the denial of such application by the planning commission shall be final unless within ten working days from the date of the decision of the planning commission the applicant, or any other person aggrieved, appeals there from in writing to the city clerk. Council members who desire to file any such appeal as a councilmember shall do so within six working days from the date of the decision of the planning commission. The city clerk, after the filing of such appeal, shall set a date for a public hearing; giving of notice and conduct of the hearing shall be the same as prescribed in this chapter for hearing by the planning commission. The decision appealed from shall be affirmed unless reversed by a vote of not less than a majority of the voting members of the city council.

B.     No permit or license shall be issued for any use involved in an application for a variance or conditional use permit until the same has become final by reason of the failure of any person to appeal or by reason of the action of the city council. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.76.110 Term—Extension.
A.    If the use authorized by any variance is or has been unused, abandoned or discontinued for a period of one year, the variance shall become null and void and of no effect.

B.     The planning commission or the city council may, upon their own initiative or upon the request of the applicant, extend the use authorized by the variance for a period not to exceed one year. Such action shall be initiated prior to the original expiration date of the variance. This action shall be by administrative procedure and shall not require a public hearing. A maximum of one extension may be granted. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.76.120 Violation.
A.    Upon violation of any applicable provision of this title or, if granted subject to conditions, upon failure to comply with conditions, or due to a change in conditions occurring after the original grant of the

        variance permit which change in conditions makes the continuation of the variance incompatible with the general welfare of the surrounding neighborhood, a variance shall be suspended automatically.

B.     The planning commission shall hold a public hearing within forty days in accordance with the procedures prescribed in this chapter for appeals, and if not satisfied that the regulation, general provision or condition is being complied with, may revoke the variance or take such action as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the regulation, general provision or condition. Within fifteen days following the date of a decision of the planning commission revoking a variance, the secretary shall transmit to the city council written notice of the decision. The decision shall be final thirty days following the date on which the variance was revoked unless an appeal has been filed. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

 

Chapter 18.78 ZONE CHANGES
18.78.010 Amendments generally.
A.    Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning practice justify such action, the city council or the planning commission upon its own motion may, or upon the verified application of any interested person shall, initiate proceedings to amend, supplement or change the zones, regulations or districts established by this title.

B.     With the exception of amendments changing property from one zone to another, or changing the boundary of any zone, amendments may be made in the same manner as the zoning ordinance from which this title derives was adopted. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.78.020 Application.
A.    Applications for changes of zone shall be made in writing to the planning commission in such form as is approved by the planning commission. The planning commission may provide forms for such purposes and may prescribe the type of information to be provided thereon. No petition shall be received unless it complies with such requirements.

B.     Applications filed pursuant to this chapter shall be numbered consecutively in the order of their filing and shall become a part of the permanent official records of the planning commission, and there shall be attached thereto copies of all notices and actions pertaining thereto. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.78.030 Investigation.
The planning commission shall cause to be made, by its own members or members of its staff, such investigation of facts bearing upon such application as will serve to provide all necessary information to assure that the action on each such application is consistent with the intent and purpose of this title and with previous amendments or variances. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.78.040 Public hearing—Scheduling—Notice.
Following the receipt in proper form of any such application, the secretary of the planning commission shall fix a time and place of public hearing thereon. Not less than ten days before the date of such public hearing, notice of the date, time, place of hearing and location of the property and the nature of the request shall be given in the following manner:

A.    By publishing once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city;

B.     By mailing a notice, postage prepaid, to the applicant, each member of the planning commission, and to the owners of all property within three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the property involved, using for this purpose the last known name and the address of such owners as shown upon the last assessment roll of the city or county. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.78.050 Public hearing—Conduct.
Public hearings as provided for in this chapter shall be held before the planning commission at the time and place for which public notice has been given as required in Section 18.78.040. The planning commission may establish its own rules for the conduct of such hearings. A summary of all pertinent testimony offered at a public hearing, together with the names and addresses of all persons testifying shall be recorded and made a part of the permanent files of the case. Any such hearing may be continued; provided, that prior to the adjournment or recess thereof, the presiding officer at such hearing shall announce the time and place to which such hearing will be continued. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.78.060 Approval or denial.
A.    Within thirty-five days after the conclusion of a public hearing, the planning commission shall render its decision on the matter so heard. The failure of the planning commission to render such decision within thirty-five days after the conclusion of the hearing shall be deemed to constitute a denial. The planning commission shall announce and record its actions by formal resolution, and such resolution shall recite the findings of the planning commission upon which it bases its decision.

B.     Within ten days after final action by the planning commission on an application for amendments or changes of zone boundaries, its recommendations together with the complete records of the case shall be delivered to the city council. The city council, after receipt of the report and recommendation from the planning commission, shall hold a final hearing thereon. The manner of setting the hearing, giving of notice and conducting the hearing shall be the same as prescribed for hearings by the planning commission. The recommendation of the planning commission shall be approved unless reversed by a vote of not less than a majority of the members of the city council. No permit or license shall be issued for any use involved in an application for a change of zone until the same has become final by the adoption of an ordinance. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.78.070 Annexations.
A.    In any petition for the annexation of property to the city, the petitioner may request in his/her petition how he/she desires the property to be zoned, provided that the property is annexed to the city.

B.     The planning commission may give notice of its intention to consider the petition for annexation and for zoning the property in accordance with provisions of state law. Such notice shall be given as may be required by law from time to time for zoning and annexation.

C.     If no zoning is approved in connection with the petition for annexation, all property annexed to the city shall, upon annexation, be automatically zoned R-1a one-family dwelling zone only, unless such annexation has been prezoned, in which case the prezoning shall become effective. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

18.78.080 Prezoning.
The method of accomplishing prezoning of unincorporated territory shall be as provided by this chapter for amendments and changes of zone, except that publication of notice, and all ministerial and other acts required by state law, shall comply with such state law. Such zoning shall become effective in accordance with state law. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

 

Chapter 18.80 AFFORDABLE HOUSING INCENTIVES
18.80.010 Purpose of affordable housing incentives.
When an applicant seeks a density bonus for a housing development within the city or donates land that meets the requirements of this chapter, upon request of the applicant, the city shall provide a density bonus and incentives or concessions for the production of housing units and childcare facilities, as prescribed in this chapter. The purpose of this chapter is to increase the housing supply and availability in the city and satisfy the requirements of Government Code Section 65915, et seq., as amended (the “Density Bonus Law”). (Ord. 1792 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.80.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

“Affordable housing agreement” means an agreement between the applicant and the city guaranteeing the affordability of rental or ownership units in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

“Affordable housing costs” means the amount set forth in the Health and Safety Code Sections 50052.5 and 50053, as the same may be amended from time to time.

“Approving body” means the planning commission, city council, or housing authority board approving the housing development of which the density bonus request is a part. Where there is an appeal, the “Approving body” shall mean the city council.

“Childcare facility” means a child day care facility other than a family day care home, including, but not limited to, infant centers, preschools, extended day care facilities, and school-age childcare centers.

“Common interest development” means a condominium project as defined by Section 1351(f) of the Civil Code, or a planned development as defined by Section 1351(k) of the Civil Code, as the same may be amended from time to time.

“Concession(s)” or “incentive(s)” means:

1.     A reduction in site development standards or a modification of zoning code requirements or architectural design requirements that exceed the minimum building standards approved by the California Building Standards Commission as provided in Part 2.5 (commencing with Section 18901) of Division 13 of the Health and Safety Code, including, but not limited to, a reduction in setback and square footage requirements and in the ratio of vehicular parking spaces that would otherwise be required that results in identifiable and actual cost reductions, to provide for affordable housing costs, as defined in Section 50052.5 of the Health and Safety Code, or for rents for the targeted units to be set as specified in Section 18.80.100.

2.     Approval of mixed-use zoning in conjunction with the housing project if commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development and if the commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses are compatible with the housing project and the existing or planned development in the area where the proposed housing project will be located.

3.     Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the developer or the city that result in identifiable and actual cost reductions to provide for affordable housing costs, as defined in Section 50052.5 of the Health and Safety Code, or for rents for the targeted units to be set as specified in Section 18.80.100.

“Density bonus” means a density increase over the otherwise maximum allowable gross residential density as of the date of application by the applicant to the city, or if elected by the applicant, a lessor percentage of density increase, including, but not limited to, no increase in density. The amount of density increase to which the applicant is entitled shall vary according to the amount by which the percentage of affordable housing units exceeds the percentage established in Section 18.80.050.

“Development standard” means and includes site or construction condition, including, but not limited to, a height limitation, a setback requirement, a floor area ratio, an onsite open-space requirement, or a parking ratio that applies to a residential development pursuant to any ordinance, general plan element, specific plan, charter, or other local condition, law, policy, resolution, or regulation.

“Housing development” means a development project for five or more residential units, including mixed-use developments. “Housing development” also includes a subdivision or common interest development, as defined in Section 4100 of the Civil Code, approved by a city, county or city and county and consists of residential units or unimproved residential lots and either a project to substantially rehabilitate and convert an existing commercial building to residential use or the substantial rehabilitation of an existing multifamily dwelling, as defined in subdivision (d) of Section 65863.4 of the Government Code, where the result of the rehabilitation would be a net increase in available residential units. For the purpose of calculating a density bonus, the residential units shall be on contiguous sites that are the subject of one development application, but do not have to be based upon individual subdivision maps or parcels. The density bonus shall be permitted in geographic areas of the housing development other than the areas where the units for the lower income households are located.

“Lower income households” means households defined in Section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code, as the same may be amended from time to time.

“Maximum allowable residential density” means the density allowed under the zoning ordinance and land use element of the general plan, or, if a range of density is permitted, means the maximum allowable density for the specific zoning range and land use element of the general plan applicable to the project. Where the density allowed under the zoning ordinance is inconsistent with the density allowed under the land use element of the general plan, the general plan density shall prevail.

 

“Persons and families of moderate income” means persons and families defined in Section 50093 of the Health and Safety Code, as the same may be amended from time to time.

“Senior citizen housing development” means a project as defined by Sections 51.3 and 51.12 of the Civil Code, as the same may be amended from time to time.

“Study” does not include reasonable documentation to establish eligibility for the concession or incentive or to demonstrate that the incentive or concession meets the definition of “Concession(s)” or “incentive(s)”set forth herein.

“Very low-income households” means households defined in Section 50105 of the Health and Safety Code, as same may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 1792 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.80.030 Application requirements.
A.    A conditional use permit is required for any project in which agreement with the city is entered pursuant to the Density Bonus Law (Government Code Section 65915 et seq.). The permit shall be obtained prior to the effective date of such agreement.

B.     A development plan submittal in accordance with usual development application requirements is required which shall contain the following:

1.     Location of dwelling units within the project intended for affordable housing.

2.     Total number of rental dwelling units and for-sale dwelling units within the project.

3.     Proposed rent schedules and/or sale prices. (Ord. 1792 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.80.040 Appeal process.
Any appeal relating to density bonuses, incentives, concessions, or waivers/modifications of development standards shall be handled in a manner established in La Habra Municipal Code Section 18.66.080. (Ord. 1792 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.80.050 Density bonus requirements, calculations and location.
A.    Density Bonus Development Requirements. Upon written request of an applicant, the approving body for a housing development shall grant one density bonus as specified under subsection B of this section and if requested by the applicant and consistent with the applicable requirements of this chapter, incentives or concessions, pursuant to Section 18.80.060, waivers or reductions of development standards, and parking ratios, as described in Section 18.80.070 when the applicant for a housing development seeks and agrees to construct a housing development, excluding any units permitted by the density bonus awarded pursuant to this chapter, that will contain at least any one of the following:

1.     Ten percent of the total units of a housing development for lower income households, as defined in Section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code.

2.     Five percent of the total units of a housing development for very low-income households, as defined in Section 50105 of the Health and Safety Code.

3.     A senior citizen housing development, as defined in Sections 51.3 and 51.12 of the Civil Code, or a mobile home park that limits residency based on age requirements for housing for older persons pursuant to Section 798.76 or 799.5 of the Civil Code.

 

4.     Ten percent of the total dwelling units in a common interest development, as defined in Section 4100 of the Civil Code, for persons and families of moderate income, as defined in Section 50093 of the Health and Safety Code, provided that all units in the development are offered to the public for purchase.

5.     Ten percent of the total units of a housing development for transitional foster youth, as defined in Section 66025.9 of the Education Code, disabled veterans, as defined in Government Code Section 18541, or homeless persons, as defined in the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. Section 11301 et seq.). The units described in this paragraph shall be subject to a recorded affordability restriction of fifty-five years and shall be provided at the same affordability level as very low-income units.

6.     For the purposes of this section, “total units” or “total dwelling units” does not include units added by a density bonus awarded pursuant to this section or any local law granting a greater density bonus.

B.     The amount of density bonus authorized under subsection A shall be calculated pursuant to subsection C. An applicant who requests a density bonus pursuant to this section shall elect whether the bonus shall be awarded on the basis of subection A.1, A.2, A.3, A.4 or A.5.

1.     For housing developments meeting the criteria of subsection A.1, the density bonus shall be calculated as follows:

 

Percentage Low-Income Units

Percentage Density Bonus

10

20

11

21.5

12

23

13

24.5

14

26

15

27.5

17

30.5

18

32

19

33.5

20

35

 

2.     For housing developments meeting the criteria of subsection A.2, the density bonus shall be calculated as follows:

 

Percentage Very Low-income Units

Percentage Density Bonus

5

20

6

22.5

7

25

8

27.5

9

30

10

32.5

11

35

3.     For housing developments meeting the criteria of subsection A.3, the density bonus shall be twenty percent of the number of senior housing units.

4.     For housing developments meeting the criteria of subsection A.5, the density bonus shall be twenty percent of the number of the type of units giving rise to a density bonus under that subsection.

5.     For housing developments meeting the criteria of subsection A.4, the density bonus shall be calculated as follows:

 

Percentage Moderate-Income Units

Percentage Density Bonus

10

5

11

6

12

7

13

8

14

9

15

10

16

11

17

12

18

13

19

14

20

15

21

16

22

17

23

18

24

19

25

20

26

21

27

22

28

23

29

24

30

25

31

26

32

27

33

28

34

29

35

30

36

31

37

32

38

33

39

34

40

35

 

C.     Density Calculation. All density calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole number.

D.    Total Density Bonus Limit. In no event shall the total density bonus awarded pursuant to this chapter exceed thirty-five percent.

E.     Location of Density Bonus Units. The density bonus units shall be permitted in geographic areas of the housing development other than the areas where the units for the lower income households are located.

F.     Design Requirements. Affordable units developed in conjunction with a market rate development shall be of similar design and quality as the market rate units. Exterior and floor plans of affordable units shall be similar to the market rate units; interior finishes need not be the same.

G.    Location Distribution Requirements for Affordable Units. Affordable units shall be dispersed throughout the housing development rather than clustered in a single area or a few areas. Location of affordable units with a housing development shall be approved by the approving body.

H.    Except as provided in Section 18.80.060, the granting of a density bonus shall not require or be interpreted to require the waiver of a local ordinance or provisions of a local ordinance unrelated to development standards.

I.      Nothing prohibits the city from granting a density bonus greater than what is described in this section for a development that meets the requirements of this section or from granting a proportionately lower density bonus than what is required by this section for developments that do not meet the requirements of this section. (Ord. 1792 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.80.060 Concessions or incentives.
A.    Evidence for Concession and Incentives. An applicant for a density bonus pursuant to Section 18.80.050 may submit to the community development department a proposal for the specific incentives or concessions that the applicant requests pursuant to this chapter and may request a meeting with the director of community and economic development or his/her designee to discuss the proposal. However, the approving body shall grant the concession or incentive requested by the applicant pursuant to subsection B unless the city council makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence, of any of the following:

1.     The concession or incentive does not result in identifiable and actual cost reductions, consistent with the definition of “concession(s)” or “incentive(s)” in Section 18.80.020, to provide for affordable housing costs, as defined in Section 50052.5 of the Health and Safety Code, or for rents for the targeted units to be set as specified in Section 18.80.100.

2.     The concession or incentive would have a specific adverse impact, as defined in Government Code Section 65589.5(d)(2), as the same may be amended from time to time, upon the public health and safety or the physical environment or on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low-income and moderate income households.

3.     The concession or incentive would be contrary to state or federal law.

B.     Number of Incentives or Concessions. The applicant shall receive the following number of incentives or concessions as provided in Table 18.80.060.B.

 

 

Table 18.80.060.B

Additional Density Bonus Concessions or Incentives

 

Household Income of Units

Percent of Units

Concessions or Incentives

Very Low-income

5 %

1

10 %

2

15 %

3

Lower Income

10 %

1

20 %

2

30 %

3

Moderate Income Units in Common Interest Development

10 %

1

20 %

2

30 %

3

 

C.     Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to require the city to grant an incentive or concession that has a specific, adverse impact, as defined in paragraph (2) of subdivision (d) of Section 65589.5 of the Government Code, upon health, safety, or the physical environment, and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to require the city to grant an incentive or concession that would have an adverse impact on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources.

D.    In no case may the city apply any development standard that will have the effect of physically precluding the construction of a development meeting the criteria of this section at the densities or with the concessions or incentives permitted by this chapter.

E.     Waiver of Development Standards. An applicant may submit to the community development department a proposal for the waiver or reduction of development standards that will have the effect of physically precluding the construction of a development meeting the criteria of this section at the densities or with the concessions or incentives permitted under this chapter. The waiver or reduction of development standards must comply with the following conditions and requirements:

1.     Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to require the city to waive or reduce development standards if the waiver or reduction would have a specific, adverse impact, as defined in Government Code Section 65589.5(d)(2), as the same may be amended from time to time, upon the health, safety, or the physical environment, and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact.

2.     Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to require the city to waive or reduce development standards that would have an adverse impact on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources or to grant any waiver or reduction that would be contrary to state or federal law.

3.     A proposal for the waiver or reduction of development standards pursuant to this section shall neither reduce nor increase the number of incentives or concessions to which the applicant is entitled pursuant to this section.

4.     The applicant shall show by substantial evidence that the waiver or modification is necessary to make the housing units economically feasible.

5.     Any discretionary actions for modification or waiver shall be processed in conjunction with the housing development application. However, regardless of whether the housing development application required a public hearing, such a hearing shall be held before the planning commission if a discretionary action is required. (Ord. 1792 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.80.070 Parking standards.
A.    Maximum Parking Requirements for Density Bonus Units. Except as provided in subsections B and C, upon request of the applicant, the city shall not require a vehicular parking ratio, inclusive of accessible and guest parking, to the entire housing development that meets the criteria of Sections 18.80.050 and 18.80.100 that exceeds the following ratios:

1.     Zero to one bedroom: One on-site parking space.

2.     Two to three bedrooms: Two on-site parking spaces.

3.     Four and more bedrooms: Two and one-half parking spaces.

B.     Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, if a development includes the maximum percentage of low-income or very low-income units provided for in Section 18.80.050.B.1 and B.2, and is located within one-half mile of a major transit stop, as defined in subdivision (b) of Section 21155 of the Public Resources Code, and there is unobstructed access to the major transit stop from the development, then, upon the request of the developer, the city shall not impose a vehicular parking ratio, inclusive of accessible and guest parking, that exceeds 0.5 spaces per bedroom. For purposes of this section, a development shall have unobstructed access to a major transit stop if a resident is able to access the major transit stop without encountering natural or constructed impediments.

C.     Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, if a development consists solely of rental units, exclusive of a manager’s unit or units, with an affordable housing cost to lower income families, as provided in Section 50052.5 of the Health and Safety Code, then, upon the request of the developer, the city shall not impose a vehicular parking ratio, inclusive of accessible and guest parking, that exceeds the following ratios:

1.     If the development is located within one-half mile of a major transit stop, as defined in subdivision (b) of Section 21155 of the Public Resources Code, and there is unobstructed access to the major transit stop from the development, the ratio shall not exceed 0.5 spaces per unit.

2.     If the development is a for-rent housing development for individuals who are sixy-two years of age or older that complies with Sections 51.2 and 51.3 of the Civil Code, the ratio shall not exceed 0.5 spaces per unit. The development shall have either paratransit service or unobstructed access, within a one-half mile, to fixed bus route service that operates at least eight times per day.

3.     If the development is a special needs housing development, as defined in Section 51312 of the Health and Safety Code, the ratio shall not exceed 0.3 spaces per unit. The development shall have either paratransit service or unobstructed access, within one-half mile, to fixed bus route service that operates at least eight times per day.

D.    Parking Calculations. If the total number of parking spaces required for a development is other than a whole number, the number shall be rounded up to the next whole number.

E.     Allowed Parking Types. For the purpose of this section, a development may provide on-site parking through tandem parking or uncovered parking, but not through on-street parking.

F.     This section shall apply to a development that meets the requirements of Sections 18.80.050 and 18.80.100, but only at the request of the applicant. An applicant may request parking incentives or concessions beyond those provided in this section, pursuant to Section 18.80.060.

G.    This section does not preclude the city from reducing or eliminating a parking requirement for development projects of any type in any location.

H.    Notwithstanding subsections B and C, if the city or an independent consultant has conducted an area wide or jurisdiction wide parking study in the last seven years, then the city may impose a higher vehicular parking ratio not to exceed the ratio described in subsection A, based upon substantial evidence found in the parking study, that includes, but is not limited to, an analysis of parking availability, differing levels of transit access, walkability access to transit services, the potential for shared parking, the effect of parking requirements on the cost of market-rate and subsidized developments, and the lower rates of car ownership for low-income and very low-income individuals, including seniors and special needs individuals. The city shall pay the costs of any new study. The city shall make findings, based on a parking study completed in conformity with this paragraph, supporting the need for the higher parking ratio.

I.      A request pursuant to this section shall neither reduce nor increase the number of incentives or concessions to which the applicant is entitled pursuant to Section 18.80.060. (Ord. 1792 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.80.080 Donation of land.
A.    Density Bonus with Land Donation. When an applicant for a tentative subdivision map, parcel map, or other residential development approval donates land to the city that meets the requirements of this section, the applicant shall be entitled to a fifteen percent increase above the otherwise maximum allowable residential density for the entire development as follows:

 

Percentage Very Low-income

Percentage Density Bonus

10

15

11

16

12

17

13

18

14

19

15

20

16

21

17

22

18

23

19

24

20

25

21

26

22

27

23

28

24

29

25

30

26

31

27

32

28

33

29

34

30

35

 

B.     Requirements for Donated Land. This increase shall be in addition to any increase in density mandated by Section 18.80.050, up to a maximum combined mandated density increase of thirty-five percent if an applicant seeks an increase pursuant to both this section and Section 18.80.050.

C.     Additional Density Bonus. Nothing in this section shall be construed to enlarge or diminish the authority of a city to require a developer to donate land as a condition of development. An applicant shall be eligible for the increased density bonus described herein if all the following conditions are met:

1.     The applicant donates and transfers the land no later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or residential development application to the city or to a housing developer approved by the city.

2.     The developable acreage and zoning classification of the land being transferred are sufficient to permit construction of units affordable to very low-income households in the amount not less than ten percent of the number of residential units of the proposed development.

3.     The transferred land is at least one acre in size or of sufficient size to permit development of at least forty units, has the appropriate general plan designation, is appropriately zoned with appropriate development standards for development at the density described in paragraph (3) of subdivision (c) of Section 65583.2 of the Government Code, and is or will be served by adequate public facilities and infrastructure.

4.     The transferred land shall have all of the permits and approvals, other than building permits, necessary for the development of the very low-income housing units on the transferred land, not later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or residential development application, except that the local government may subject the proposed development to subsequent design review to the extent authorized by subdivision (i) of Section 65583.2 of the Government Code, if the design is not reviewed by the local government prior to the time of transfer.

5.     The transferred land and the affordable units shall be subject to a deed restriction ensuring continued affordability of the units consistent with paragraphs (1) and (2) of Section 18.80.100, which shall be recorded on the property at the time of transfer.

6.     The land is transferred to the city or to a housing developer approved by the city. The city may require the applicant to identify and transfer the land to the developer.

7.     The transferred land shall be within the boundary of the proposed development or, if the local agency agrees, within one-quarter mile of the boundary of the proposed development.

8.     A proposed source of funding for the very low-income units shall be identified no later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or residential development application. (Ord. 1792 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

 

18.80.090 Provision of childcare facilities.
A.    When an applicant proposes to construct a housing development that conforms to the requirements of Section 18.80.050 and includes a childcare facility, as that term is defined in Government Code Section 65915(h)(4), that will be located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to, the project, the city shall grant either of the following:

1.     An additional density bonus that is an amount of square feet of residential space that is equal to or greater than the amount of square feet in the childcare facility.

2.     An additional concession or incentive that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the childcare facility.

B.     The city shall require, as a condition of approving the housing development, that the following occur:

1.     The childcare facility shall remain in operation for a period of time that is as long or longer than the period of time during which the density bonus units are required to remain affordable pursuant to Section 18.80.100.

2.     Of the children who attend the childcare facility, the children of very low-income households, lower income households, or families of moderate income shall equal a percentage that is equal to or greater than the percentage of dwelling units that are required for very low-income households, lower income households, or families of moderate income pursuant to Section 18.80.050.

C.     Notwithstanding any requirement of this chapter, the city reserves the right to deny a requested density bonus or concession for a childcare facility if it finds, based upon substantial evidence, that the community has adequate childcare facilities. (Ord. 1792 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.80.100 Continued affordability.
A.    An applicant shall agree to, and the city shall ensure, the continued affordability of all very low and low-income rental units that qualified the applicant for the award of the density bonus for fifty-five years or a longer period of time if required by the construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program. Rents for the lower income density bonus units shall be set at an affordable rent as defined in Section 50053 of the Health and Safety Code.

B.     An applicant shall agree to, and the city shall ensure that, the initial occupant of all for-sale units that qualified the applicant for the award of the density bonus are persons and families of very low, low, or moderate income, as required, and that the units are offered at an affordable housing cost, as the cost is defined in Section 50052.5 of the Health and Safety Code. The city shall enforce an equity sharing agreement, unless it is in conflict with the requirements of another public funding source or law. The following apply to the equity sharing agreement:

1.     Upon resale, the seller of the units shall retain the value of any improvements, the down payment, and the seller’s proportionate share of appreciation. The city shall recapture any initial subsidy, as defined in subsection B.2, and its proportionate share of appreciation, as defined in subsection B.3, which amount shall be used within five years for any of the purposes described in subdivision (e) of Section 33334.2 of the Health and Safety Code that promote home ownership.

2.     For the purposes of this section, the city’s initial subsidy shall be equal to the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale minus the initial sale price to the moderate-income household, plus the amount of any down payment assistance or mortgage assistance. If upon resale the mar-

ket value is lower than the initial market value, then the value at the time of the resale shall be used as the initial market value.

3.     For the purposes of this section, the city’s proportionate share of appreciation shall be equal to the ratio of the city’s initial subsidy to the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale.

C.     An applicant shall be ineligible for a density bonus or any other incentives or concessions under this section if the housing development is proposed on any property that includes a parcel or parcels on which rental dwelling units are or, if the dwelling units have been vacated or demolished in the five-year period preceding the application, have been subject to a recorded covenant, ordinance, or law that restricts rents to levels affordable to persons and families of lower or very low-income; subject to any other form of rent or price control through a public entity’s valid exercise of its police power; or occupied by lower or very low-income households, unless the proposed housing development replaces those units, and either of the following applies:

1.     The proposed housing development, inclusive of the units replaced pursuant to this paragraph, contains affordable units at the percentages set forth in Section 18.80.050.

2.     Each unit in the development, exclusive of a manager’s unit or units, is affordable to, and occupied by, either a lower or low-income household.

D.    For the purpose of this paragraph, “replace” shall mean either of the following:

1.     If any dwelling units described in subsection C, are occupied on the date of application, the proposed housing development shall provide at least the same number of units of equivalent size to be made available at affordable rent or affordable housing cost to, and occupied by, persons and families in the same or lower income category as those households in occupancy. If the income category of the household in occupancy is not known, it shall be refutably presumed that lower income renter households occupied these units in the same proportion of lower income renter households to all renter households within the jurisdiction, as determined by the most recently available data from the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development’s Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy database. For unoccupied dwelling units described in subsection C, in a development with occupied units, the proposed housing development shall provide units of equivalent size to be made available at affordable rent or affordable housing cost to, and occupied by, persons and families in the same or lower income category as the last household in occupancy. If the income category of the last household in occupancy is not known, it shall be refutably presumed that lower income renter households occupied these units in the same proportion of lower income renter households to all renter households within the jurisdiction, as determined by the most recently available data from the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development’s Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy database. All replacement calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole number. If the replacement units will be rental dwelling units, these units shall be subject to a recorded affordability restriction for at least fifty-five years. If the proposed development is for-sale units, the units replaced shall be subject to subsection B.

2.     If all dwelling units described in subsection C, have been vacated or demolished within the five-year period preceding the application, the proposed housing development shall provide at least the same number of units of equivalent size as existed at the highpoint of those units in the five-year period preceding the application to be made available at affordable rent or affordable housing cost to, and occupied by, persons and families in the same or lower income category as those persons and families in occupancy at that time, if known. If the incomes of the persons and families in occupancy at the highpoint is not known, it shall be refutably presumed that low-income and very low-income renter households occupied these units in the same proportion of low-income and very low-income renter households to all renter households within the jurisdiction, as determined by the most recently available data from the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development’s Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy database. All replacement calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole number. If the replacement units will be rental dwelling units, these units shall be subject to a recorded affordability restriction for at least fifty-five years. If the proposed development is for-sale units, the units replaced shall be subject to subsection B.

E.     Notwithstanding subsection D, for any dwelling unit described in subsection C, that is or was, within the five-year period preceding the application, subject to a form of rent or price control through a local government’s valid exercise of its police power and that is or was occupied by persons or families above lower income, the city may do either of the following:

1.     Require that the replacement units be made available at affordable rent or affordable housing cost to, and occupied by, low-income persons or families. If the replacement units will be rental dwelling units, these units shall be subject to a recorded affordability restriction for at least fifty-five years. If the proposed development is for-sale units, the units replaced shall be subject to subsection B.

2.     Require that the units be replaced in compliance with the jurisdiction’s rent or price control ordinance, provided that each unit described in subsection C, is replaced. Unless otherwise required by the jurisdiction’s rent or price control ordinance, these units shall not be subject to a recorded affordability restriction.

F.     For the purposes of this section, “equivalent size” means that the replacement units contain at least the same total number of bedrooms as the units being replaced.

G.    Affordable Housing Agreement. Affordability shall be ensured by requiring that the applicant enter into an affordable housing agreement in accordance with this chapter and in form and substance acceptable to the city, which agreement shall be approved by the city attorney, recoded, and run with the land. (Ord. 1792 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1719 § 1, 2010)

 

18.80.110 Development bonus, mixed-use projects.
A.    When an applicant for approval of a commercial development has entered into an agreement for partnered housing described in subection C of this section to contribute affordable housing through a joint project or two separate projects encompassing affordable housing, the city shall grant to the commercial developer a development bonus as prescribed in subsection B. Housing shall be constructed on the site of the commercial development or on a site that is all of the following:

1.     Within the boundaries of the city.

2.     In close proximity to public amenities including schools and employment centers.

3.     Located within one-half mile of a major transit stop, as defined in subdivision (b) of Section 21155 of the Public Resources Code.

B.     The development bonus granted to the commercial developer shall mean incentives, mutually agreed upon by the developer and the city, that may include, but are not limited to, any of the following:

1.     Up to a twenty-percent increase in maximum allowable intensity in the general plan.

2.     Up to a twenty-percent increase in maximum allowable floor area ratio.

3.     Up to a twenty-percent increase in maximum height requirements.

4.     Up to a twenty-percent reduction in minimum parking requirements.

5.     Use of a limited-use/limited-application elevator for upper floor accessibility.

6.     An exception to a zoning ordinance or other land use regulation.

C.     For the purposes of this section, the agreement for partnered housing shall be between the commercial developer and the housing developer, shall identify how the commercial developer will contribute affordable housing, and shall be approved by the city.

D.    For the purposes of this section, affordable housing may be contributed by the commercial developer in one of the following manners:

1.     The commercial developer may directly build the units.

2.     The commercial developer may donate a portion of the site or property elsewhere to the affordable housing developer for use as a site for affordable housing.

3.     The commercial developer may make a cash payment to the affordable housing developer that shall be used towards the costs of constructing the affordable housing project.

E.     For the purposes of this section, subparagraph (A) of paragraph (3) of subdivision (c) of Section 65915 of the Government Code shall apply.

F.     Nothing in this section shall preclude any additional allowances or incentives offered to developers by local governments pursuant to law or regulation.

G.    If the developer of the affordable units does not commence with construction of those units in accordance with timelines ascribed by the agreement described in subsection C, the city may withhold certificates of occupancy for the commercial development under construction until the developer has completed construction of the affordable units.

H.    In order to qualify for a development bonus under this section, a commercial developer shall partner with a housing developer that provides at least thirty percent of the total units for low-income households or at least fifteen percent of the total units for very low-income households.

I.      Nothing in this section shall preclude an affordable housing developer from seeking a density bonus, concessions or incentives, waivers or reductions of development standards, or parking ratios under Section 65915 of the Government Code.

J.      A development bonus pursuant to this section shall not include a reduction or waiver of the requirements within an ordinance that requires the payment of a fee by a commercial developer for the promotion or provision of affordable housing.

K.    The city shall submit to the Department of Housing and Community Development, as part of the annual report required by Section 65400 of the Government Code, information describing a commercial development bonus approved pursuant to this section, including the terms of the agreements between the commercial developer and the affordable housing developer, and the developers and the local jurisdiction, and the number of affordable units constructed as part of the agreements.

L.     For purposes of this section, “partner” shall mean formation of a partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other entity recognized by the state in which the commercial development applicant and the affordable housing developer are each partners, members, shareholders or other participants, or a contract or agreement between a commercial development applicant and affordable housing developer for the development of both the commercial and the affordable housing properties.

M.    This section (18.80.110) shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2022, and as of that date is repealed. (Ord. 1792 § 1, 2018)

