
Title 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapters:

1.01    Code Adoption

1.04    General Provisions

1.08    General Penalty

Chapter 1.01
CODE ADOPTION
Sections:

1.01.010    Adoption.

1.01.020    Title--Citation--Reference.

1.01.030    Codification authority.

1.01.040    Ordinances passed prior to adoption of code.

1.01.050    Reference applies to all amendments.

1.01.060    Title, chapter and section headings.

1.01.070    Reference to specific ordinances.

1.01.080    Effect of code on past actions and obligations.

1.01.090    Effective date.

1.01.100    Constitutionality.

1.01.010 Adoption.
Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code, there is adopted the “Lakeport Municipal Code” as published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington, together with those secondary codes adopted by reference as authorized by the California State Legislature, save and except those portions of the secondary codes as are deleted or modified by the provisions of the “Lakeport Municipal Code.” (Ord. 694 §1, 1989)

1.01.020 Title--Citation--Reference.
This code shall be known as the “Lakeport Municipal Code” and it shall be sufficient to refer to the code as the “Lakeport Municipal Code” in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the “Lakeport Municipal Code.” Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the “Lakeport Municipal Code” and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. (Ord. 694 §2, 1989)

1.01.030 Codification authority.
This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the city, codified pursuant to the provisions of Section 50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code. (Ord. 694 §3, 1989)

1.01.040 Ordinances passed prior to adoption of code.
The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance 691 passed October 3, 1988. The following ordinances passed subsequent to Ordinance 691, but prior to adoptions of this code are adopted and made a part of this code: Ordinances 692 and 693. (Ord. 694 §4, 1989)

1.01.050 Reference applies to all amendments.
Whenever a reference is made to this code as the “Lakeport Municipal Code” or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 694 §5, 1989)

1.01.060 Title, chapter and section headings.
Title, chapter and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section of this code. (Ord. 694 §6, 1989)

1.01.070 Reference to specific ordinances.
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within this code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 694 §7, 1989)

1.01.080 Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendment hereby of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the city shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee or penalty at the effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to collection of any such license, fee or penalty, or the penal validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining to continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 694 §8, 1989)

1.01.090 Effective date.
This code shall become effective on the date the ordinance adopting this code as the “Lakeport Municipal Code” shall become effective. (Ord. 694 §9, 1989)

1.01.100 Constitutionality.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The council declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 694 §10, 1989)

Chapter 1.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

1.04.010    Elections.

1.04.010 Elections.
Pursuant to Government Code Section 36503.5, all general municipal elections hereafter held in the city shall be on the same day as the Statewide General Election, as that date may be established by state law. (Ord. 757, 1993)

Chapter 1.08
GENERAL PENALTY
Sections:

1.08.010    General penalty--Continuing violations-- Violations as nuisances.

1.08.010 General penalty--Continuing violations--Violations as nuisances.
A.    Whenever in this code or in any other ordinance of the city or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto, any act is prohibited or made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided, the violation of any such provision of this code or any other ordinance, rule or regulation of the city shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or both such fine and imprisonment.

Every day any violation of this code or any other ordinance, rule or regulation of the city shall continue shall, unless otherwise provided, constitute a separate and distinct offense.

1.    Offenses Charged as Infractions. Any violation or offense may be deemed an infraction as defined by Section 19, et seq., of the California Penal Code and charged as such in the discretion and at the election of the prosecutor of the city, in which event the punishment therefor shall not be imprisonment but a fine not to exceed the sum of five hundred dollars for each such infraction.

2.    Notice to Appear. This code adopts by reference California Penal Code Sections 853.6, 853.7 and 853.8.

B.    A Continuing Violation of this Code is a Public Nuisance. The city council may order the abatement of any public nuisance, as defined in this section, by separate ordinance of the city, or any state statute following notice and hearing. The city council may direct that the hearing be conducted before another board commission or officer of the city. When applicable, costs incurred by the city in abating such nuisances shall be special assessments against the parcels or property where the nuisances are located. The foregoing provisions are alternative and supplemental to other procedures provided by law for the abatement of nuisances.

C.    Any police or fire officer or city manager employed by the city of Lakeport may cite a person without a warrant whenever he/she has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be issued the citation has committed a misdemeanor in his/her presence, which misdemeanor is a violation of any statute or ordinance of the city except that where the violation constitutes grounds for revoking a valid permit or approval issued by the city, no citation may be issued while such permit remains in force.

D.    Pursuant to the authority contained in Penal Code Section 836.5, the city council authorizes the community development director and/or his/her duly authorized representative to arrest without a warrant any person whenever the community development director and/or his/her authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a misdemeanor or an infraction in his/her presence. Such authority shall apply only to arrests for violations of statutes or ordinances which the community development director and/or his/her authorized representative has the duty to enforce during the duration of the community development director’s and/or his/her authorized representative’s job.

The community development director and/or his/her duly authorized representative may arrest a violator of the public offenses set forth in the Lakeport Municipal Code and issue a citation and notice to appear in the manner prescribed by Chapter 5.c. of Title 3, Part 2 of the Penal Code.

Each citation to appear shall state the name and the address of the violator, the provisions of the article violated, and the time and place of appearance before the court. The person cited shall sign the citation giving his/her written promise to appear as stated therein. If the person cited fails to appear, the city attorney may request issuance of a warrant for the arrest of the person cited. (Ord. 850 §2, 2006)

Title 2
ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapters:

2.04    City Council

2.08    Officers Generally

2.10    City Manager

2.12    City Clerk

2.14    City Finance Director

2.16    Planning Commission

2.20    Park and Recreation Commission

2.22    Traffic Safety Advisory Committee

2.24    Redevelopment Agency

2.28    Emergency Services

2.32    Administrative Fees

2.36    Travel Expenses for Officers and Employees

2.40    Peace Officer Standards and Training

2.44    Unclaimed Property

2.48    Personnel System

Chapter 2.04
CITY COUNCIL
Sections:

2.04.010    Meetings.

2.04.020    Compensation.

2.04.010 Meetings.
A.    Meetings of the city council shall be held in the Council Chambers at City Hall, 225 Park Street, Lakeport, California.

B.    Regular meetings of the city council of the city of Lakeport shall be held on the first and third Tuesdays of each and every month during the year at the hour of six p.m.

C.    If the date of the regular meeting falls on a holiday, then the regular meeting shall be held on the following Tuesday. (Ord. 838 §1, 2005; Ord. 812 §2, 2002; Ord. 805 §2, 2000; Ord. 744 §2, 1993; Ord. 684 §§1-3, 1988)

2.04.020 Compensation.
A.    Government Code Section 36516 provides that a city council may enact an ordinance providing that each member of the city council shall receive a salary consistent with the limitations of such statute.

B.    City council members in cities with a population up to and including thirty-five thousand persons may receive a salary not to exceed three hundred dollars per month.

C.    Each member of the city council shall receive a salary in the amount of three hundred dollars per month commencing in the month that the ordinance codified in this section becomes operative. (Ord. 661 §§1--3, 1986)

Chapter 2.08
OFFICERS GENERALLY
Sections:

2.08.010    Indemnification of officers and employees.

2.08.010 Indemnification of officers and employees.
The city council ordains that notwithstanding the absence of liability insurance, the city will defend and indemnify any city officer, employee or volunteer who becomes the subject of litigation and take all steps required to protect said officer, employee or volunteer as required by Government Code Section 825 et seq. (Ord. 649, 1985)

Chapter 2.10
CITY MANAGER
Sections:

2.10.010    The city council/manager plan.

2.10.020    Creation of position.

2.10.030    Appointment of city manager.

2.10.040    Bond.

2.10.050    Compensation and expenses.

2.10.060    Residence.

2.10.070    Council members’ eligibility.

2.10.080    Evaluation of the city manager’s performance.

2.10.090    Acting city manager.

2.10.100    Code of ethics.

2.10.110    Powers and duties of city manager.

2.10.120    Council-manager relations.

2.10.130    Removal of the city manager.

2.10.010 The city council/manager plan.
A.    The city adopts the city council/manager plan form of local government to combine the leadership policy of elected officials in the form of a council with the managerial and administrative abilities in the form of a qualified professional city manager. The plan establishes a representative government system in which the council determines the policies and services for the community, and the city manager effectively and efficiently implements these policies and the delivery of these services.

B.    City Council Functions. The city council is the legislative body; its members are the community’s decision-makers. Power is centralized in the elected council collectively and not in individual members of the council. The council focuses on the community’s goals, provision of public services and utilities, general plan and land use, economic development, redevelopment, development standards, capital improvements, financing, and strategic planning. The council will hire a professional manager to carry out the administrative responsibilities and will supervise the manager’s performance.

C.    City Manager Functions. The manager is hired to serve the council and the community and to bring to Lakeport the benefits of education, training, and experience in administering the city’s projects, programs, and public services on behalf of the council. The manager prepares a recommended budget for the council’s consideration; oversees the recruitment, hiring, and supervision of the city’s personnel, contractors, and consultants; serves as the council’s chief advisor; and implements the council’s policies and programs and public services in an effective and efficient manner. The city manager provides or supervises the delivery of complete and objective information, provides options and alternatives, and analyzes long-term and short-term consequences on public services, finances, growth, infrastructure, development standards, and other community programs and needs. The city manager provides professional advice on policy matters, intergovernmental affairs, and economic development. The city manager follows the direction of the entire council and not individual members of the council or public, and serves at the sole discretion of the council. (Ord. 807 §1, 2000)

2.10.020 Creation of position.
The position of city manager is created and established. (Ord. 807 §2, 2000)

2.10.030 Appointment of city manager.
The appointment of the city manager shall require the vote of at least three members of the city council and shall hold office at the pleasure of the city council. The city manager shall be chosen by the council solely on the basis of his/her executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to the manager’s actual experience in, and knowledge of, accepted practices in respect to the duties of the manager’s office hereinafter set forth.

The council shall enter into an employment agreement with the city manager outlining his/her compensation, benefits, terms, and conditions of employment and other items deemed desirable to be included in an agreement. To the extent such agreement conflicts with these provisions, the agreement shall control. (Ord. 807 §3, 2000)

2.10.040 Bond.
The city manager shall acquire a surety bond to be approved by the council, such bond to be conditioned on the faithful performance of his/her duties. The bond premium shall be paid by the city. (Ord. 807 §4, 2000)

2.10.050 Compensation and expenses.
The city manager shall receive such compensation and expense allowance in accordance with the employment agreement and as the city council shall from time to time determine and fix by resolution. Such compensation and expense allowance shall be a proper charge against such funds of the city as the city council shall designate. The city manager shall make periodic reports to the city council summarizing the manager’s reimbursed expenses for the previous month. (Ord. 807 §5, 2000)

2.10.060 Residence.
The city manager shall not be required to initially reside in the city of Lakeport. Within six months, the city manager must become a resident of the city unless the city council approves residency outside the city limits. (Ord. 807 §6, 2000)

2.10.070 Council members’ eligibility.
No member of the city council shall be eligible for appointment as city manager until one year has elapsed after such council member has ceased to be a member of the city council. (Ord. 807 §7, 2000)

2.10.080 Evaluation of the city manager’s performance.
The city council shall adopt a performance evaluation policy and shall conduct, at least annually, an evaluation of the city manager’s performance. The city manager shall be given the opportunity to discuss his/her performance with the city council before the evaluation is concluded. The results of this evaluation shall be in writing and acknowledged by the city manager. (Ord. 807 §8, 2000)

2.10.090 Acting city manager.
The city manager may designate one of the department heads as acting city manager during any temporary absence or disability of the city manager. The city council shall name the acting city manager in the event of a prolonged absence of the city manager or if the city council terminates or places the city manager on administrative leave. (Ord. 807 §9, 2000)

2.10.100 Code of ethics.
The city manager shall be familiar with and adhere to the international city/county management association’s (ICMA) code of ethics. (Ord. 807 §10, 2000)

2.10.110 Powers and duties of city manager.
The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city and the city of Lakeport municipal sewer district, and the executive director of the Lakeport redevelopment agency, and other duties as assigned. The manager may head one or more departments and shall be responsible to the city council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city. To that end, he/she shall have the power and shall be required to, and shall be the duty and responsibility to:

A.    Authority Over Employees. Control, order, and give directions to all department heads (with the exception of the city attorney) and to subordinate officers and employees of the city under his/her jurisdiction through their department heads;

B.    Appointment and Removal of Employees. Oversee, appoint, remove, promote, demote, suspend, or dismiss all officers and employees of the city under him/her through their department heads (except the city attorney), subject to all applicable laws and personnel rules and regulations;

C.    Departmental Cooperation. All subordinate officers, including the city attorney, shall assist the city manager in administering the affairs of the city efficiently, economically, and harmoniously. Department heads and the city clerk responsible to the city manager shall take direction only from the city manager;

D.    Administrative Reorganization. Conduct studies and recommend to the city council administrative reorganization of offices, positions, or units under his/her direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective, and economical conduct of the city’s business;

E.    Enforcement of Laws. Insure that all laws, ordinances, and policies of the city are duly enforced and that all franchises, permits, and privileges granted by the city are faithfully observed, as well as state and federal laws;

F.    Representation of City. Represent the city in its negotiations and working relationships with the state, the county, and other governmental jurisdictions; provided that any contracts negotiated for the exchange of services from any such other governmental jurisdiction shall be subject to approval by the city council;

G.    Performance of Duties of City Auditor. Perform or have performed by a properly qualified certified public accountant all the duties and powers imposed by law on a city auditor;

H.    Attendance at Council Meetings. Attend meetings of the city council unless excused therefrom by the council, except when his/her removal is under consideration by the council;

I.    Recommended Activities. Recommend to the city council adoption of such measures, including ordinances and resolutions, as he/she may deem necessary or expedient for the health, safety, or welfare of the community or for the improvement of administrative services;

J.    Advise as to Finances. Keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial conditions and needs of the city;

K.    Preparation of the Budget. Prepare and submit to the city council the proposed annual budget;

L.    Purchase of Supplies. Enforce and supervise, subject to and in accordance with the city purchasing policy, the purchase and acquisition in any lawful manner of all property, equipment, services, material, and supplies for the city and for all departments and divisions thereof, provided the purchase or acquisition thereof has been approved by the city council or is included in a budget which has been approved and adopted by the city council. No expenditure shall be submitted or recommended to the city council except on report or approval of the city manager;

M.    Investigation of City Affairs and Complaints. Investigate the affairs of the city or any department or division thereof. Investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the government of the city, and in regard to service maintained by the public utilities in the city, and see that all franchises, permits, and privileges granted by the city are faithfully performed and observed;

N.    Supervision of Public Property. Exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks, and all other public property which is under the control and jurisdiction of the city council;

O.    Hours of Employment. Devote the entire working time of the city manager to the duties of this office, as assigned by the city council, and shall be granted administrative leave compensation for time spent as provided by the city council;

P.    Performance of Delegated Duties. Perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to the city manager from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other action of the city council;

Q.    Attendance at Commission and Board Meetings. Attend any and all meetings of any commissions or boards heretofore or hereafter created by the city council upon the city manager’s own volition or upon direction of the city council. The city manager shall be heard by such commissions and boards as to all matters upon which he/she wishes to address;

R.    Authorization for Professional Services. Approve and sign contracts for any special and professional services as authorized by the city council;

S.    Personnel Plan. Oversee the preparation and update of the personnel rules and regulations and procedures and classification plans and establish proper administrative policies and directives and handle all negotiations, grievances, and personnel actions;

T.    Preparation of Compensation Plan. Oversee the preparation and submission of, and the recommendation to the city council, a compensation plan for all appointed officers and employees of the city;

U.    Leadership in Civic Activities. Provide leadership, participate, and be involved in civic activities designated to benefit the residents of the city;

V.    Communications. Provide periodic reports keeping the city council informed of his/her activities and involvement with individual council members. (Ord. 807 §11, 2000)

2.10.120 Council-manager relations.
The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city manager. The members of the city council may meet with department heads and other employees for the purposes of asking questions and gathering information. However, neither the council nor any of its members shall give orders or instructions implied or otherwise to any subordinates of the city manager. The city manager shall take orders and instructions from the city council only when the council is in a duly convened meeting of the city council. No individual council member shall give any orders or instructions to the city manager. (Ord. 807 §12, 2000)

2.10.130 Removal of the city manager.
A.    The removal of the city manager shall require the vote of at least three members of the city council at a regular or special meeting of the council. Such action shall be consistent with the employment agreement and applicable laws.

B.    The city council, with a majority vote, shall have the right to place the city manager on administrative leave with full pay or suspend the city manager without pay.

C.    The city manager shall not be removed from office, other than for misconduct in office, during or within a period of ninety days next succeeding any general municipal election held in the city at which a member of the city council is elected or when a new city council member is appointed. The purpose of this provision is to allow any newly elected or appointed member of the city council or a reorganized city council to observe the actions and ability of the city manager in the performance of the duties of his/her office. (Ord. 807 §13, 2000)

Chapter 2.12
CITY CLERK
Sections:

2.12.010    Office created.

2.12.020    Powers and duties.

2.12.030    Deputies.

2.12.040    Transfer of duties--Financial and accounting.

2.12.050    Competitive service.

2.12.060    Surety bond.

2.12.010 Office created.
The city clerk of the city shall be appointed by the city manager and serve at the pleasure of the city manager. The city clerk shall be qualified by training and experience to perform the duties of the office. The duties and responsibilities of the city treasurer are transferred to the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 902 §1(part), 2016)

2.12.020 Powers and duties.
The city clerk shall:

A.    Keep Record of Proceedings. Maintain and preserve the minutes and records of the proceedings of the city council and all council committees, boards and commissions in accordance with the general laws of the state of California.

B.    Record Ordinances and Resolutions. Record in full, uniformly and permanently, all ordinances and resolutions of the city and be the legal custodian of the same. This shall include the vote thereon and the notice of publication or posting.

C.    Publish All Legal Notices. The city clerk shall publish all legal notices as required by law or ordinance.

D.    Attend City Council Meetings. Attend in person or by designee all city council meetings in their entirety for the purpose of making and keeping an accurate record of the proceedings.

E.    Conduct Local Elections and Keep Election Records. The city clerk shall keep and maintain all election records and have custody of all property used in connection with elections.

F.    Maintain City Seal. The city clerk shall have custody of the seal of the city and affix it to such documents as may be required and authorized by law.

G.    Publication of List of Appointments of All Ongoing Boards, Commissions and Committees. The city council requires that the city clerk make the annual publication by December 31st of each year of the local appointment list ("Maddy Act").

H.    Oaths, Affidavits, Depositions and Acknowledgments. The city clerk and the city clerk’s designee may administer oaths or affirmations and take and certify affidavits and depositions pertaining to city affairs and business which may be used in any court or proceedings in the state. The acknowledgment of an instrument may be made before a city clerk and the city clerk’s designee within the city in which the city clerk was appointed.

I.    Receipt of Claims Against the City. The city clerk shall receive all claims, amendments thereto, or applications for leave to present late claims against the city.

J.    Additional Duties. The city clerk shall perform such additional duties as are prescribed by ordinance. (Ord. 902 §1(part), 2016)

2.12.030 Deputies.
The city clerk may appoint deputies and may delegate such duties and responsibilities as are deemed appropriate to any deputy appointed thereby, subject to the prior approval of the city manager. The deputies shall hold office at the pleasure of the city manager and receive such compensation as is provided by the city council. (Ord. 902 §1(part), 2016)

2.12.040 Transfer of duties--Financial and accounting.
The financial and accounting duties imposed upon the city clerk by Sections 40802 through 40805, inclusive, of the Government Code, are transferred to the city finance director as such office has been created and established and the powers and duties thereof defined by ordinance. (Ord. 902 §1(part), 2016)

2.12.050 Competitive service.
The city clerk shall be in the competitive service of the city subject to all rules and policies as established by the city council. (Ord. 902 §1(part), 2016)

2.12.060 Surety bond.
The city clerk shall acquire a surety bond to be approved by the city council, such bond to be conditioned on the faithful performance of the city clerk’s duties. The bond premium shall be paid by the city. (Ord. 902 §1(part), 2016)

Chapter 2.14
CITY FINANCE DIRECTOR
Sections:

2.14.010    Office created.

2.14.020    Powers and duties.

2.14.030    Surety bond.

2.14.010 Office created.
The finance director of the city shall be appointed by the city manager and serve at the pleasure of the city manager. The finance director shall be qualified by training and experience to perform the duties of the office. (Ord. 901 §1(part), 2016)

2.14.020 Powers and duties.
The finance director shall be the head of the finance department of the city, and shall have the power and shall be required to:

A.    Have charge of the administration of the financial affairs of the city;

B.    Compile the budget expense and income estimates;

C.    Maintain a general accounting system for the city and each of its officers, departments and agencies;

D.    Supervise and be responsible for the disbursement of all moneys and audit of all expenditures to insure that budget appropriations are not exceeded;

E.    Audit all purchase orders before issuance to insure that sufficient funds are appropriated and available;

F.    Audit and approve before payment of bills, invoices, payrolls, demands or charges against the city and with advice of the city attorney, when necessary, determine the regularity, legality and correctness of such claims, demands or charges;

G.    Prepare and submit to the city council periodically a register of audited demands with the finance director’s affidavit attached thereto as provided in the Government Code;

H.    Submit to the city council periodic statements of all receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the city;

I.    At of the end of each fiscal year, submit a complete financial statement and report;

J.    Supervise the keeping of current inventories of all property of the city by all city departments, offices and agencies;

K.    Perform all the financial and accounting duties which would be imposed upon the city clerk in the absence of this chapter, and the city clerk shall be relieved of such duties, including all such duties imposed upon the city clerk by Government Code Sections 40802 to 40805;

L.    Perform all duties that are imposed upon the finance director by this code or by other law; and

M.    Perform such other duties as may be imposed upon the finance director by this code, other law, or the appointing authority acting in a manner authorized by this code or other law. (Ord. 901 §1(part), 2016)

2.14.030 Surety bond.
The finance director of the city shall acquire a surety bond to be approved by the city council, such bond to be conditioned on the faithful performance of the finance director’s duties. The bond premium shall be paid by the city. (Ord. 901 §1(part), 2016)

Chapter 2.16
PLANNING COMMISSION
Sections:

2.16.010    Planning commission established--Membership and authority.

2.16.020    Meetings and public records.

2.16.030    Rules of conduct.

2.16.010 Planning commission established--Membership and authority.
There is established a planning commission consisting of five members to be appointed by the city council. Planning commissioners must be residents from within the city limits and not already officials of the city. The city council may appoint one member who lives outside of the city limits but within the Lakeport zip code area.

The planning commission members shall be appointed by the city council for a term of four years. The planning commission shall have land use decision-making authority as defined by the Lakeport zoning ordinance and shall also advise and report on planning matters to the Lakeport city council. The city procedure for recruitment and appointment of planning commission members shall be as specified in a city council resolution. (Ord. 833 §2(part), 2005)

2.16.020 Meetings and public records.
The planning commission shall meet at least once a month and may, as necessary, meet on additional days with notice as provided by law. The planning commission shall maintain a public record of all proceedings. (Ord. 833 §2(part), 2005)

2.16.030 Rules of conduct.
Rules of conduct and operation of the planning commission shall be set forth in a resolution of the planning commission. (Ord. 833 §2(part), 2005)

Chapter 2.20
PARK AND RECREATION COMMISSION
Sections:

2.20.010    Established--Membership.

2.20.020    Term of office--Filling of vacancies.

2.20.030    Appointment of officers.

2.20.040    Compensation.

2.20.060    Meetings.

2.20.070    Quorum--Attendance.

2.20.080    Powers and duties.

2.20.090    Acceptance of gifts, donations or bequests.

2.20.010 Established--Membership.
There is established a park and recreation commission consisting of the following persons:

A.    Five voting members, citizens-at-large, at least four who are residents of the city and up to one member who lives outside of the city limits but within the Lakeport zip code area, to be appointed by the city council on the basis of interest and qualification.

B.    The city manager shall appoint appropriate staff members and a staff liaison to coordinate the activities of the committee. (Ord. 916 §1(part), 2018)

2.20.020 Term of office--Filling of vacancies.
A.    Members of the park and recreation commission shall serve for a term of two years and shall be appointed by the city council. Three members shall have terms expiring December 31st in odd years and two members shall have terms expiring December 31st in even years.

B.    Vacancies in the commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of the term of office shall be filled for the unexpired term by appointment of the city council. (Ord. 916 §1(part), 2018)

2.20.030 Appointment of officers.
The park and recreation commission shall meet at its first meeting each year and elect a chairman and vice-chairman from members of the committee. The duties of such officers shall respectively be such as are usually performed by such officers. Officers shall hold office for one year or until their successors are elected. (Ord. 916 §1(part), 2018)

2.20.040 Compensation.
Members of the park and recreation commission shall receive no compensation. (Ord. 916 §1(part), 2018)

2.20.060 Meetings.
A.    The park and recreation commission shall hold at least one regular meeting per month for the transaction of business, except if no agenda items have been proposed, then the regularly scheduled meeting may be canceled.

B.    The commission shall adopt rules and regulations to govern its meetings and perform its duties thereunder and shall keep a record of its minutes, resolutions, findings, determinations and recommendations which shall be a public record. Minutes of the commission’s meetings shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be made available to members of the city council.

C.    Special meetings may be called at any time upon twenty-four hours’ written notice to the members thereof and notification within twenty-four hours to the public press. (Ord. 916 §1(part), 2018)

2.20.070 Quorum--Attendance.
A.    A majority of the regular members shall constitute a quorum.

B.    Absence from three consecutive regular meetings without the approval of the city council shall be deemed to constitute retirement of such member and the office may be declared vacant. (Ord. 916 §1(part), 2018)

2.20.080 Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the commission shall be to:

A.    Act in an advisory capacity only to the city council in matters pertaining to city parks and recreation referred to the commission by the city council.

B.    Cooperate with the planning commission and civic organizations to advance the sound planning of new recreation areas and facilities.

C.    Recommend, from time to time, policies on city recreation facilities to the city council for consideration and approval.

D.    Perform such other duties as may be assigned to the commission by the city council. (Ord. 916 §1(part), 2018)

2.20.090 Acceptance of gifts, donations or bequests.
The park and recreation commission may receive donations, gifts, legacies, endowments or bequests made to the city for the acquisition of park and recreation facilities and the construction, maintenance and operation of such facilities, subject to the approval of the city council. All donations, gifts, legacies, endowments and bequests so received shall be in the name of the city and turned over to the city finance director and shall be kept in a special fund to be designated as the park and recreation fund. (Ord. 916 §1(part), 2018)

Chapter 2.22
TRAFFIC SAFETY ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Sections:

2.22.010    Committee established--Composition.

2.22.020    Terms of committee members--Vacancies and compensation.

2.22.030    Organization of commission--Meetings, officers, minutes.

2.22.040    Powers and duties.

2.22.010 Committee established--Composition.
There is established a traffic safety advisory committee consisting of the following persons:

A.    Five voting members, citizens-at-large, at least three who are residents of the city and up to two members who may be nonresidents of the city, to be appointed by the city council on the basis of interest and qualification.

B.    The city manager shall appoint appropriate staff members and a staff liaison to coordinate the activities of the committee. (Ord. 906 §1(part), 2016)

2.22.020 Terms of committee members--Vacancies and compensation.
A.    Terms. Members of the traffic safety advisory committee shall serve for a term of four years upon appointment by the city council. Vacancies on the commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of term of office shall be filled for the unexpired term by appointment by the city council.

B.    Vacation or Removal from Office. Members of the traffic safety advisory committee shall be removed from office or their office declared vacant in the following manner and for the following reasons:

1.    By a majority vote of the council;

2.    If a member is no longer a permanent resident of the city of Lakeport, in which event his/her removal shall be automatic and no action by the council is necessary;

3.    If a member is absent from four noticed regular meetings of the committee in any twelve-month period, except for good cause as determined by members of the committee, his/her removal shall be automatic and no action by the council is necessary.

C.    Compensation. Members of the traffic safety advisory committee shall receive no compensation. (Ord. 906 §1(part), 2016)

2.22.030 Organization of commission--Meetings, officers, minutes.
A.    Meetings. The traffic safety advisory committee shall hold at least one regular meeting every other month for the transaction of business, except if no agenda items have been proposed, then the regularly scheduled meeting may be cancelled.

B.    Officers. The traffic safety advisory committee shall meet at its first meeting each year and elect a chairman and vice-chairman from members of the committee. Their duties shall respectively be such as are usually carried by such officers. Such officers shall hold office for one year, or until their successors are elected.

C.    Minutes. The city clerk, or his/her designate, shall act as secretary to the committee, and shall keep a record of its proceedings and transactions. Minutes of the commission shall be filed with the city clerk. (Ord. 906 §1(part), 2016)

2.22.040 Powers and duties.
The powers, duties and responsibilities of the traffic safety advisory committee shall be to make recommendations to the city council regarding:

A.    Traffic safety;

B.    Pedestrian safety;

C.    Parking, as it relates to traffic safety. (Ord. 906 §1(part), 2016)

Chapter 2.24
REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
Sections:

2.24.010    Created.

2.24.020    Eminent domain.

2.24.010 Created.
A.    It is found and declared, pursuant to Section 33010 of the Community Redevelopment Law, that there is a need for a redevelopment agency created by Section 33100 of said law to function in the city and said agency is authorized to transact business and exercise its powers under the Community Redevelopment Law.

B.    Said agency shall be known as the redevelopment agency.

C.    The city council declares itself as the redevelopment agency pursuant to the Community Redevelopment Law. (Ord. 664 §§1--3, 1986)

2.24.020 Eminent domain.
Pursuant to Section 33342.7 of the Health and Safety Code, a description of the agency’s program to acquire real property by eminent domain is as follows:

The Lakeport Redevelopment Agency shall not exercise condemnation of real property, nor any non-contiguous areas, within the Lakeport Redevelopment Project area.

The agency’s program to acquire real property by eminent domain may be amended only by amending the redevelopment plan pursuant to Article 12 of the Community Redevelopment Law (commencing with Health and Safety Code Section 33450). (Ord. 866 §1, 2007)

Chapter 2.28
EMERGENCY SERVICES*
Sections:

2.28.010    Title.

2.28.020    Purposes.

2.28.030    Definitions.

2.28.040    City emergency organization.

2.28.050    Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS).

2.28.060    City mutual aid coordinators.

2.28.070    Disaster council created.

2.28.080    Disaster council--Powers and duties.

2.28.090    Volunteers.

2.28.100    Office of emergency services created-- Officers and staff.

2.28.110    Director of emergency services.

2.28.120    Powers and duties of director.

2.28.130    Local emergency--Authority to proclaim-- Ratification.

2.28.140    Legality of initial emergency measures.

2.28.150    Local emergency--Termination.

2.28.160    State of emergency--Who may request.

2.28.170    Activation of county or operational area emergency operations center.

2.28.180    Authority for emergency orders and regulations.

2.28.190    Authorized emergency vehicles.

2.28.200    Emergency expenditures.

2.28.210    Planning.

2.28.220    Emergency plan.

2.28.230    Emergency preparedness council-- Membership.

2.28.240    Punishment of violations--Acts prohibited during emergency.

2.28.250    Authorities and references.

*    Prior Ordinance History: Ord. 471

2.28.010 Title of chapter.
This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the “emergency services ordinance.” (Ord. 832 §1(part), 2004)

2.28.020 Purposes.
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within the city of Lakeport in the event of an emergency; the establishment, coordination and direction of the city emergency organization; the establishment, coordination and direction of the disaster council; the establishment, coordination and direction of the office of emergency services; and the coordination of the emergency functions of this city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations and affected private persons. (Ord. 832 §1(part), 2004)

2.28.030 Definitions.
The following terms as used in this chapter shall, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, have the respective meanings herein set forth:

A.    “Council” means the city council.

B.    “Emergency” means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this city caused by such conditions as environmental disasters, air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, hazardous materials incident, riot, or earthquake or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of this city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. Included within the term “emergency” are the various degrees of emergency enumerated in the California Emergency Services Act, Section 8558 of the Government Code including “state of war emergency,” “state of emergency” and “local emergency.”

Pursuant to Government Code Section 8558, the following terms shall have the following meaning:

1.    “State of war emergency” means the condition which exists immediately, with or without a proclamation thereof by the Governor, whenever this state or nation is attacked by an enemy of the United States, or upon receipt by the state of a warning from the federal government indicating that such an enemy attack is probable or imminent.

2.    “State of emergency” means the duly proclaimed existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the state caused by such conditions as environmental disasters, air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, hazardous materials incident, riot or earthquake or other conditions, other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy or conditions causing a “state of war emergency” which conditions, by reason of their magnitude, are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services of any single county, city and county, or city, and require the combined forces of a mutual aid region or regions to combat.

3.    “Local emergency” means the duly proclaimed existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the territorial limits of a county, city and county, or city, caused by such conditions as environmental disasters, air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, hazardous materials incident, riot or earthquake, or other conditions, other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of that political subdivision and require the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat.

C.    “Emergency operations center (EOC)” means a location from which centralized emergency management can be performed.

D.    “Emergency response agency” means any organization responding to an emergency, whether in the field, at the scene of an incident, or to an EOC, in response to an emergency, or providing mutual aid support to such an organization.

E.    “Emergency response personnel” means personnel involved with an agency’s response to an emergency.

F.    “Emergency services” means all activities carried out pursuant to the California Emergency Services Act.

G.    “Expenditures” means any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, and shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city.

H.    “Incident” means an occurrence or event, either human-caused or by natural phenomena, that requires action by emergency response personnel to prevent or minimize loss of life or damage to property and/or natural resources.

I.    “Lead agency” means the agency designated to act as the primary coordinator and facilitator of emergency services during an emergency within the operational area.

J.    “Mutual aid region” means a geographical area defined by the state of California in accordance with the State Emergency Services Act.

K.    “Operational area” means an intermediate level of the state emergency services organization, consisting of a county and all political subdivisions within the county area. Each county geographic area has been designated by the state as an operational area. An operational area is used by the county and the political subdivisions comprising the operation area for the coordination of emergency activities and to serve as a link in the system of communications and coordination between the state’s emergency operation centers and the operations centers of the political subdivisions comprising the operational area, as defined in Government Code Sections 8559(b) and 8605. This definition does not change the definition of operational area as used in the existing fire and rescue mutual aid system.

1.    The operational area’s eligibility for state reimbursement of response-related personnel costs under California’s Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS) shall not be affected by nonparticipation of any local government(s) within the operational area.

2.    The county government shall serve as the lead agency of the operational area unless another member agency of the operational area assumes that responsibility by written agreement with county government.

3.    The city of Lakeport is a member of the Lake County operational area and participates in its functions. (Ord. 832 §1(part), 2004)

2.28.040 City emergency organization.
All officers and employees of the city, together with those volunteer forces registered to aid them during a duly proclaimed emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of this chapter, who by agreement or operation of law, may be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in the city of Lakeport during such emergency, shall constitute the city of Lakeport emergency organization. The city emergency organization also includes the American Red Cross, members of recognized community disaster relief and response organizations (e.g. NEST), Radio Amateur Civil Emergency Services (RACES), and such other organizations and groups as may offer and have their services accepted prior to, during, or after an emergency.

A.    All employees of the city are designed as disaster service workers pursuant to California Government Code 3100.

B.    The city emergency organization shall organize its response using the California Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS). (Ord. 832 §1(part), 2004)

2.28.050 Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS).
The Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS) is the adopted emergency management system in the county of Lake and the city of Lakeport.

The Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS) utilizes the Incident Command System (ICS), multi/interagency coordination, mutual aid, and the operational area concept to facilitate priority setting, interagency cooperation and the efficient flow of resources and information during an emergency. (Ord. 832 §1(part), 2004)

2.28.060 City mutual aid coordinators.
The following are named for the purpose of coordinating emergency mutual aid requests made through established state procedures:

A.    Building inspector mutual aid--Community development director or his/her designee;

B.    Emergency management mutual aid--City emergency services coordinator or his/her designee;

C.    Fire and rescue mutual aid--Chief of the Lakeport County fire protection district or his/her designee;

D.    Law enforcement mutual aid--Chief of police or his/her designee;

E.    Medical examiner/coroner mutual aid--Chief of police or his/her designee;

F.    Medical/health mutual aid--County public health officer or his/her designee;

G.    Public works mutual aid--City engineer/director of public works or his/her designee. (Ord. 832 §1(part), 2004)

2.28.070 Disaster council created.
The city of Lakeport disaster council is hereby created and shall consist of the following:

A.    The mayor, who shall serve as the disaster council chair;

B.    A second member of the council, who shall be first vice-chair;

C.    The city manager, who shall be the second vice-chair;

D.    Such representatives of federal, state and local civic, business, labor, veterans, professional or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the city council;

E.    The chief of police;

F.    The chief of the Lakeport County fire protection district;

G.    City engineer/director of public works;

H.    Community development director;

I.    The city attorney (who shall serve without vote);

J.    The city emergency services coordinator shall serve as staff to the disaster council. (Ord. 832 §1(part), 2004)

2.28.080 Disaster council--Powers and duties.
It shall be the duty of the city disaster council, and it is hereby empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The disaster council shall meet upon call of the chair or, if he/she is unavailable or unable to call such meeting, the first vice-chair and then the city manager or his/her designee may call a meeting. The disaster council shall meet a minimum of twice a year at a time and place designated by the chair. The city disaster council shall call and conduct its meetings in accordance with rules, not inconsistent with this chapter, as the council shall adopt by majority vote. (Ord. 832 §1(part). 2004)

2.28.090 Volunteers.
Volunteers who perform service in the city emergency organization in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall so serve without compensation. Volunteers shall be registered with the city office of emergency services as disaster service workers in order to be eligible for worker’s compensation benefits, as provided in Part 1, of Division 4, of the California Labor Code, commencing with Section 3201. (Ord. 832 §1(part), 2004)

2.28.100 Office of emergency services created-- Officers and staff.
There is hereby created within the city of Lakeport the city of Lakeport Office of Emergency Services (OES). The OES is part of the city manager’s office headed by the “director of emergency services”. (Ord. 832 §1(part), 2004)

2.28.110 Director of emergency services.
There is hereby created the position of director of emergency services. The city manager shall be the director of emergency services. The chief of police shall serve as director of emergency services during any temporary absence or disability of the city manager. (Ord. 832 §1(part), 2004)

2.28.120 Powers and duties of director.
The director is hereby empowered to:

A.    Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a “local emergency” if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect;

B.    Request the director of the Lake County operational area, the Governor of the state, and the President of the United States to proclaim a “state of emergency” when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency;

C.    Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;

D.    Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of the city; and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise;

E.    Represent this city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies;

F.    In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency the proclamation of a state or emergency by the Governor or the Director of the California Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a state of war emergency, the director is hereby empowered:

1.    To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest possible time by the city council;

2.    To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to make expenditures, binding the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use;

3.    To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of emergency or state of war emergency, to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he/she deems necessary in the execution of his/her duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers;

4.    To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency;

5.    To execute all of his or her ordinary power as city manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him or her by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan adopted by the city council, all powers conferred upon him or her by any statute, by any agreement approved by the city council, and by any other lawful authority.

G.    Designate the order of succession to the director’s office, to take effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his/her duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be maintained on file with the city clerk. (Ord. 832 §1(part), 2004)

2.28.130 Local emergency--Authority to proclaim-- Ratification.
The city council, or if the council is not in session, in the following order, city manager, chief of police, or their designee operating as director of emergency services in the emergency operations center may proclaim a local emergency. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by an authorized city officer, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect. (Ord. 832 §1(part), 2004)

2.28.140 Legality of initial emergency measures.
All emergency measures taken by the director of emergency services prior to the issuance of an official proclamation of emergency, or prior to any decision of the city council not to issue such proclamation, shall be legal and binding upon the city. (Ord. 832 §1(part), 2004)

2.28.150 Local emergency--Termination.
Pursuant to the California Emergency Services Act, the council shall review the declaration at least every fourteen days until the need for continuing the local emergency has ended, and shall proclaim the termination of such local emergency at the earliest practicable date that conditions warrant. (Ord. 832 §1(part), 2004)

2.28.160 State of emergency--Who may request.
The city council, or if the council is not in session, in the following priority order, city manager, chief of police or their designee operating as director of emergency services in the city emergency operations center, may request the Governor to proclaim a state of emergency where the conditions of disaster, or of extreme peril to the safety of life and property within the city caused by such conditions as environmental disasters, air pollution, oil or chemical spill, fire, flood, storm, riot, earthquake or other conditions, other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy or conditions causing a state of war emergency, which conditions, by reason of their magnitude, are likely to be beyond the control of the city, and require the forces of a mutual aid region or regions to combat. (Ord. 832 §1(part), 2004)

2.28.170 Activation of county or operational area emergency operations center.
The following personnel are authorized to request the activation and partial or total mobilization of the County Emergency Organization to staff the County or Operational Area Emergency Operations Center (EOC): the city manager, chief of police, and others authorized by the city manager to act as director of emergency services in the city emergency operations center. (Ord. 832 §1(part), 2004)

2.28.180 Authority for emergency orders and regulations.
The city council, to provide prompt response to emergency situations following the proclamation of a local emergency as authorized in this chapter, the proclamation of a state of emergency, local emergency or the existence of a state of war emergency, specifically delegates in the following priority order, to the city manager, chief of police, or others authorized by the city manager to act as director of emergency services in the emergency operations center, authority to promulgate orders and regulations to provide for the protection of life and property, where necessary to preserve the public order and safety. Such orders and regulations should, when circumstances permit, be jointly concurred in, but may be independently promulgated when the situation makes concurrence impractical. All such orders and regulations to be effective must be in writing and signed by the promulgating official, and must be confirmed at the next regular meeting of the city council. (Ord. 832 §1(part), 2004)

2.28.190 Authorized emergency vehicles.
Private or public owned vehicles, while operated in the line of duty by office of emergency services personnel responding to, but not returning from, emergency calls are designated authorized emergency vehicles (California Vehicle Code Section 2416 (10)). (Ord. 832 §1(part), 2004)

2.28.200 Emergency expenditures.
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. (Ord. 832 §1(part), 2004)

2.28.210 Planning.
The city shall include the use of the California Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS) in all emergency plans and procedures. (Ord. 832 §1(part), 2004)

2.28.220 Emergency plan.
The county operational area office of emergency services shall be responsible for the development of the operational area emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the utilization of the California Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS); effective mobilization of all of the resources of the county, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services and staff of the emergency organization. The city emergency plan will reflect all requirements to coordinate activities in conjunction with the operational area emergency plan. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council

It shall be the responsibility of all city emergency operations center section chiefs and alternates to have a thorough knowledge of the city and operational area emergency plan. The city shall insure that the key personnel are properly trained and organized to meet all of their responsibilities in the event of an emergency. (Ord. 832 §1(part), 2004)

2.28.230 Emergency preparedness council--Membership.
The mayor shall be city of Lakeport’s representative to the county of Lake emergency preparedness council. (Ord. 832 §1(part), 2004)

2.28.240 Punishment of violations--Acts prohibited during emergency.
During the period beginning on the date of the existence of a major disaster of state of emergency declared by the director of emergency services and ending one hundred eighty days after that date, and within the area to which the declaration applies, it shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed five thousand dollars, or by imprisonment for not to exceed six months, or both, for any person, contractor, business or other entity during an emergency to:

A.    Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or her by virtue of this chapter;

B.    Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy, during a state of war emergency, or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof;

C.    Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by any emergency services agency of the state of California, the county of Lake, county districts or any city in the county of Lake.

D.    Sell, or offer to sell, any consumer food items, repair or reconstruction services, emergency or medical supplies or gasoline for an amount which is ten or more percent greater than the price charged by a person, contractor, business or other entity for said goods or services immediately prior to the proclamation of emergency unless said person, business, contractor or other entity can prove that the increase was directly attributable to additional costs imposed on it by the supplier of the goods or for labor and materials used to provide the service.

For purposes of this emergency order, the following definitions shall apply:

1.    A consumer food item is any article which is used or intended for use for food, drink, confection or condiment by humans or animals.

2.    Repair of reconstruction services are those contractor services for repairs to residential and commercial property of any type which are damaged as a result of the disaster. This includes the removal of debris (including a damaged tree) and garbage.

3.    Emergency supplies shall include, but are not limited to, water, flashlights, radios, batteries, candles, blankets, soaps and diapers.

4.    Medical supplies shall include, but are not limited to, prescription and non-prescription drugs, bandages, gauzes, and isopropyl alcohol.

E.    Buy, sell, remove, deface, cover, hide, destroy or tamper with any sign, tag or placard posted by a member of the city emergency organization on a building or structure damaged by a disaster.

F.    Post any sign, tag or placard not authorized by the city emergency organization on a building or structure damaged by a disaster. (Ord. 832 §1(part), 2004)

2.28.250 Authorities and references.
A.    Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS) Regulations: California Code of Regulations Title 19, Division 2, Chapter 1, commencing with Section 2400.

B.    California Emergency Services Act: Health and Safety Code Section 1797 et seq.

C.    Disaster Service Workers: California Government Code Section 3100 et seq. (Ord. 832 §1(part), 2004)

Chapter 2.32
ADMINISTRATIVE FEES
Sections:

2.32.010    Designated--Collection.

2.32.010 Designated--Collection.
A.    In addition to any other charges that may otherwise be provided by law, the city clerk shall charge and collect the following fees for the service or matter indicated:

1.    For preparing a first copy, other than a carbon copy, of any public writing on file in his office or any other city office, per folio of one hundred words, one dollar;

2.    For preparing a carbon copy of any such public writing made at the time of preparing a first copy thereof, per folio, thirty-five cents;

3.    For duplicating by machine process, any public writing or record on file in his office or any other city office, fifty cents per folio;

4.    For comparing with the original on file in his office, the copy of any public writing prepared by another and presented to the city clerk for his certificate, one dollar per folio;

5.    For certifying to a copy of any writing on file in his office, one dollar;

6.    Copies of maps, diagrams, graphs, and other records of special design may be furnished upon payment of the cost of preparation, or acquisition, as estimated by the city clerk;

7.    Mailing list, copies at five cents per name.

B.    Neither the state nor any county, municipality, district or other political subdivision or any department thereof, nor any governmental agency or public officer, board or body acting in its official capacity shall be required to pay the fees prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 396 §§1, 2, 1963)

Chapter 2.36
TRAVEL EXPENSES FOR OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Sections:

2.36.010    Purpose of provisions.

2.36.020    Scope of provisions.

2.36.030    Authorization.

2.36.040    Claim requirements.

2.36.050    General expense guidelines.

2.36.060    Out-of-city travel--Over twenty-four hours--Per diem allowance.

2.36.070    Out-of-city travel--Under twenty-four hours--Per diem allowance.

2.36.080    Reimbursement of actual expenses.

2.36.090    Transportation expenses.

2.36.010 Purpose of provisions.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish rules and regulations governing the expenditure of public funds for travel, subsistence, lodging and other related costs incurred during the conduct of official city business of the city. (Ord. 599 §1.1, 1981)

2.36.020 Scope of provisions.
All city council members, officers, employees or other official representatives of the city may claim reimbursement for the expenditure governed by this policy. (Ord. 599 §1.2, 1981)

2.36.030 Authorization.
All travel outside the city, and all reimbursement for travel, subsistence, lodging or other related costs must be authorized as follows:

A.    City council members by authorization of the mayor;

B.    All other officers, employees or representatives by a travel authorization certified by the department head. Whenever possible, travel authorizations are to be submitted to the city council prior to the expected departure date.

C.    Representatives of the police department shall require no authorization other than police chief approval for expenses incurred in connection with investigation, prisoner pickup and transportation and prosecution to the extent that such funds are provided for in the police department budget.

D.    The city attorney-city legal counsel shall require no authorization for expenses incurred with regard to litigation of civil matters in which the city is interested to the extent that such funds are provided for in the legal council budget. (Ord. 599 §2, 1981)

2.36.040 Claim requirements.
A.    No expenses shall be reimbursed under this policy unless rendered upon the currently approved travel expense claim form and approved by the duly authorized department head and by the city council.

B.    Each claimant must provide the information required including but not limited to dates and times of departure and return, destination, travel authorization of purpose for trip, mileage, lodging, etc.

C.    Each claimant under the provisions of Section 2.36.030 of this chapter must state the purpose for which the expenses were incurred. (Ord. 599 §3, 1981)

2.36.050 General expense guidelines.
A.    The allowances for meals and lodging shall be in accordance with the allowances set forth in this chapter unless the cost and circumstances are beyond the control of the claimant, in which case, actual costs may be paid at the discretion of the city council.

B.    Subsistence. Whenever possible and within their control, claimants are expected to incur expenses comparable to those arising from the use of good, moderately priced establishments catering to the general public.

C.    Transportation. Claimants are expected to use the method of transportation that is in the best interest of the city, considering both total direct expense as well as the claimants time. (Ord. 599 §4, 1981)

2.36.060 Out-of-city travel--Over twenty-four hours-- Per diem allowance.
A.    The sum of fifty-eight dollars will be allowed for each full twenty-four-hour period or fraction thereof.

B.    Documentation. No receipts or vouchers are necessary for lodging or meal expenditures when claiming under subsection A of this section.

C.    Other Expenses. Parking mileage and transportation costs can be claimed in addition to the per diem allowance allowed under this section. The charges will be paid in accordance with the applicable sections elsewhere in this chapter.

D.    Registration. Actual registration costs will be paid in addition to per diem when supported by a receipt or other documentation. (Ord. 619 §1, 1983; Ord. 599 S5, 1981)

2.36.070 Out-of-city travel--Under twenty-four hours-- Per diem allowance.
Claimants out of the city for a period less than twenty-four hours shall not be allowed a per diem. Claimants shall be entitled for reimbursement for actual expenses incurred pursuant to the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 599 §6, 1981)

2.36.080 Reimbursement of actual expenses.
A.    Eligibility. Total actual expenses incurred will be allowed for certain conditions and circumstances as follows:

1.    Actual expenses incurred by a member of the city council if travel is authorized by the mayor;

2.    Actual expenses of a claimant as defined in Section 2.36.040 of this chapter if certified by the duly authorized officer in the manner provided in this chapter;

B.    Actual costs must be supported by proper receipt or documentation as set forth in this policy for each item claimed.

C.    Other Expenses. Parking, mileage and transportation costs can be claimed in addition to the other expenses allowed under this section. Said charges shall be paid in accordance with the applicable sections elsewhere in this chapter. Registration cost shall be paid in addition to other costs when supported by a receipt or other documentation. Actual costs of meals if supported by a receipt or other documentation if included in registration fee will be also allowed.

D.    Limitations. Claims for actual costs reimbursement of this section shall not include per diem claims. (Ord. 599 §7, 1981)

2.36.090 Transportation expenses.
A.    Definition. Transportation expenses consist of charges for commercial carrier fees, private car mileage allowance, emergency repairs to county cars, overnight or day parking fees, bridge and road tolls, necessary taxi, bus or streetcar fares and all other charges essential to the transportation to and from official destinations.

B.    Eligibility. Allowances will be paid for expenses authorized as provided in Section 2.36.030 of this chapter.

C.    Allowance. Private car mileage allowance will be paid at the rate of twenty-five cents per mile. Actual regular class fare will be paid for in any commercial transportation service utilizing special and round trip rates whenever possible. Actual bridge, parking, ferry, taxi or streetcar fares will be paid when necessary.

D.    Documentation. Mileage should reasonably conform to the standard mileage schedule attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and on file in the office of the city clerk. Receipts must accompany the claim for all other expenses claimed hereunder. (Ord. 599 §8, 1981)

Chapter 2.40
PEACE OFFICER STANDARDS AND TRAINING
Sections:

2.40.010    Qualification for aid.

2.40.020    Adherence to standards.

2.40.010 Qualification for aid.
The city council declares that it desires that the city qualify to receive aid from the state under the provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4 of the California Penal Code. (Ord. 397 §1, 1963)

2.40.020 Adherence to standards.
Pursuant to Section 13522 of Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4 of the California Penal Code, the city while receiving aid from the state pursuant to said Chapter 1 will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. (Ord. 397 §2, 1963)

Chapter 2.44
UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
Sections:

2.44.010    Duties of city officers and employees.

2.44.020    Return to owner.

2.44.030    Sale at public auction.

2.44.040    Reports of property sold.

2.44.050    Reports of property not sold.

2.44.060    Frequency of sales.

2.44.070    Disposition of perishable or depreciable items.

2.44.080    Disposition of revenues.

2.44.090    Keeping of register.

2.44.010 Duties of city officers and employees.
It is the duty of every officer and employee of the city who finds any property in or upon any public street, sidewalk, public building or other public property or grounds in the city, which appears to be lost or abandoned, to deliver the same to the chief of police immediately upon the finding thereof, together with a statement in writing which states as follows:

A.    The time and place of finding;

B.    The name and address of the owner of the property, or the person believed to be the owner, if known; if not known, a statement to such effect. (Ord. 509 §1, 1974)

2.44.020 Return to owner.
The chief of police shall take appropriate care and protection of the property received under Section 2.44.010 of this chapter and shall restore such property to its true owner as soon as possible, if the true owner presents such proof of ownership as is satisfactory to the chief of police, and if such true owner pays for the reasonable costs incurred in the care and protection of the property. (Ord. 509 §2, 1974)

2.44.030 Sale at public auction.
A.    In the event that the chief of police is not able to ascertain the true owner of the property after a reasonable investigation thereof in view of the value and importance of the property and in the event that any such property remains in his possession unclaimed by its true owner for a period of six months, or three months in case of bicycles, from the date of its finding, the chief of police is authorized and required to dispose of the property.

B.    Such property shall be sold at public auction to the highest bidder, at an auction sale held in the city. The time and place of such sale together with a reasonable description of the property to be sold shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city, and more than ten days shall elapse between the first publication of the notice and the day upon which the auction is held. (Ord. 509 §3, 1974)

2.44.040 Reports of property sold.
A.    Immediately after the completion of any sale under Section 2.44.030 of this chapter, the chief of police shall make a report thereof to the city clerk, which shall consist of the following:

1.    An affidavit of the publication of the notice;

2.    A list of the property sold together with the amount for which each item of the property was sold, and the person to whom it was sold, and a list of the property not sold at auction which is set forth in the affidavit;

3.    A statement of the expenses of the sale.

B.    The chief of police shall accompany the report with a remittance in the amount of the difference between the selling price of the property and the expenses of the sale. (Ord. 509 §4, 1974)

2.44.050 Reports of property not sold.
In the event that any property is not sold at public auction under Section 2.44.030 of this chapter, the chief of police shall submit a report to the city council stating such fact and setting forth the items of property unsold. The city council shall then make such disposition of the unsold articles as it deems to the best interests of the city. (Ord. 509 §5, 1974)

2.44.060 Frequency of sales.
The chief of police shall hold a public auction sale as often as he deems necessary or expedient. (Ord. 509 §6, 1974)

2.44.070 Disposition of perishable or depreciable items.
Should any property come into the custody and possession of the chief of police which is perishable or which loses the greater part of its value by being retained during the six-month period required by this chapter, or should the lawful charges of the chief of police in keeping or protecting the property amount to two-thirds of the value of the property, the chief of police is not required to retain the property six months, but may dispose of the same at his discretion and in the manner most appropriate therefor. (Ord. 509 §7, 1974)

2.44.080 Disposition of revenues.
Any funds which are received by the city clerk pursuant to any sale under this chapter shall be added to the general fund of the city. The city clerk shall supply funds from time to time to the chief of police for the purpose of caring for or protecting or selling property covered by this chapter. (Ord. 509 §8, 1974)

2.44.090 Keeping of register.
The chief of police shall keep a register of lost or abandoned property, which shall contain the following information: The time and place of finding; the person turning in the property; a description of the property; the disposition thereof, including the name and address of the person to whom the property is delivered by the chief of police, and any other remarks which the chief of police may deem pertinent. (Ord. 509 §9, 1974)

Chapter 2.48
PERSONNEL SYSTEM
Sections:

2.48.010    Adopted.

2.48.020    Exempt service.

2.48.030    Rules--Adoption and amendment.

2.48.040    Appointments.

2.48.050    Probationary period.

2.48.060    Status of present employees.

2.48.070    Rules--Applicability.

2.48.080    Adverse actions.

2.48.090    Right of appeal.

2.48.100    Abolition of position.

2.48.010 Adopted.
In order to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters; to attract to municipal service the best and most competent person available; to assure that appointments and promotions of employees will be based on merit and fitness; and to provide a reasonable degree of security for qualified employees, the personnel system is adopted. (Ord. 411 §1, 1965)

2.48.020 Exempt service.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all offices, positions and employments in the service of the city, except the following exempt positions:

A.    Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional, technical or other services;

B.    Volunteer personnel, such as volunteer firemen;

C.    Emergency employees who are hired to meet the immediate requirements of an emergency condition, such as extraordinary fire, flood or earthquake which threatens life or property;

D.    Employees, other than those listed in this section, who are employed less than four consecutive forty-hour weeks are defined as temporary employees;

E.    Lifeguards employed for summer work only. (Ord. 411 §2, 1965)

2.48.030 Rules--Adoption and amendment.
Personnel rules shall be adopted by resolution of the city council after notice of such action has been publicly posted at least five days prior to city council consideration. Amendments and revisions may be suggested by an interested party and shall be processed as provided in the personnel rules. The rules shall establish regulations governing the personnel system, including:

A.    Preparation, installation, revision and maintenance of a position classification plan covering all positions in the competitive service, including employment standards and qualifications for each class;

B.    Preparation, revision and administration of a plan of compensation directly correlated with the position classification plan, providing a rate or range of pay for each class;

C.    Certification and appointment of persons from employment lists, and the making of provisional and emergency appointments;

D.    The establishment and use of employment lists containing names of persons eligible for appointment;

E.    Evaluation of employees during the probationary period;

F.    Transfer, promotion, demotion, reinstatement, disciplinary action and layoff of employees in the competitive service;

G.    Separation of employees from the city service;

H.    Standardization of hours of work; attendance and leave regulations, working conditions, and the development of employee’s morale, welfare and training;

I.    The establishment of adequate personnel records; J. The establishment of grievance and appeal procedures. (Ord. 411 §3, 1965)

2.48.040 Appointments.
A.    Appointments to new positions and vacant positions in the competitive service shall be made in accordance with the personnel rules. Appointments and promotions shall be made and based on merit and fitness to be ascertained so far as practicable by and upon recommendation of the department head on approval of the city council.

B.    In any appointment the department head may require a qualifying test or tests, and set minimum standards therefor as required.

C.    When appointment is to be made to a vacancy in the competitive service, there shall be transmitted to the department head the names of all persons on the appropriate list. The department head shall forward the list to the city council with his recommendations for their approval.

D.    In the absence of appropriate employment lists, a provisional appointment may be made not to exceed six months by the department head on the approval of the city council of a person meeting the minimum training and experience qualifications for the position. A provisional employee may be removed at any time without the right of appeal or hearing. During the period of suspension of an employee or pending final action on proceedings to review suspension, demotion or discharge of an employee, such vacancy may be filled by the department head on approval of the city council subject to the provisions of this chapter and the personnel rules. The clerk is to be advised by the department head of a pending vacancy so an application may be received. (Ord. 411 54, 1965)

2.48.050 Probationary period.
A.    All regular appointments, including promotional appointments, shall be for a probationary period of not less than six months. During the probationary period, the employee may be rejected at any time without the right of appeal on hearing.

B.    An employee rejected during the probationary period from a position to which he has been promoted shall be reinstated to a position in the class from which he was promoted unless he is discharged from the city service as provided in this chapter and the rules.

C.    An employee in the competitive service promoted or transferred to a position not included in the competitive service shall be reinstated to a position in the class from which he was promoted or transferred if action is taken to reject him unless he is discharged in the manner provided in this chapter and the personnel rules for positions in the competitive service. (Ord. 411 §5, 1965)

2.48.060 Status of present employees.
A.    Any person holding a position included in the competitive service, who, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, has served continuously in such position, or in some other position in the competitive service, for a period equal to the probationary period prescribed in the rules for his class, shall assume regular status in the competitive service in the position held on such effective date and shall thereafter be subject in all respects to the provisions of this chapter and the personnel rules.

B.    Any other person holding positions in the competitive service shall be regarded as probationers who are serving out the balance of their probationary periods as prescribed in the rules before obtaining regular status. The probationary period shall be computed from the date of appointment or employment. (Ord. 411 §6, 1965)

2.48.070 Rules--Applicability.
The provisions of the personnel rules relating to attendance and leaves shall apply to the incumbents of full-time exempt positions. (Ord. 411 §7, 1965)

2.48.080 Adverse actions.
A.    Department heads shall have the right, for due cause, to demote, dismiss, reduce in pay or suspend without pay for thirty calendar days, any permanent employee.

B.    The employee may require, by written demand, that the department head make a written statement of the reason or reasons therefor which, within three days after such demand, shall be furnished to the employee.

C.    The provisions of this section shall not apply to reductions in pay which are a part of a general plan to reduce salaries and wages or to eliminate positions. (Ord. 445 §1, 1969: Ord. 411 §8, 1965)

2.48.090 Right of appeal.
A.    Any employee in the competitive service shall have the right to appeal to the city council any disciplinary action, interpretation or alleged violation of this chapter or the rules adopted hereunder, except in those instances where the right of appeal is specifically prohibited by this chapter or the rules adopted hereunder.

B.    The city council shall have the right to subpoena, the power to examine witnesses under oath, the power to compel the attendance of witnesses and the power to require the production of evidence by subpoena. Subpoenas shall be issued in the name of the city and attested by the city clerk. Each member of the city council shall have the power to administer oaths to witnesses. All appeals shall be concluded as expeditiously as possible and in accordance with the requirements and procedures as set forth in the personnel rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 411 §9, 1965)

2.48.100 Abolition of position.
A.    Whenever in the judgment of the city council it becomes necessary, the city council may abolish any position of employment in the competitive service. Employees transferred, demoted or laid off because of the abolishment of positions shall not be subject to written charges nor shall they have a right to appeal in such cases. Seniority shall be observed in effecting such reduction in personnel and the order of layoff shall be in the reverse order of total cumulative time served in permanent and probationary status in the competitive service upon the effective date of layoff. Layoff shall be made within classes of positions, and all provisional employees in an affected class or classes shall be laid off prior to the layoff of any probationary or permanent employees. For the purpose of determining order of layoff, the total cumulative time shall include time served on military leave of absence. The names of probationary and permanent employees laid off shall be placed upon reemployment lists in classes which, in the opinion of the department head require basically the same qualifications and duties and responsibilities of those of the class of positions from which layoff was made.

B.    Names of persons laid off shall be placed upon reemployment lists in order of total cumulative time served in probationary and permanent status, and shall remain on such lists for a period of one year unless reemployed sooner. (Ord. 411 §10, 1965)

Title 3
REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapters:

3.04    Purchasing System

3.05    Awarding Public Works Contracts

3.08    Investment of City Funds

3.12    Documentary Stamp Tax

3.16    Special Tax on New Construction

3.20    Transient Occupancy Tax

3.24    Sales and Use Tax

3.28    Transactions and Use Tax

3.29    Public Safety and Essential City Services Transactions and Use Tax

3.30    Fire Service Fee

3.34    Fire Mitigation Fees

3.40    Maintenance Districts

Chapter 3.04
PURCHASING SYSTEM*
Sections:

3.04.010    Purpose.

3.04.020    Definitions.

3.04.030    Powers and duties.

3.04.040    Purchasing guidelines.

3.04.050    Purchase agreements.

3.04.060    Award of contracts to businesses located in the city.

3.04.070    Informal bid procedure.

3.04.080    Formal bid procedure.

3.04.090    Sole-source purchasing.

3.04.100    Sole-source purchases from businesses within the city.

3.04.110    Emergency purchases.

*    Prior legislation: Ord. 581.

3.04.120    Exemptions from bidding procedure.

3.04.130    Disposition of surplus personal property.

3.04.010 Purpose.
A.    This chapter is adopted pursuant to Government Code Section 54201 et seq. to provide guidance and direction regarding the procurement of supplies, equipment, and services; to ensure that the city and its departments will receive high quality goods and services at minimum cost to the taxpayer; to exercise positive financial control over purchases; to clearly define the authority for all purchases; and to limit the administrative demands imposed by the purchasing system to those reasonably necessary to achieve the other objectives of that system.

B.    The policies and procedures contained in this chapter are not intended to conflict with Public Contracts Code Section 20160 et seq., Public Contracts Code Section 22030 et seq., or any other applicable law governing the solicitation of bids and award of contracts for public works projects requiring the expenditure of five thousand dollars or more. (Ord. 894 §1(part), 2014)

3.04.020 Definitions.
Unless otherwise indicated, the following definitions shall apply to this chapter.

"City clerk" means the city clerk of the city of Lakeport, or such other officer to whom the duties and responsibilities of the city treasurer have been transferred, or his or her designee.

"City manager" means the city manager of the city of Lakeport or his or her designee.

"Department head" means a person designated by the city manager and/or the city council to be responsible for the management of a department of the city or his or her designee.

"Emergency" means an emergency as defined by Section 2.28.030.

"Equipment" means items that are durable, have a fixed life expectancy and are shown in the city’s books as fixed assets.

"General services" means all services other than professional services and services pursuant to a public works contract excluded from this chapter by Section 3.04.010(B).

"Local business" means an individual, business, partnership or corporation that meets all of the following: (1) maintains a place of business located within the city of Lakeport; (2) has a current city of Lakeport business license; (3) reports to the state sales tax returns for goods purchased at its business located within the boundaries of the city which regularly maintains a place of business and an inventory of merchandise for sale within the sphere of influence of the city; (4) has any necessary licenses, certificates, bonds and insurances; and (5) is in good financial and legal standing with the city.

"Market value" means the value estimated by the purchasing officer at which the surplus personal property would sell if offered at auction or other open competitive bid sale.

"Professional service agreement" means a written contract for professional services entered into as provided in this chapter.

"Professional services" means those services governed by Government Code Section 4525 et seq., including architectural, landscape architectural, engineering, environmental, and land surveying services.

"Purchase" means the renting, leasing, purchasing, licensing or trade of supplies or equipment or the hiring of private contractors.

"Purchase order" means a form approved by the purchasing officer for the purchase of supplies, material, and/or equipment, but not professional services.

"Purchasing officer" means the city manager or his or her designee.

"Supplies" means office supplies, janitorial supplies, material, goods, tools, or other commodities used in the general conduct of the city’s business that do not constitute equipment.

"Surplus personal property" means any personal property or equipment owned by the city of Lakeport which the purchasing officer determines, subject to approval of the city manager or the city council as required by Section 3.04.130, is no longer needed or used for city purposes or which has become obsolete, worn out or past its useful life. (Ord. 894 §1(part), 2014)

3.04.030 Powers and duties.
A.    Department heads:

1.    Shall have the power to:

a.    Negotiate and recommend to the city council contracts for the purchase of supplies, equipment, and/or services on behalf of their respective departments.

b.    Approve purchase orders and professional service agreements for the benefit of their respective departments for amounts up to three thousand dollars.

c.    Execute contracts for the purchase of supplies, equipment and/or services for the benefit of their respective departments in accordance with the policies and procedures prescribed by this chapter.

d.    Increase the time for performance or the not-to-exceed amounts prescribed by professional service agreements for which they are responsible by up to ten percent of the original agreement amount if they reasonably conclude that doing so will result in cost and/or time savings to the city.

2.    Are under the duty to:

a.    Identify the type and quantity of supplies, equipment, and/or services required to fulfill the responsibilities of their respective departments.

b.    Engage in an informal bidding process under Section 3.04.070 for items expected to cost more than three thousand dollars and less than or equal to fifty thousand dollars, or a formal bidding process under Section 3.04.080 for items expected to cost more than fifty thousand dollars.

It is not permissible to split or separate purchases into smaller amounts to evade the requirements of this chapter.

c.    Maintain records of all submitted bids for the procurement of supplies, equipment, and/or services as required by the city’s approved document-retention schedule.

d.    Determine whether the required items or services are budgeted or the city council has otherwise authorized their purchase.

e.    Secure necessary authorization prior to the commencement of work or delivery of supplies and equipment by preparing a purchase order or professional service agreement and ensuring that it is approved as prescribed by this chapter.

f.    Supervise the inspection of supplies or equipment purchased to ensure that the items conform to the quality expectations of the city.

g.    Monitor the work of contractors to ensure adherence to the terms and conditions of professional service agreements.

h.    Provide coded and approved invoices to the finance department for payment in a timely fashion.

B.    The purchasing officer:

1.    Shall have the power to:

a.    Negotiate contracts for the purchase of supplies, equipment, and/or services on behalf of the city.

b.    Approve purchase orders and professional service agreements on behalf of the city in amounts up to twenty-five thousand dollars.

c.    Execute contracts for the purchase of supplies, equipment and/or services on behalf of the city in accordance with this chapter.

2.    Is under the duty to:

a.    Enforce this chapter.

b.    Recommend the transfer or exchange of surplus supplies and equipment between departments as needed, and recommend the sale of all supplies and equipment which have become obsolete, useless, or otherwise unsuitable for use by the city.

C.    The city manager:

1.    Shall have the power to:

a.    Approve purchase orders and professional service agreements on behalf of the city for amounts up to twenty-five thousand dollars, or up to one hundred thousand dollars during a state of emergency declared pursuant to Chapter 2.28.

b.    Perform any or all the duties of a department head or the purchasing officer.

2.    Is under the duty to:

a.    Ensure that the process for purchasing supplies, equipment, and services meets the needs of the community and the city.

b.    Recommend to the city council revisions and amendments to this chapter to achieve its purposes.

D.    The finance director shall have the power to:

1.    Review and process payment to vendors after receiving properly coded and approved invoices.

2.    Prepare the warrant/check register and submit to the city clerk for vendor payment issuance.

3.    Delay processing payments to vendors if an agreement is void or if insufficient budgetary appropriation is available. Purchase orders and professional service agreements are void if any of the following is true:

a.    The term of the agreement has expired;

b.    The not-to-exceed amount specified by the agreement has been exceeded; or

c.    The services performed are other than specified in the agreement.

E.    The city clerk shall have the power to issue payment to vendors after receiving an approved warrant/check register from the finance director. (Ord. 894 §1(part), 2014)

3.04.040 Purchasing guidelines.
A.    Purchases of supplies, equipment, or services for amounts equal to three thousand dollars or less do not require a bidding process and may be approved by a department head. Purchases in this range do not require a purchase order or a professional service agreement unless otherwise required by the vendor.

B.    Purchases of supplies, equipment, or services for amounts greater than three thousand dollars but less than or equal to twenty-five thousand dollars are subject to the informal bidding process set forth in Section 3.04.070. Purchases in this range require that a purchase order or a professional service agreement be prepared and approved by a department head and by the purchasing officer or city manager.

C.    Purchases of supplies, equipment, or services for amounts greater than twenty-five thousand dollars but less than or equal to fifty thousand dollars must meet the requirements of the informal bidding process set forth in Section 3.04.070. Purchases in this range require that a purchase order or a professional service agreement be prepared and approved by the department head, the city manager, and council.

D.    Purchases of supplies, equipment, or services for amounts greater than fifty thousand dollars must meet the requirements of the formal bidding process set forth in Section 3.04.080. Purchases in this range require that a purchase order or a professional service agreement be prepared and approved by the department head, the city manager, and council.

E.    During a declared state of emergency, purchases of supplies, equipment, or services for any amount do not require a bidding process. Purchases less than or equal to one hundred thousand dollars require the approval of the city manager. Purchases greater than one hundred thousand dollars require the approval of the city council.

PURCHASE ORDER AND PROFESSIONAL SERVICE AGREEMENT
REQUIREMENT MATRIX 

Contract Amount

Purchase Order

Professional Services Agreement

Bidding Process

Authorization Required

$3,000.00 or less

Not required

Not required

None

Department head only

$3,000.01–$25,000.00

Required

Required

Informal

Department head and either (i) purchasing officer or (ii) city manager

$25,000.01–$50,000.00

Required

Required

Informal

Department head, city manager, and city council

$50,000.01 or more

Required

Required

Formal

Department head, city manager, and city council

Any amount during a declared state of emergency

Not required

Not required

None

City manager (up to $100,000.00) or city council (above $100,000.00)

NOTE: The above matrix is intended to summarize the requirements of this chapter and not to change them. If the matrix contradicts the text of this chapter in any respect, the language of the chapter will prevail. (Ord. 894 §1(part), 2014)

3.04.050 Purchase agreements.
A.    Professional Service Agreement (PSA).

1.    Professional service agreements are used to purchase professional services as defined in Section 3.04.020.

2.    All purchases of professional services over three thousand dollars require the completion of a PSA on the city’s standard form, except during times of a declared state of emergency. Deviations from the city’s standard professional service agreement must be approved by the purchasing officer or the city manager.

3.    The city shall secure professional services based upon demonstrated competence, professional qualifications, and suitability for the project in general and needs to comply with either the informal or formal bid procedures set forth in Section 3.04.070 or 3.04.080 respectively if the value of the agreement exceeds three thousand dollars. The city should also consider the cost of the professional service, and in the event that a vendor is selected that does not offer the lowest price, a rationale must be provided to and approved by the city manager prior to final selection being made.

4.    Authority to approve a professional service agreement shall be as specified in Section 3.04.040.

5.    Authority to modify a professional service agreement shall be as specified in Section 3.04.040 based on the total not-to-exceed value of the agreement, including any proposed increase in the not-to-exceed value.

B.    Purchase Order (PO).

1.    Purchase orders are used to purchase supplies, material, and/or equipment having a cost greater than three thousand dollars. They are not to be used to secure professional services.

2.    Authority to approve a purchase order shall be as specified in Section 3.04.040.

3.    Authority to modify a purchase order shall be as specified in Section 3.04.040 based on the total not-to-exceed value of the purchase order, including any proposed increase in the not-to-exceed value.

4.    All procurements using a PO require the completion of a purchase order on the city’s standard form, except during times of a declared state of emergency. Deviations from the city’s standard purchase order must be approved by the purchasing officer or the city manager. (Ord. 894 §1(part), 2014)

3.04.060 Award of contracts to businesses located in the city.
A.    In establishing a preference to local businesses in the award of contracts for supplies, equipment or services under this chapter, the city council finds that local businesses are disadvantaged in comparison to businesses located outside the city, particularly due to longer commutes for the delivery of goods and services and the high gas prices which increase the cost of goods and services delivered to and from the city limits. The city council also finds that awarding contracts to local businesses results in financial advantages to the city.

B.    City personnel are directed to use their best efforts to purchase supplies, equipment, and services from local businesses whenever possible and consistent with the terms of this policy.

C.    All informal and formal bids are to be evaluated with a ten percent preference for local businesses. A bid or proposal received from a local business will be tabulated as if it were ten percent lower than the figure actually set forth in the bid or proposal. The local business must claim the local business preference to be considered.

D.    To qualify as a local business, the business shall submit with its bid or proposal, or have on file with the city clerk, an affidavit that demonstrates its eligibility as a local business, including but not limited to the following: the business has a facility with an address within the city and the business will attribute any sales tax from sales to the city of Lakeport. (Ord. 894 §1(part), 2014)

3.04.070 Informal bid procedure.
When the informal bid procedure is required, purchases shall be made in compliance with the following:

A.    The city shall specifically identify the goods and/or services it wishes to purchase and determine the estimated cost of the good and/or service from at least three different providers whenever possible.

B.    Informal bids received must be documented in writing and retained by the department head as required by the approved document retention schedule.

C.    Unless otherwise provided by any existing law, rule, regulation, or policy, the purchase of supplies, equipment and nonprofessional services shall be awarded to the provider with the lowest responsive estimated cost. (Ord. 894 §1(part), 2014)

3.04.080 Formal bid procedure.
When the formal bid procedure is required, purchases shall be made following compliance with the following:

A.    Notice Inviting Bids. Notices inviting sealed bids shall include: (1) a general description of the articles and/or services to be purchased, (2) where bid forms and specifications may be obtained, (3) the date, time and place for the bidders’ conference, if any, and for the submission of sealed bids, and (4) any other information which the department head conducting the procurement deems useful.

B.    Published Notice. Notice inviting bids shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city at least five days before the date of opening of the bids, or if there is no such newspaper, posted in at least three public places in the city designated by the city clerk for posting public notices at least five days before the date of opening of the bids.

C.    Bidder’s Security.

1.    When deemed necessary or appropriate, as with public works projects, the purchasing officer may require a bidding vendor to submit a bid security in any of the following forms:

a.    Cash;

b.    A cashier’s check made payable to the city;

c.    A certified check made payable to the city;

d.    A bidder’s bond executed by a surety insurer admitted to do business in California, made payable to the city.

2.    Any requirement for bid security must be included in the public notice inviting bids.

3.    The security shall be in an amount equal to at least ten percent of the bid amount.

4.    A vendor shall forfeit its bid security upon its refusal or failure to perform pursuant to the terms of its contract with the city within twenty days after notice of award of contract or such lesser period specified in the notice inviting bids.

D.    Failure to Perform.

1.    Upon refusal or failure of the lowest successful bidder to execute or perform the contract pursuant to its terms, the officer or agency of the city authorized to award the contract may award it to the next lowest responsible bidder.

2.    If the officer or agency of the city authorized to award the contract awards the contract to the next lowest bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder’s security shall be applied by the city to the difference between the low bid and the second lowest bid, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder.

E.    Bid Opening Procedure.

1.    Sealed bids shall be submitted to the office of the city clerk and shall be identified as "Submitted Bid" on the envelope.

2.    Bids shall be opened at the time and place stated in the notice inviting bids.

3.    A record of all bids submitted to the city shall be subject to public inspection at the office of the city clerk during regular business hours for at least ten calendar days after the bids are opened.

F.    Rejection of Bids. The officer or agency of the city authorized to award the contract may reject any and all bids and require the purchasing officer or department head to rebid the purchase.

G.    Award of Contracts. The officer or agency of the city authorized by Section 3.04.040 to do so shall award contracts.

H.    Tie Bids. If two of more bids are submitted in the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if the public interest will not permit the delay of re-advertising for bids, the officer or agency of the city authorized to award the contract may accept either bid.

I.    No Bids Received. If no bids are received following compliance with the requirements of this section, the officer or agency of the city authorized to award the contract may procure the requested supplies, equipment, or services without further compliance with this chapter.

J.    Performance Bonds.

1.    The purchasing officer may require a performance bond in such amount as may be reasonably necessary to ensure performance before entering into any contract.

2.    If a performance bond is required, the form and amount of the bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids. (Ord. 894 §1(part), 2014)

3.04.090 Sole-source purchasing.
A.    Prior to submitting a purchase request, the requesting department shall conduct a survey of available sources to determine whether there is only one source capable of competently and efficiently providing the required supplies, equipment or service.

B.    If it is determined that there is only a single source for the purchasing of a particular item or service, the requesting department shall prepare a waiver of bid and submit it to the purchasing officer.

C.    If it is determined that there is only a single source for the purchasing of a particular item or service, upon review and approval of the request by the purchasing officer and the city manager, the contract may be awarded to the sole source vendor without competition. In this case, the purchasing officer or authorized designee shall conduct negotiations, as appropriate, as to price, delivery, and terms. (Ord. 894 §1(part), 2014)

3.04.100 Sole-source purchases from businesses within the city.
A.    Prior to submitting a purchase request, the request department shall conduct a survey of available sources within the city to determine whether there is only one local business capable of competently and efficiently providing the required supplies or equipment.

B.    If it is determined that there is only a single local business for the purchasing of a particular item or service, the requesting department shall prepare a waiver of bid and submit it to the purchasing officer demonstrating the purchase meets all the following requirements:

1.    The price of the supplies or equipment is twenty-five thousand dollars or less.

2.    The supplies or equipment have been competitively bid and awarded by the state of California and are available to the city on the same or substantially similar terms as they are available to the state.

3.    The purchase is made from a local business where the requesting department has conducted a survey of available sources within in the city and found that there is only one local business capable of competently and efficiently providing the required supplies or equipment.

4.    The purchase is made with city funds only.

5.    The purchase price, delivery, and terms offered by the local business are the same or substantially similar to those available to the city under subsection (B)(2) of this section. For purposes of this section, "substantially similar" means, for pricing, an amount within ten percent of the price available to the city under subsection (B)(2) of this section.

C.    If the requesting department determines there is a single source local business that can provide the supplies or equipment on the same or substantially similar terms as those offered under the state’s competitively bid contract, the requesting department shall prepare a waiver of bid and submit it to the purchasing officer. Upon review and approval of the request by the purchasing officer and the city manager, the contract may be awarded to the single source local business without competition because competitive bidding will provide no economic benefit to the city.

D.    The purchasing officer or authorized designee shall conduct negotiations, as appropriate, as to price, delivery, and terms. (Ord. 894 §1(part), 2014)

3.04.110 Emergency purchases.
A.    The city manager shall make, or authorize others to make, emergency purchases of supplies, equipment or services during a declared state of emergency for amounts less than or equal to one hundred thousand dollars; provided, that such emergency purchases shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances. Purchases for amounts greater than one hundred thousand dollars must be approved by the city council.

B.    When making an emergency purchase, the requesting department shall complete a waiver of bid form and submit it to the purchasing officer. (Ord. 894 §1(part), 2014)

3.04.120 Exemptions from bidding procedure.
A.    Purchases of three thousand dollars or less.

B.    Sole-source purchases in accordance with Section 3.04.090.

C.    Sole-source local business purchases in accordance with Section 3.04.100.

D.    Emergency purchases in accordance with Section 3.04.110.

E.    Intergovernmental orders by which the city has contracted with another governmental entity to purchase particular supplies, equipment or services on a cooperative basis, including but not limited to order through the U.S. Communities Government Purchasing Alliance.

F.    Purchases of professional services in accordance with Section 3.04.050. (Ord. 894 §1(part), 2014)

3.04.130 Disposition of surplus personal property.
A.    Prior to disposal, a list of surplus personal property specifying the item, its actual or estimated purchase price, date of purchase, and estimated market value shall be submitted to the city council for approval as to its "surplus" status. Surplus personal property of the city shall be disposed of on annual or semi-annual basis, in the following manner:

1.    The city manager may authorize the sale or disposition of surplus personal property which has a market value equal to or less than his or her contracting authority under Section 3.04.040.

2.    The city council may authorize the sale or disposition of surplus personal property which has a market value in excess of the city manager’s contracting authority under Section 3.04.040.

3.    Any surplus personal property within his or her contracting authority may be sold or disposed of by the city manager as follows:

a.    Surplus property with an estimated market value of less than one hundred dollars may be disposed of by the department head, upon written approval of the city manager, in the manner most advantageous to the city considering the value of the property and the cost of sale, including, but not limited to, sale by salvage, recycling or disposal.

b.    Surplus personal property with an estimated market value of more than one hundred dollars but less than or equal to five thousand dollars per individual item of property may be sold or disposed of by any method the city manager determines to be most advantageous to the city considering the value and nature of the property and the cost of sale, including, but not limited to, sale by salvage, recycling or disposal.

c.    Surplus personal property with an estimated market value of greater than five thousand dollars per individual item of property shall be sold under sealed bid or by public auction. Public auctions may include electronic bidding or auction services.

d.    Disposition of surplus personal property pursuant to this section shall be "as is" without warranty, express or implied, and the buyer shall agree to pay applicable sales or transfer taxes.

e.    Notwithstanding other provisions in this section, surplus personal property may be sold to another public entity for market value or traded for market value equivalent property or services as approved by the city manager.

f.    Notwithstanding other provisions in this section, surplus personal property of any value may be traded in as consideration toward the acquisition of other personal property upon written approval of the city manager.

g.    Notwithstanding other provisions in this section, surplus personal property of any value may be transferred to other city departments without consideration as approved by the city manager.

4.    Surplus personal property which the city manager deems unacceptable for sale to the public may be disposed of in the manner deemed appropriate by the city manager. Examples of such property include: city-owned animals, law enforcement equipment and property which may pose a hazard to the general public.

B.    The city council may, by resolution, authorize the donation of surplus personal property, if the city council finds that such donation serves a public purpose or benefit. All donations pursuant to this section shall be "as is" without warranty, express or implied, and the transferee shall agree to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers and employees from any claim, cause of action, damage, loss or liability arising out of the condition of the property or its use by the organization or subsequent transferee.

C.    In cases where a sealed bid or public auction is required for the sale of surplus personal property, reasonable notice to prospective bidders of such sale by sealed bid or public auction shall be given, as determined by the purchasing officer, taking into account the circumstances and the item or items to be sold.

D.    Any department disposing of surplus personal property shall document the disposition and provide, in writing, to the finance director or his or her designee, who shall keep a record of sales, exchanges or other disposition of any property disposed of pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, at least the following information:

1.    A description of the property transferred;

2.    The name of the transferee;

3.    The date of transfer;

4.    The gross receipts, net receipts and/or transaction costs; and

5.    A description, including the value of any personal property received in exchange for the property transferred.

E.    Such records shall be kept consistent with the city’s records retention policy. (Ord. 894 §1(part), 2014)

Chapter 3.05
AWARDING PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS
Sections:

3.05.010    Purpose.

3.05.011    Public projects.

3.05.012    List of contractors.

3.05.013    Informal bidding procedure.

3.05.014    Notice inviting formal bids.

3.05.015    Awarding formal bids.

3.05.016    Emergencies.

3.05.010 Purpose.
This chapter is intended to establish regulations to apply to all public contracts in a manner that is consistent with the requirements of the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act (Public Contract Code Section 22000 et seq.). (Ord. 913 §1(part), 2017)

3.05.011 Public projects.
A.    Except as provided in subsection E of this section, the city manager may cause public projects of sixty thousand dollars or less to be performed by employees of the city by force account, by negotiated contract, or by purchase order.

B.    Except as provided in subsection E of this section, public projects of two hundred thousand dollars or less may be let to contract by informal procedures as set forth in Section 3.05.013.

C.    Except as provided in subsection E of this section, and Section 3.05.013(E), public projects of more than two hundred thousand dollars shall be let to contract by the formal bidding procedure outlined in Sections 3.05.014 and 3.05.015.

D.    The term "public project" shall have the definition set forth in Public Contract Code Section 22002.

E.    The dollar limits set forth in subsections A and B of this section shall adjust without city council action as necessary to comply with any adjustment mandated by the controller pursuant to the authority granted by Public Contract Code Section 22020. (Ord. 919 §1(part), 2018: Ord. 913 §1(part), 2017)

3.05.012 List of contractors.
A list of contractors shall be developed and maintained in accordance with Public Contract Code Section 22034, subdivision (a), and any criteria promulgated from time to time by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission (Commission). Such list will be maintained by the city manager. (Ord. 913 §1(part), 2017)

3.05.013 Informal bidding procedure.
The following apply to informal bids for public projects:

A.    Notice Inviting Informal Bids.

1.    Required Noticing. When a public contract is to be bid pursuant to the procedures in this section, a notice inviting informal bids shall be mailed to all construction trade journals specified by the commission in accordance with Public Contract Code Section 22036.

2.    Optional Noticing. Notification may be also provided to the contractors on the list created pursuant to Section 3.05.012 for the category of work being bid, and to any additional contractors and/or construction trade journals.

3.    Exception. If the product or service is proprietary in nature such that it can be obtained only from a certain contractor or contractors, the notice inviting informal bids may be sent exclusively to such contractor or contractors.

B.    Mailing Notices. All mailing of notices to contractors and construction trade journals, pursuant to subsections (A)(1) and (A)(3) of this section, shall be completed not less than ten calendar days before bids are due.

C.    Description of Project. The notice inviting informal bids shall describe the project in general terms and how to obtain more detailed information about the project, and state the time and place for the submission of bids.

D.    Authority to Award Contracts. The city manager is authorized to award a contract if the lowest bid received is sixty thousand dollars or less. Contracts valued at more than sixty thousand dollars can only be awarded by the city council.

E.    Bids Exceeding Two Hundred Thousand Dollars. If all bids received pursuant to the informal process are in excess of two hundred thousand dollars, the city council may adopt a resolution by a four-fifths vote to award the contract at two hundred twelve thousand five hundred dollars or less, to the lowest responsible bidder, if it determines the city’s cost estimate was reasonable. Otherwise, the project shall be rebid pursuant to Section 3.05.014 and awarded pursuant to Sections 3.05.014 and 3.05.015.

F.    Award of Contract. The contract shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. (Ord. 919 §1(part), 2018: Ord. 913 §1(part), 2017)

3.05.014 Notice inviting formal bids.
The following rules apply to notices for bids for public projects pursuant to the formal bidding process:

A.    Contents of Notice. Notice inviting formal bids shall state the time and place for the receiving and opening of sealed bids and distinctly describe the project.

B.    Publication of Notice. The notice shall be published at least fourteen calendar days before the date of opening the bids in a newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the city, or otherwise comply with the requirements of Public Contract Code Section 22037.

C.    Electronic Transmission of Notice. The notice inviting formal bids shall also be sent electronically, if available, by either facsimile or electronic mail and mailed to all construction trade journals specified in accordance with Public Contract Code Section 22036. The notice shall be sent at least fifteen calendar days before the date of opening the bids. The city may provide additional notice. (Ord. 913 §1(part), 2017)

3.05.015 Awarding formal bids.
The following rules apply to awarding formal bids for public projects:

A.    Rejecting Formal Bids. In its discretion, the city council may reject any bids presented, if the city, prior to rejecting all bids and declaring that the project can be more economically performed by employees of the city, furnishes a written notice to an apparent low bidder. The notice shall inform the bidder of the city’s intention to reject the bid and shall be mailed at least two business days prior to the hearing at which the city intends to reject the bid. If after the first invitation of bids all bids are rejected, after reevaluating its cost estimates of the project, the city shall have the option of either of the following:

1.    Abandoning the project or re-advertising for bids in the manner described by this chapter.

2.    By passage of a resolution by a four-fifths vote of the city council declaring that the project can be performed more economically by city employees, may have the project done by force account without further complying with this chapter.

B.    Lowest Bidder. If a contract is awarded, it shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. If two or more bids are the same and the lowest, the city may accept the one it chooses.

C.    No Bids. If no bids are received through the formal or informal procedure, the project may be performed by the employees of the city by force account or negotiated contract without further complying with this chapter. (Ord. 913 §1(part), 2017)

3.05.016 Emergencies.
A.    In cases of emergency when repair or replacements are necessary, the city council may proceed at once to replace or repair any public facility without adopting plans, specifications, strain sheets, or working details, or giving notice for bids to let contracts. The work may be done by day labor under the direction of the city council, by contractor, or by a combination of the two. The city council’s authority under this section may be exercised by the city manager during an emergency declared pursuant to Chapter 2.28.

B.    In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the city shall comply with Chapter 2.5 of Part 3 of Division 2 of the Public Contract Code (commencing with Section 22050). (Ord. 913 §1(part), 2017)

Chapter 3.08
INVESTMENT OF CITY FUNDS
Sections:

3.08.010    Authority.

3.08.020    Permissible investments.

3.08.030    Redemptions.

3.08.040    City bonds.

3.08.050    Monthly reports.

3.08.060    Deposits.

3.08.010 Authority.
Pursuant to Sections 53607 and 53608 of the Government Code, the authority to invest and reinvest money of the city, to sell or exchange securities so purchased, and to deposit such securities for safekeeping is delegated to the city clerk. (Ord. 469 §1, 1972)

3.08.020 Permissible investments.
The city clerk is authorized to purchase, at their original sale or after they have been issued, securities which are permissible investments under Section 53601 and 53635 of the Government Code, as they now read or may hereafter be amended, from money in her custody which is not required for the immediate necessities of the city and as she may deem wise and expedient, and to sell or exchange for other eligible securities and reinvest the proceeds of the securities so purchased. (Ord. 469 §2, 1972)

3.08.030 Redemptions.
From time to time the city clerk shall redeem the securities in which city money has been invested pursuant to Section 3.08.020 of this chapter so that the proceeds may be applied to the purposes for which the original moneys were designated or placed in the city treasury. (Ord. 469 §3, 1972)

3.08.040 City bonds.
Bonds issued by the city and purchased pursuant to Section 3.08.020 of this chapter may be canceled either in satisfaction of sinking fund obligations or otherwise; provided, however, that said bonds may be held uncanceled and while so held may be resold. (Ord. 469 §4, 1972)

3.08.050 Monthly reports.
The city clerk shall make a monthly report of all such investments to the city council. (Ord. 469 §5, 1972)

3.08.060 Deposits.
The city clerk is authorized to deposit for safekeeping with a trust company or a state or national bank located within this state or with the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco or any branch thereof located within this state, or with any federal reserve bank, or with any state or national bank located in any city designated as a reserve city by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the securities in which the city money has been invested pursuant to Section 3.08.020 of this chapter; provided, however, that the city clerk shall take from such trust company or bank a receipt for the securities so deposited and shall not be responsible for such securities delivered to and receipted for by such trust company or bank until they are withdrawn therefrom by the city clerk. (Ord. 469 §6, 1972)

Chapter 3.12
DOCUMENTARY STAMP TAX
Sections:

3.12.010    Title of provisions.

3.12.020    Imposed--Rate.

3.12.030    Exemptions.

3.12.040    Administration.

3.12.050    Claims for refunds.

3.12.010 Title of provisions.
This chapter shall be known as the “real property transfer tax ordinance of the city of Lakeport.” It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. (Ord. 434 §1, 1967)

3.12.020 Imposed--Rate.
There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien. or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars, a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents for each five hundred dollars or fractional part thereof. (Ord. 434 S2, 1967)

3.12.030 Exemptions
A.    Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt.

B.    Exemptions required by Revenue and Taxation Code Sections 11926 and 11927 are not subject to the tax imposed by this chapter.

C.    Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, is a party shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title.

D.    Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment:

1.    Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;

2.    Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 306 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended;

3.    Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or

4.    Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place or organization is effected.

Subdivisions (1) through (4) of this subsection, inclusive, shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyance occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change.

E.    Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, but only if:

1.    The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;

2.    Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed;

3.    Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order.

F.    Partnerships.

1.    In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if:

a.    Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and

b.    Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned;

2.    If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.

3.    Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in subdivision (2) of this subsection, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. (Ord. 690 §§1, 2, 1988; Ord. 434 §§3--8, 1967)

3.12.040 Administration.
The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 434 §9, 1967)

3.12.050 Claims for refunds.
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. (Ord. 434 §10, 1967)

Chapter 3.16
SPECIAL TAX ON NEW CONSTRUCTION
Sections:

3.16.010    Levied--Applicability.

3.16.020    Rate.

3.16.030    Payment--Exemption.

3.16.040    Payment prerequisite to building permit issuance.

3.16.010 Levied--Applicability.
There is levied upon all new structures and related impermeable surfaces within the city a special tax for flood control and storm drainage improvements. No existing structure or related impermeable surface shall be subject to such tax. (Ord. 588 §1, 1980)

3.16.020 Rate.
The amount of the special tax for storm drainage improvements shall be set at a single rate not to exceed twenty cents per square foot of area covered by the new structure and related impermeable surface. The city council shall establish the rate of the tax by appropriate resolution not more frequently than once a year. (Ord. 625 §1, 1984: Ord. 588 52, 1980)

3.16.030 Payment--Exemption.
The special tax shall be levied and collected at the time the building permit or grading permit shall be issued. New structures not requiring a building or grading permit shall not be required to pay said tax. (Ord. 588 §3, 1980)

3.16.040 Payment prerequisite to building permit issuance.
No building permit or grading permit shall be issued until the tax has been paid. (Ord. 588 §4, 1980)

Chapter 3.20
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Sections:

3.20.010    Title of provisions.

3.20.020    Definitions.

3.20.030    Imposed--Rate.

3.20.050    Exemptions.

3.20.060    Operator’s duties.

3.20.070    Registration.

3.20.080    Reporting and remitting.

3.20.090    Delinquency--Penalties and interest.

3.20.100    Failure to collect and report--Determination of tax by city.

3.20.110    Appeals.

3.20.120    Recordkeeping.

3.20.130    Refunds.

3.20.140    Actions to collect.

3.20.150    Violation--Penalty.

3.20.010 Title of provisions.
This chapter shall be known as the “uniform transient occupancy tax ordinance of the city of Lakeport.” (Ord. 414 §1, 1965)

3.20.020 Definitions.
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter:

A.    “Hotel” means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel; inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodginghouse, roominghouse, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location or other similar structure or portion thereof; and shall further include any space, lot, area or site in any trailer court, recreational vehicle park, mobile home park, camp, park or lot where a trailer, tent, recreational vehicle, mobile home, motorhome, or other similar conveyance is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes.

B.    “Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes.

C.    “Operator” means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his function through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.

D.    “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

E.    “Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel, valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.

F.    “Tax administrator” means the city clerk or such other official as may be appointed by the city council.

G.    “Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may be considered. (Ord. 728 §1, 1991; Ord. 414 §2, 1965)

3.20.030 Imposed--Rate.
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of ten percent of the rent charged by the operator. The tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. Transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be due upon the transient’s ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax administrator may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the tax administrator. (Ord. 728 §2, 1991: Ord. 640 §1, 1985: Ord. 615, 1984: Ord. 554 §1, 1977: Ord. 414 §3, 1965)

3.20.050 Exemptions.
A.    No tax shall be imposed on:

1.    Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax provided in this chapter;

2.    Any federal or state officer or employee when on official business;

3.    Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty.

B.    No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator. (Ord. 414 §4 1965)

3.20.060 Operator’s duties.
A.    Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient.

B.    The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt from the operator.

C.    No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner provided in this chapter. (Ord. 414 §5, 1965)

3.20.070 Registration.
Within thirty days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or within thirty days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register said hotel with the tax administrator and obtain from him a transient occupancy registration certificate to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. The certificate shall, among other things, state the following:

A.    The name of the operator;

B.    The address of the hotel;

C.    The date upon which the certificate was issued;

D.    “This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face thereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the Tax Administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the Tax Administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this city. This certificate does not constitute a permit.” (Ord. 414 §6, 1965)

3.20.080 Reporting and remitting.
A.    Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax administrator, make a return to the tax administrator on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies.

B.    At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the tax administrator.

C.    The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax and he may require further information in the return.

D.    Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason.

E.    All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator. (Ord. 414 §7, 1965)

3.20.090 Delinquency--Penalties and interest.
A.    Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.

B.    Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed.

C.    Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections (A) and (B) of this section.

D.    Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

E.    Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax required by this chapter to be paid. (Ord. 414 §8, 1965)

3.20.100 Failure to collect and report--Determination of tax by city.
A.    If any operator fails or refuses to collect the tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of the tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator procures such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter.

B.    In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last-known place of address.

C.    Such operator may within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application for a hearing is not made within the time pre scribed the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the tax administrator shall give not less than five days’ written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in said notice why said amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After the hearing, the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties.

D.    The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.20.110 of this chapter. (Ord. 414 §9, 1965)

3.20.110 Appeals.
A.    Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due.

B.    The city council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his last-known place of address.

C.    The findings of the council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed in this chapter for service of notice of hearing.

D.    Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. (Ord. 414 §10, 1965)

3.20.120 Recordkeeping.
It is the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (Ord. 414 §11, 1965)

3.20.130 Refunds.
A.    Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter it may be refunded as provided in subsections (B) and (C) of this section provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator.

B.    An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.

C.    A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection (A) of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a re fund from the operator who collected the tax.

D.    No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. (Ord. 414 §12, 1965)

3.20.140 Actions to collect.
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. (Ord. 414 §13, 1965)

3.20.150 Violation--Penalty.
A.    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable therefor by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment.

B.    Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required in this chapter, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is punishable as aforesaid. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as aforesaid. (Ord. 414 §14, 1965)

Chapter 3.24
SALES AND USE TAX
Sections:

3.24.010    Short title.

3.24.020    Rate.

3.24.030    Purpose.

3.24.040    Contract with state.

3.24.050    Sales tax.

3.24.060    Place of sale.

3.24.070    Use tax.

3.24.080    Adoption of provisions of state law.

3.24.090    Limitations on adoption of state law.

3.24.100    Permit not required.

3.24.110    Incorporation of sales and use exemptions.

3.24.120    Amendments.

3.24.130    Enjoining collection forbidden.

3.24.140    Violation--Penalty.

3.24.010 Short title.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “Uniform local sales and use tax ordinance.” (Ord. 495 §1, 1973)

3.24.020 Rate.
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent. (Ord. 495 §2, 1973)

3.24.030 Purpose.
The city council declares that the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

A.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

B.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

C.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State sales and use taxes;

D.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 495 §4, 1973)

3.24.040 Contract with state.
Prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of the sales and use tax ordinance codified in this chapter; provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 495 §5, 1973)

3.24.050 Sales tax.
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.24.020 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 495 §6, 1973)

3.24.060 Place of sale.
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 495 §7, 1973)

3.24.070 Use tax.
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate stated in Section 3.24.020 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 495 §8, 1973)

3.24.080 Adoption of provisions of state law.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 495 §9, 1973)

3.24.090 Limitations on adoption of state law.
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word “state” is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the state of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would. be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provisions of that code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 495 §10, 1973)

3.24.100 Permit not required.
If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 495 §11, 1973)

3.24.110 Incorporation of sales and use exemptions.
The sales and use exemptions required by Revenue and Taxation Code Section 7202 are incorporated with this chapter as though set forth in full in this chapter. (Ord. 687 §3, 1988: Ord. 495 §12, 1973)

3.24.120 Amendments.
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. (Ord. 495 §15, 1973)

3.24.130 Enjoining collection forbidden.
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 495 §16, 1973)

3.24.140 Violation--Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 495 §17, 1973)

Chapter 3.28
TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
Sections:

3.28.010    Title.

3.28.020    Operative date.

3.28.030    Purpose.

3.28.040    Contract with state.

3.28.050    Transactions tax rate.

3.28.060    Place of sale.

3.28.070    Use tax rate.

3.28.080    Adoption of provisions of state law.

3.28.090    Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes.

3.28.100    Permit not required.

3.28.110    Exemptions and exclusions.

3.28.120    Amendments.

3.28.130    Enjoining collection forbidden.

3.28.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the “City of Lakeport Transactions and Use Tax Ordinance.” The city of Lakeport hereinafter shall be called “city.” This chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the city. (Ord. 834 §1, 2004)

3.28.020 Operative date.
“Operative date” means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than one hundred ten days after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. If the ordinance codified in this chapter is approved by the voters at the November 2004 election, the operative date shall be April 1, 2005. (Ord. 834 §2, 2004)

3.28.030 Purpose.
This chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions of this chapter be interpreted in order to accomplish these purposes:

A.    To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which authorizes the city to adopt this tax ordinance which shall be operative if a majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose.

B.    To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

C.    To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefore, that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State sales and use taxes.

D.    To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at the same time, minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 834 §3, 2004)

3.28.040 Contract with state.
Prior to the operative date of April 1, 2005, the city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance; provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. (Ord. 834 §4, 2004)

3.28.050 Transactions tax rate.
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at the rate of one-half of one percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in such territory on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 834 §5, 2004)

3.28.060 Place of sale.
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 834 §6, 2004)

3.28.070 Use tax rate.
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter for storage, use or other consumption in such territory at the rate of one-half of one percent of the sales price of the property.

The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 834 §7, 2004)

3.28.080 Adoption of provisions of state law.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 834 §8, 2004)

3.28.090 Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes.
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code:

A.    Wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. However, the substitution shall not be made when:

1.    The word “state” is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, State Board of Control, State Board of Equalization, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the state of California;

2.    The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of the ordinance codified in this chapter;

3.    In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to:

a.    Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or b. Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provision of that code;

4.    In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

B.    The word “city” shall be substituted for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 834 §9, 2004)

3.28.100 Permit not required.
If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 834 §10, 2004)

3.28.110 Exemptions and exclusions.
A.    There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the state of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-administered transactions or use tax.

B.    There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from:

1.    Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government;

2.    Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his or her agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this subsection, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied:

a.    With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence, and

b.    With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address;

3.    The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter;

4.    A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter;

5.    For the purposes of subsections (B)(3) and (B)(4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.

C.    There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter, the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property:

1.    The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax ordinance;

2.    Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California;

3.    If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter;

4.    If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter;

5.    For the purposes of subsections (C)(3) and (C)(4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised;

6.    Except as provided in subsection (C)(7) of this section, a retailer engaged in business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer;

7.    “A retailer engaged in business in the city” shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the city.

D.    Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. (Ord. 834 §11, 2004)

3.28.120 Amendments.
All amendments subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this chapter, provided, however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 834 §12, 2004)

3.28.130 Enjoining collection forbidden.
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 834 §13, 2004)

Chapter 3.29
PUBLIC SAFETY AND ESSENTIAL CITY SERVICES TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
Sections:

3.29.010    Title.

3.29.020    Operative date.

3.29.030    Purpose.

3.29.050    Contract with state.

3.29.060    Transactions tax rate.

3.29.070    Place of sale.

3.29.080    Use tax rate.

3.29.090    Adoption of provisions of state law.

3.29.100    Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes.

3.29.110    Permit not required.

3.29.120    Exemptions and exclusions.

3.29.130    Amendments.

3.29.140    Enjoining collection forbidden.

3.29.150    Severability.

3.29.160    Effective date.

3.29.170    Termination date.

3.29.180    Independent citizen oversight.

3.29.190    Audit and review.

3.29.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the Lakeport public safety and essential city services transactions and use tax ordinance. The city of Lakeport hereinafter shall be called "city." This chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the city. (Ord. 910 §1(part), 2016)

3.29.020 Operative date.
"Operative date" means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than one hundred ten days after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the date of such adoption being November 8, 2016. (Ord. 910 §1(part), 2016)

3.29.030 Purpose.
The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

A.    To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which authorizes the city to adopt this tax ordinance which shall be operative if a majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose.

B.    To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

C.    To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California state sales and use taxes.

D.    To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 910 §1(part), 2016)

3.29.050 Contract with state.
Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance; provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. (Ord. 910 §1(part), 2016)

3.29.060 Transactions tax rate.
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at the rate of one percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 910 §1(part), 2016)

3.29.070 Place of sale.
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 910 §1(part), 2016)

3.29.080 Use tax rate.
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter for storage, use or other consumption in said territory at the rate of one percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 910 §1(part), 2016)

3.29.090 Adoption of provisions of state law.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 910 §1(part), 2016)

3.29.100 Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes.
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code:

A.    Wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. However, the substitution shall not be made when:

1.    The word "State" is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, State Board of Equalization, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California.

2.    The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof, rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter.

3.    In those sections including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to:

a.    Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; or

b.    Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provision of that code.

4.    In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

B.    The word "city" shall be substituted for the word "State" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 910 §1(part), 2016)

3.29.110 Permit not required.
If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 910 §1(part), 2016)

3.29.120 Exemptions and exclusions.
A.    There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the state of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-administered transactions or use tax.

B.    There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from:

1.    Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.

2.    Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this subsection, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied:

a.    With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and

b.    With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address.

3.    The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

4.    A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

5.    For the purposes of subsections (B)(3) and (4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.

C.    There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property:

1.    The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax ordinance.

2.    Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California.

3.    If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

4.    If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

5.    For the purposes of subsections (B)(3) and (4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.

6.    Except as provided in subsection (B)(7) of this section, a retailer engaged in business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer.

7.    "A retailer engaged in business in the city" shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the city.

D.    Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. (Ord. 910 §1(part), 2016)

3.29.130 Amendments.
All amendments subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this chapter; provided, however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 910 §1(part), 2016)

3.29.140 Enjoining collection forbidden.
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 910 §1(part), 2016)

3.29.150 Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the ordinance and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 910 §1(part), 2016)

3.29.160 Effective date*.
This chapter relates to the levying and collecting of the city transactions and use taxes and shall take effect immediately. However, no tax imposed by this chapter shall be effective unless that tax has been approved by the voters of the city as required by Section 2(b) of Article XIII C of the California Constitution and applicable law. (Ord. 910 §1(part), 2016)

*    The tax imposed by this chapter was approved by voters on November 8, 2016. The tax is in effect as of April 1, 2017.

3.29.170 Termination date.
The authority to levy the tax imposed by this chapter shall not expire until subsequent action, if any, by the voters of the city to repeal or amend this chapter. (Ord. 910 §1(part), 2016)

3.29.180 Independent citizen oversight.
A five-member independent citizens’ advisory committee will be created and shall meet annually to review the expenditure of revenues generated by the tax imposed by this chapter and to make recommendations to the city council regarding those expenditures. Members of the committee will be appointed to terms of not more than four years by the city council. The independent citizens’ advisory committee shall meet publicly on at least a quarterly basis to review all revenues and expenditures of the transactions and use tax imposed by this chapter, review annual audit reports related to the tax, and make at least one written annual report to the city council at a public meeting summarizing the independent citizens’ advisory committee’s findings and including any appropriate recommendations. The minutes of the meetings of independent citizens’ advisory committee shall be provided to the city council and placed on the next available regular city council meeting agenda for informational purposes. (Ord. 910 §1(part), 2016)

3.29.190 Audit and review.
The proceeds of the tax imposed by this chapter, as well as the expenditure thereof, shall be audited annually by an independent accounting firm. The city council shall discuss the results of such audit at a meeting of the city council that is open to the public. The report of such audit shall be posted on the city’s website. (Ord. 910 §1(part), 2016)

Chapter 3.30
FIRE SERVICE FEE
Sections:

3.30.010    Findings, purpose and intent.

3.30.020    Definitions.

3.30.030    Special tax.

3.30.040    Collection.

3.30.050    Appeals.

3.30.010 Findings, purpose and intent.
A.    Section 4 of Article XIIIA of the California Constitution permits cities by a two-thirds vote of their qualified electorate to impose a special tax on property, and Government Code Section 50075 authorizes a local agency to impose a special tax pursuant to Government Code Section 53978 for fire protection prevention services.

B.    It is the purpose of this chapter to authorize the levy of a special tax on parcels of real property on the secured property tax rolls of Lake County that are within the city in order to augment funding for fire protection, prevention, medical aid, ambulance service, and hazardous materials responses. Because the burden of this tax falls on property, it is a property tax, but it is not determined according to, nor is it in any manner based on the value of the property. This tax is based, to the extent practical, upon the risk of fire or the need for medical aid service to each parcel and the improvement thereon. Insofar as not inconsistent with this chapter, such provision of California Revenue and Taxation Code as related to ad valorem property taxes are intended to apply to the collection and administration of this tax. As authorized by Government Code Section 53978, this tax is not an ad valorem tax and the exemptions contained in or authorized by Article XIII of the California Constitution shall not apply.

The revenues raised by this tax are to be used solely for the purposes of obtaining, furnishing, operating, and maintaining fire suppression equipment or apparatus, for paying the salaries and benefits of fire fighting personnel, and for other necessary fire protection and prevention services, for providing medical aid, rescue services and hazardous materials responses. (Ord. 784 §1, 1996: Ord. 763 (part), 1994)

3.30.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter: “Developed parcel” means any parcel upon which an improvement exists.

“Improvement” means those items included within the Revenue and Taxation Code Section 105 definition of improvement, except for: a) fence, poles and walls that are not a part or connected to a structure; b) trees and vines.

“Lakeport” means the city of Lakeport.

“Parcel” means the land and improvements thereon, designated by a parcel number on the assessor’s parcel map and carried on the secured property tax roll of Lake County, for the purpose of this chapter, parcel does not include any land or improvement outside the boundaries of the city of Lakeport.

“Taxpayer” means the assessee of the property shown on the secured tax roll or the person or legal entity actually paying the tax, if different from the assessee.

“Year” or “fiscal year” means the period of July 1 through the following June 30. (Ord. 784 §2, 1996)

3.30.030 Special tax.
A special annual tax in the amount of one dollar and five cents per unit of benefit as adjusted each year by the March report of the Bay Area Census, All Urban Consumers Price Index, in accordance with the Units of Benefit Table as set forth in the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be imposed on all parcels within the city for the purpose of providing fire protection and prevention services (salaries and benefits of fire fighting personnel, necessary fire protection and prevention services, medical aid, ambulance services and hazardous materials control); to be collected in the manner authorized by Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. (Ord. 784 §3, 1996: Ord. 763 (part), 1994)

3.30.040 Collection.
The tax shall constitute a lien against each parcel for which the tax is not collected in accordance with Revenue and Taxation Code Section 2187.

The County of Lake shall be charged with the collection of this tax and shall deduct the reasonable cost, not to exceed the present percentage rate, incurred by the county from the taxes collected. (Ord. 784 §3, 1996: Ord. 763 (part), 1994)

3.30.050 Appeals.
Appeals as to the amount of the tax assessed or as to the classification of real property, land use or improvement, may be made to the city council by December 31st of the fiscal year for which the tax pertains. (Ord. 784 §5, 1996)

Chapter 3.34
FIRE MITIGATION FEES
Sections:

3.34.010    Title.

3.34.020    Purpose.

3.34.030    Findings.

3.34.040    Prior agreements and dedication.

3.34.050    Definitions.

3.34.060    Exemptions.

3.34.070    Required actions of affected fire service provider(s).

3.34.080    Fire mitigation fee ceiling established.

3.34.090    Fee payment.

3.34.100    Administrative charge.

3.34.110    Use of fees.

3.34.120    Fee fund records and report.

3.34.130    Termination of fee collection.

3.34.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known and be cited as the “fire mitigation fee ordinance.” (Ord. 842 §1(part), 2005)

3.34.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to implement the Lakeport general plan policy providing for the adoption of fire mitigation fees and for the collection of such fees at the time of the issuance of building permits, such fees to be allocated to the fire agency for the acquisition of capital facilities in order to ensure the provision of the capital facilities necessary to maintain current levels of fire protection services necessitated by new development. (Ord. 842 §1(part), 2005)

3.34.030 Findings.
The city council finds and declares as follows:

A.    Adequate fire protection facilities must be available to serve new development.

B.    New development requires the construction or expansion of fire protection facilities and the acquisition of equipment.

C.    In many areas of the city, property taxes and fire suppression assessments currently collected by fire agency are insufficient to provide funds for expansion or construction of fire facilities and purchase of equipment necessitated by new development resulting in the potential for inadequate fire protection coverage for the new development and the growing population.

D.    The above conditions place the city of Lakeport’s growing population in a condition perilous to its health and safety.

E.    The impacts of development on the existing fire protection facilities and equipment cannot be alleviated without city involvement.

F.    For the above reasons, new methods for financing fire protection facilities and equipment necessitated by development are needed in the city of Lakeport. (Ord. 842 §1(part), 2005)

3.34.040 Prior agreements and dedication.
A.    Any agreement existing prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter between an applicant for development and city pertaining to the dedication of land or payment of fees for fire facilities and equipment to serve the property which is the subject of this application, or any portion thereof, shall satisfy the requirements of this chapter.

B.    If land, facilities or equipment has been dedicated or donated to, and accepted by, the city as a condition of approval of a discretionary permit, such dedication or donation may be considered by the city council as satisfying the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 842 §1(part), 2005)

3.34.050 Definitions.
Whenever the following words are used in this chapter, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section.

“City” means the city of Lakeport.

“City manager” means the city manager of the city of Lakeport.

“Development” means all construction for which a building permit or other permit is required.

“Facilities and equipment” means any long-term capital facilities and equipment used by a fire agency for fire suppression or emergency medical services including station construction, station expansion and fire or emergency medical apparatus.

“Fire agency” and “agency” means any special district providing fire protection services within the incorporated area of the city of Lakeport.

“Other permits” mean conditional use permits and site plan review permits. (Ord. 842 §l(part), 2005)

3.34.060 Exemptions.
A.    There shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter, building permits for the following types of development:

1.    Piers, ramps, boat lifts, docks, suspended platforms and pilings;

2.    Agricultural buildings requiring an exempt building permit.

B.    The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to buildings constructed for governmental uses.

C.    The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the replacement on the same parcel by the owner of a dwelling or dwellings destroyed by fire or other calamity, provided that:

1.    The application for a building permit to replace such dwelling is filed with the city within one year after destruction of the dwelling;

2.    There is no change in occupancy; and

3.    The square footage is not increased by over five hundred square feet of living space. (Ord. 842 §1(part), 2005)

3.34.070 Required actions of affected fire service provider(s).
This chapter shall become applicable to development within the boundaries of the city when the following events occur:

A.    The governing body of a fire agency adopts a resolution making the following findings:

1.    The agency does not have existing fire protection facilities and equipment that could be used to provide an adequate level of services to new development within the city’s boundary.

2.    The agency does not have sufficient funds available to construct additional facilities from fund balances, capital facility funds, property tax sources, fire suppression assessments, or any other appropriate sources.

3.    The lack of fire protection facilities and equipment to serve new development would create a situation perilous to the public health and safety if fire mitigation fees are not levied within the city.

B.    The fire agency resolves as follows:

1.    The agency requests the city to impose a specified percentage of the fire mitigation fee ceiling on the agency’s behalf upon applicants for building permits or other permits for development.

2.    Mitigation fees paid under this chapter shall only be used to expand the availability of capital facilities and equipment to serve new development.

3.    The agency shall place all funds collected for the city under this chapter, and all interest subsequently accrued by the agency on these funds, in a separate budget accounting category to be known as the “City of Lakeport Fire Mitigation Fee.”

4.    The agency shall expend funds from the “City of Lakeport Fire Mitigation Fee” budget accounting category only for those purposes of providing capital facilities and equipment to serve new development.

5.    The agency shall submit a fire mitigation fee annual report no later than October 31st of each year to the city manager. Such report shall include, but not be limited to, the balance in the account at the end of the previous fiscal year, the fee revenue received, the amount and type of expenditures made, and the ending balance in the fund. In addition, the report shall specify the actions the agency plans to take to alleviate the facility and equipment needs caused by new development in a capital fire facilities and equipment plan adopted at a noticed public hearing. The agency shall make available, upon request by the city manager, a copy of its annual audit report.

6.    The agency shall make its records available to the public on request that justify the basis for the fee amount.

7.    The agency shall hold the city harmless for any errors made by the city in collecting or accounting for the fees for each agency.

8.    The agency shall make findings, with respect to any portion of the fee remaining unexpended or uncommitted in its account five or more years after deposit of the fee, to identify the purpose for which it was charged. The agency shall refund to the then current record owner or owners of the development project or projects on a pro rated basis, the unexpended or uncommitted portion of the fee and any interest accrued thereon, for which need cannot be demonstrated.

C.    The governing body of the fire agency adopts a capital fire facility and equipment plan in accordance with Government Code Section 66002 at a noticed public hearing.

D.    The governing body of the fire agency shall send a certified copy of the resolution and the capital fire facility and equipment plan to the city manager. The city manager shall agendize such resolution and capital fire facilities and equipment plan for the city council’s approval at a public hearing noticed in the manner required by Government Code Section 66002(b). At the close of the public hearing thereon, the city council may approve such resolution and capital fire facilities and equipment plan if it finds that such documents meet the requirements of this chapter, the city of Lakeport general plan and Government Code Section 66000 et seq. The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all building permits and other permits issued for new construction within the boundaries of the city of Lakeport thirty days after the city council approval. The agency shall provide prior written notice to the city building official of the effective date of its mitigation fee and any changes thereto.

E.    By March 31st of each year following the year of the original adoption of a resolution and approval by the city council pursuant to this section, the agency shall submit a copy of a new resolution adopted by the governing board of the agency making the findings requested by this section and setting the percentage of the fire mitigation fee ceiling requested by the agency. This percentage may be revised in the resolution up to the ceiling amount. If the resolution proposed to increase the fire mitigation fee from that previously approved by the city council, such resolution shall only become effective if approved by the city council in the manner set forth in subsection D of this section. This revision shall be effective the following July 1st. (Ord. 842 §1(part), 2005)

3.34.080 Fire mitigation fee ceiling established.
Based upon the average cost of providing a fully equipped fire station within the county of Lake, in relation to the average number of new structures served by the station, a fire mitigation fee ceiling of forty-six cents per square foot of construction for all covered roof area is established. The fire mitigation fee ceiling for buildings that install a fire sprinkler system shall be twenty-three cents per square foot of construction for all covered roof area. (Ord. 842 §1(part), 2005)

3.34.090 Fee payment.
A.    Prior to the issuance of any building permit or other permit for development, the applicant shall pay to the city the fees prescribed by the fire agency resolution as approved by the city council, or shall present written evidence that the provision of this chapter have otherwise been satisfied with respect to the development for which permits are sought.

B.    The amount of such fees shall be determined by the fire mitigation fee in effect on the date of the payment of fees for an unexpired plan check.

C.    When application is made for a new building permit following the expiration of a previously issued building permit for which fees were paid, the fee payment shall not be required.

D.    In the event that subsequent development occurs with respect to property for which fees have been paid, additional fees shall be required only for additional square footage of development that was not included in computing the prior fee.

E.    For the purpose of payment of the fees to city, the city council delegates to the agency the responsibility to collect or accept payment of the fire mitigation fee. (Ord. 842 §1(part), 2005)

3.34.100 Administrative charge.
The city may charge, for its services in administering this chapter, an administrative charge of up to two percent of the fees collected under this chapter. (Ord. 842 §1(part), 2005)

3.34.110 Use of fees.
With the exception of the administrative charge provided for herein, all fees collected pursuant to this chapter (and transferred to agency), including any interest accrued thereon, shall be used by the agency for the purpose of providing for capital facilities and equipment. (Ord. 842 §1(part), 2005)

3.34.120 Fee fund records and report.
Any fire agency receiving funds pursuant to this chapter shall maintain a separate budget accounting category for any fees paid. Such category shall be known as the “City of Lakeport Fire Mitigation Fee” account. By October 31st of each year, each agency receiving funds pursuant to this chapter shall file a report with the city manager on the balance in the account at the end of the previous fiscal year, the fee revenue received, the amount and type of expenditures made, and the ending balance in the fund. In addition, the report shall specify the actions the agency plans to take to alleviate the facility and equipment needs caused by the new development. (Ord. 842 §1(part), 2005)

3.34.130 Termination of fee collection.
Fee collection as to any fire agency shall terminate as follows:

A.    If, by March 31st of any year following the year of the original adoption of a resolution pursuant to Section 3.34.060 of this chapter which was approved by the city council, the fire agency has not submitted a new resolution pursuant to Section 3.34.060(E) of this chapter, fee collection shall terminate July of such year.

B.    If, at any time, the governing body of a fire agency submits a copy of a resolution to the city manager requesting termination of fee collection, fee collection shall terminate thirty days from the date of receipt by the city manager.

C.    Each fire agency shall notify the city building official of the effective date of its termination of fee collection. (Ord. 842 §1(part), 2005)

Chapter 3.40
MAINTENANCE DISTRICTS
Sections:

3.40.010    Purpose.

3.40.020    Definitions.

3.40.030    Manner of serving notices and other documents.

3.40.040    Initiation of assessment district proceedings by council resolution.

3.40.050    Initiation of assessment district proceedings by property owner petition-- Generally.

3.40.060    Initiation of assessment district proceedings by property owner petition-- Notice of intention to file property owner petition.

3.40.070    Initiation of assessment district proceedings by property owner petition-- Execution and filing of petition.

3.40.080    Preparation of city engineer’s report.

3.40.090    Disposition of city engineer’s report-- Proposed assessment district initiated by resolution of the city council.

3.40.100    Disposition of city engineer’s report-- Proposed assessment district initiated by property owner petition.

3.40.110    Hearing on establishment of assessment district--Proposed assessment district initiated by resolution of the city council.

3.40.120    Hearing on establishment of assessment district--Proposed assessment district initiated by property owner petition.

3.40.130    Notice of proposed assessment and hearing on proposed assessment.

3.40.140    Preparation and distribution of assessment district ballots.

3.40.150    Return of ballots.

3.40.160    Tabulation and certification of ballot results.

3.40.170    Conduct of initial hearing on proposed assessment district initiated by resolution of the city council.

3.40.180    Conduct of protest hearing--Proposed assessment district initiated by resolution of the city council.

3.40.190    Conduct of protest hearing--Proposed assessment district initiated by property owner.

3.40.200    Conduct of protest hearing--Final determination.

3.40.210    Recordation of notice of assessment.

3.40.220    Assessment district modification--Generally.

3.40.230    Assessment district modifications--Initiation of modification proceedings.

3.40.240    Assessment district modifications--Conduct of modification proceedings.

3.40.250    Dissolution of assessment district.

3.40.260    Adjustment to annual assessments based on increases in consumer price index.

3.40.270    Credits against annual assessments based on prior year maintenance costs.

3.40.280    Preparation of annual register of maintenance district assessments.

3.40.290    Collection of maintenance district assessments on secured tax roll.

3.40.010 Purpose.
This chapter is adopted for the purpose of providing an alternative procedure for levying assessments against property specially benefited by public improvements to fund the cost of operating and maintaining such improvements which complies with Article XIIIC of the California Constitution as set forth in Proposition 218, adopted by the voters at the general statewide election on November 5, 1996, and Senate Bill 919 signed by the Governor July 1, 1997. (Ord. 841 §1(part), 2005)

3.40.020 Definitions.
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions shall govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this chapter:

“Assessment district” means an area containing all parcels that will receive a special benefit from public improvements as determined by the city council.

“City engineer” means such competent person designated or approved by the city council or city manager to perform the duties imposed on the city engineer by this chapter.

“Cost of operating and maintaining public improvements” means all costs of rent, repair, replacement, rehabilitation, fuel, power, electric current, care and supervision necessary to properly operate and maintain a permanent public improvement.

“Property owner” or “owner of property” means any person owning the fee title to a parcel of real property, or owning an interest in any portion of the fee title to a parcel of real property. In addition, the term “property owner” or “owner of real property” shall also include any person renting or leasing real property where such person is directly liable to pay any assessment levied pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

“Special benefit” means a particular and distinct benefit over and above general benefits conferred on real property located in an assessment district or to the public at large. “Special benefit” does not include a general enhancement of property values. (Ord. 841 §1(part), 2005)

3.40.030 Manner of serving notices and other documents.
Any notice or other document required to be served on an owner of property pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be typed or printed in at least ten-point type, and shall be deemed served either when personally delivered to such person, or when deposited in the first class United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at his or her address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll or supplemental roll of the county of lake, whichever is more current, or at his or her address as it appears on a notice of intention to file property owner petition where maintenance assessment district proceedings are being initiated by a property owner petition in the manner hereinafter provided by this chapter. Service by mail of a notice or other document in the manner provided for in this chapter shall be effective on the date of mailing, and any failure of any person to receive such notice or other document shall not affect the validity of the notice or other document. (Ord. 841 §1(part), 2005)

3.40.040 Initiation of assessment district proceedings by council resolution.
Proceedings to establish a maintenance assessment district pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be commenced by the city council by adoption of a resolution of intention. Such resolution shall include a description of the proposed maintenance assessment district boundaries and a description of the public improvements to be maintained with assessment district revenues. In addition, such resolution shall direct the city engineer to promptly prepare a city engineer’s report on the proposed maintenance assessment district in the manner hereinafter required by this chapter. Immediately following the adoption of such resolution of intention, the city clerk shall forward a copy of same to the city engineer. (Ord. 841 §1(part), 2005)

3.40.050 Initiation of assessment district proceedings by property owner petition--Generally.
Proceedings to establish a maintenance assessment district pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may also be initiated by petition of the owner or owners of all the property specially benefited by the public improvements to be maintained with assessment district revenues in the manner hereinafter provided by this chapter. (Ord. 841 §1(part), 2005)

3.40.060 Initiation of assessment district proceedings by property owner petition--Notice of intention to file property owner petition.
Prior to filing a petition to establish a maintenance assessment district, the person or persons proposing to circulate and/or file such petition shall file a notice of intention to file a property owner petition with the city clerk. Such notice of intention shall include a description of the proposed assessment district boundaries, a description of the public improvements to be maintained with assessment district revenues, and the name, mailing address, e-mail address, if any, and the telephone number of the person or persons filing such notice. In addition, such notice shall be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount equal to the estimated costs of preparing and reviewing the engineer’s report required for the establishment of a maintenance assessment district in the manner provided for by this chapter, all as determined or calculated from the maintenance assessment district fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city council. Immediately following the filing of such notice of intention, the city clerk shall forward a copy of same to the city engineer. (Ord. 841 §1(part), 2005)

3.40.070 Initiation of assessment district proceedings by property owner petition--Execution and filing of petition.
A petition to establish a maintenance assessment district pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be executed by the person or persons owning all of the property or properties within the proposed boundaries of the assessment district and shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. In addition to requesting establishment of the maintenance assessment district, such petition shall describe the boundaries of the proposed assessment district, shall describe the public improvements to be maintained with assessment district revenues, shall set forth the total amount of the annual assessments necessary to maintain such improvements, shall describe the method by which such annual assessments will be apportioned according to estimated benefits among the various lots or parcels then located or thereafter established within the assessment district boundaries, all in, the manner provided for in the report of the city engineer, and shall be approved as to form by the city attorney.

A petition to establish a maintenance assessment district pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may also include a waiver of the right of the petitioner or petitioners to any notice of the protest hearing on the assessment district to be convened before the city council at the time and in the manner hereinafter required by this chapter, and may also authorize the city clerk, upon receipt of the petition, to record the petition as the vote of the petitioner or petitioners in favor of establishment of the assessment district at such protest hearing, all at the option of the petitioner or petitioners. (Ord. 841 §1(part), 2005)

3.40.080 Preparation of city engineer’s report.
Promptly following the adoption of a council resolution of intention to establish a maintenance assessment district, or promptly following the filing of a property owner notice of intention to file a petition to establish such an assessment district in the manner provided by this chapter, the city engineer shall prepare a report setting forth all of the following information:

A.    A map of the proposed assessment district which shall indicate by a boundary line the extent of all property which will be specially benefited by the public improvements to be operated and maintained with annual assessment district revenues;

B.    A detailed description of the type and location of the public improvements to be operated and maintained with such revenues;

C.    The total annual assessments required to operate and maintain such public improvements, as well as the reasons for such assessments;

D.    The method used to calculate the assessment against any lot or parcel of property within the boundaries of the assessment district according to such lot or parcel’s proportional benefit from such public improvements, as well as the annual assessment to be levied against any existing or proposed lot or parcel within the boundaries of the assessment district, calculated in accordance with such method of apportionment;

E.    A statement of the method of calculating any increase in the amount of the total annual assessment as well as any increase in an annual assessment levied against a particular lot or parcel within the boundaries of the assessment district to account for inflation as hereinafter required by this chapter;

F.    A statement that if the actual cost of operating and maintaining such public improvements during any year the assessment district remains in effect is less than the assessment levied for that year, the difference between the actual cost of operating and maintaining the public improvements and the assessment levied for that year shall be credited against the assessments levied during the next succeeding year in the manner hereinafter required by this chapter; and

G.    The termination date of such assessment district if of limited duration, or a statement that the assessment district will continue from year to year until dissolved by the city council if the assessment district is not one of limited duration. (Ord. 841 §1(part), 2005)

3.40.090 Disposition of city engineer’s report--Proposed assessment district initiated by resolution of the city council.
Upon completion of the city engineer’s report on a proposed maintenance assessment district prepared in response to a resolution of intention to establish a maintenance district adopted by the city council, the city engineer shall file the original report with the city clerk who shall present copies of the report to the city council for its consideration at the time of the initial hearing on the maintenance assessment district, and make copies of the report available to any owner of property located within the boundaries of the proposed assessment district requesting same. (Ord. 841 §1(part), 2005)

3.40.100 Disposition of city engineer’s report--Proposed assessment district initiated by property owner petition.
Upon completion of the city engineer’s report on a proposed maintenance assessment district prepared in response to a notice of intention to file a petition for the establishment of a maintenance assessment district, the city engineer shall file the original report with the city clerk who shall promptly serve a copy or copies of the report on the person or persons who filed the notice of intention. If, following consideration of such report by the person or persons having filed the notice of intention, such persons proceed to file a petition to establish such assessment district, the city clerk shall present copies of the city engineer’s report to the city council at the time of the protest hearing on the proposed assessment district. (Ord. 841 §1(part), 2005)

3.40.110 Hearing on establishment of assessment district--Proposed assessment district initiated by resolution of the city council.
Immediately following receipt of the report of the city engineer on a proposed maintenance assessment district adopted by the city council, the city clerk shall schedule the matter for public hearings before the city council as follows:

A.    The city clerk shall schedule the matter for an initial public hearing on the proposed assessment district before the city council no earlier than forty-five days nor later than ninety days after the receipt of such report and serve a notice of proposed assessment on each owner of property within the boundaries of the proposed assessment district in the manner hereinafter required by this chapter.

B.    The city clerk shall also schedule the matter for a final protest hearing no earlier than seven days or later than forty-five days after the initial public hearing on the proposed assessment district conduced in the manner hereinafter required by this chapter. (Ord. 841 §1(part), 2005)

3.40.120 Hearing on establishment of assessment district--Proposed assessment district initiated by property owner petition.
Immediately following receipt of a petition to establish a maintenance assessment district executed and filed in the manner required by this chapter, the city clerk shall ordinarily cause the matter to be scheduled for a protest hearing before the city council at the first regular meeting of the city council occurring not less than forty-five days following the filing of such petition. However, if the petition to establish the maintenance assessment district includes a waiver of the right of the petitioner or petitioners to any notice of such protest hearing, and authorized the city clerk to record the petition as the vote of the petitioner or petitioners in favor of the assessment district, the city clerk shall cause the matter to be scheduled for a protest hearing before the city council as soon as practical. (Ord. 841 §1(part), 2005)

3.40.130 Notice of proposed assessment and hearing on proposed assessment.
At the time of setting a hearing or hearings on the establishment of a maintenance assessment district in the manner required by this chapter, the city clerk shall serve each owner of property within the boundaries of the proposed assessment district with a written notice of proposed assessment. Such notice shall set forth the date, time, and place of such hearing or hearings, and shall include all of the following information bearing on the proposed maintenance assessment district and proceedings to establish such assessment district:

A.    A map of the assessment district;

B.    A description of the type and location of all of the public improvements to be operated and maintained with annual assessment district revenues;

C.    The total annual assessment chargeable to the entire district as well as the reasons for such assessment;

D.    A statement of the method used to calculate the annual assessment against any lot or parcel of property within the boundaries of the assessment district according to such lot or parcel’s proportional benefit from such public improvements, as well as the annual assessment to be levied against each and every existing or proposed lot or parcel within the boundaries of the assessment district, calculated in accordance with such method of apportionment;

E.    A statement of the method of calculating any increase in the amount of the total annual assessment as well as any increase in an annual assessment levied against a particular lot or parcel within the boundaries of the assessment district to account for inflation as hereinafter required by this chapter;

F.    A statement that if the actual cost of operating and maintaining such public improvements during any year the assessment district remains in effect is less than the assessment levied for that year, the difference between the actual cost of operating and maintaining the public improvements and the assessment levied for that year shall be credited against the assessments levied during the next succeeding year in the manner hereinafter required by this chapter;

G.    The termination date of such assessment district if of limited duration, or a statement that the assessment district will continue from year to year until dissolved by the city council if the assessment district is not one of limited duration; and

H.    An explanation of the right of each property owner within the boundaries of the proposed assessment district to cast a ballot in favor of or against such assessment district, a summary of the procedures applicable to the completion and return of ballots, the last day for returning ballots, a description of the manner in which ballots will be weighted and tabulated, and a statement that if, after the ballots are weighted and tabulated in the manner described therein, a majority of the ballots submitted in opposition to the proposed assessment district exceeds the ballots submitted in favor of the pro posed assessment district, proceedings on the proposed assessment district will be abandoned. (Ord. 841 §1(part), 2005)

3.40.140 Preparation and distribution of assessment district ballots.
At the time of setting a hearing or hearings on the establishment of a maintenance assessment district in the manner required by this chapter, the city clerk shall also serve each owner of property within the boundaries of the proposed assessment district with an assessment district ballot. Such ballot shall include a place where a property owner may set forth his or her name, reasonable identification of the lot or parcel within the boundaries of the proposed assessment district that is owned by such person, and such person’s vote in favor of or in opposition to the proposed assessment district. Along with such ballot, the city clerk shall serve each owner of property within the boundaries of the proposed assessment district with a ballot envelope containing the address where such ballot may be mailed or personally delivered to the city clerk for tabulation. (Ord. 841 §1(part), 2005)

3.40.150 Return of ballots.
All ballots cast by an owner of property within the boundaries of a proposed maintenance assessment district must be received by the city clerk no later than the conclusion of the protest hearing thereon, regardless of whether such ballot is personally returned to the city clerk or returned to the city clerk by mail. Any ballot delivered to the city clerk after such date or time shall be deemed invalid. (Ord. 841 §1(part), 2005)

3.40.160 Tabulation and certification of ballot results.
Upon receipt of a ballot cast by the owner of property within the boundaries of a proposed assessment district, the city clerk shall determine the weight of such ballot based on a proportion equal to the ratio between the amount of the proposed annual assessment to be borne by the owner of the property casting such ballot and the total amount of the proposed annual assessments to be borne by all owners of property within the boundaries of the proposed assessment district. At the conclusion of the protest hearing, the city clerk shall tabulate the total vote cast in favor of the proposed assessment district and those cast against the proposed assessment district after weighting such ballots in the manner hereinbefore provided by this section, and shall certify the results of such tabulation in writing to the city council. (Ord. 841 §1(part), 2005)

3.40.170 Conduct of initial hearing on proposed assessment district initiated by resolution of the city council.
At the initial hearing, on a proposed maintenance assessment district initiated by resolution of the city council, the city council shall receive and consider the city engineer’s report on the proposed assessment district, as well as all comments on such report or any other matter relevant to the establishment of the proposed assessment district made by the owners within the boundaries of the proposed assessment district. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall either approve the city engineer’s report as presented, approve the city engineer’s report with such modifications to such report as the city council determines to be necessary in order to comply with the requirements of law, or abandon further proceedings on the proposed maintenance assessment district if the council determines that the district cannot be established in a manner that complies with the requirements of law or that establishment of the assessment district is not otherwise warranted.

If, at the conclusion of such hearing, the city council determines to modify any provision of the city engineer’s report bearing on the reasons for the proposed maintenance assessment district, the total amount of the annual assessment chargeable to the entire assessment district, the method used to calculate the annual assessment against any lot or parcel of property within the boundaries of the assessment district, the amount of the assessment levied against any lot or parcel within the assessment district, or the duration of the assessment district, the city clerk shall promptly cause notice of such modification to be served on each owner of property within the assessment district affected by such modification prior to the protest hearing on the assessment district. Similarly, if at the conclusion of such hearing, the city council determines to abandon further proceedings on the proposed maintenance assessment district, the city clerk shall promptly serve notice thereof on all property owners within the boundaries of the proposed assessment district. (Ord. 841 §1(part), 2005)

3.40.180 Conduct of protest hearing--Proposed assessment district initiated by resolution of the city council.
At the protest hearing on a proposed maintenance assessment district initiated by resolution of the city council, the city council shall receive copies of all ballots for and against the assessment district and the city clerk’s tabulation of such ballots. In addition, the council shall hear further comments from the owners of property within the boundaries of any proposed maintenance assessment district on any matter bearing on the establishment of the proposed assessment district or the administration thereof. (Ord. 841 §1(part), 2005)

3.40.190 Conduct of protest hearing--Proposed assessment district initiated by property owner.
At the protest hearing on a proposed maintenance assessment district initiated by a property owner petition, the city council shall receive the city engineer’s report, the property owner’s petition requesting formation of the assessment district, all ballots for and against the assessment district and the city clerk’s tabulation of such ballots. In addition, the council may, but shall not be required to, hear the comments made by an owner of property within the boundaries of the proposed maintenance assessment district bearing on the establishment of the assessment district or the administration thereof. (Ord. 841 §1(part), 2005)

3.40.200 Conduct of protest hearing--Final determination.
If, at the conclusion of the protest hearing, the city council finds that the votes cast by property owners within the boundaries of the proposed maintenance assessment district in favor of the assessment district exceed the votes cast by property owners against the assessment district when weighted in the manner required by this chapter, and, in addition, finds that establishment of the district otherwise complies with the requirements of law and is warranted, the city council shall adopt a resolution approving and establishing the assessment district, and such findings shall be final and conclusive as to all persons. If, on the other hand, the city council finds either that the votes cast by property owners within the boundaries of the proposed maintenance assessment district against the assessment district exceed the votes cast by property owners in favor of the assessment district when weighted in the manner required by this chapter, that establishment of the assessment district does not comply with the requirements of law, or that establishment of the assessment district is otherwise not warranted, the city council shall, by motion, abandon further proceedings on the assessment district. (Ord. 841 §1(part), 2005)

3.40.210 Recordation of notice of assessment.
Upon adoption of a resolution approving the establishment of a maintenance assessment district pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the city clerk shall provide a notice of the assessment, substantially in the form provided for by subsection A through F of Section 3.40.130 of this chapter to be recorded in the office of the Lake County recorder whereupon all persons shall be deemed to have notice of the establishment of the assessment district. (Ord. 841 §1(part), 2005)

3.40.220 Assessment district modification--Generally.
At any time following the establishment of a maintenance assessment district in the manner provided by this chapter, the city council may modify such assessment district either by changing the boundaries of the assessment district, by changing the type or scope of public improvements to be operated and maintained with annual assessment district revenues, or by changing the method of apportioning the costs of operating and maintaining such improvements among the various lots and parcels within the boundaries of the assessment district. (Ord. 841 §1(part), 2005)

3.40.230 Assessment district modifications--Initiation of modification proceedings.
Proceedings to modify a maintenance assessment district following establishment of the assessment district in the manner provided by this chapter shall be initiated by the city council by the adoption of a resolution of intention to make such modification. In such resolution, the city council shall identify the maintenance assessment district being modified, shall describe, with particularity, the nature of the modification, shall set a time and place for a hearing on the modification, and shall include a statement that all owners of property which are or will be included within the boundaries of the modified assessment district may protest or otherwise be heard on the modification. (Ord. 841 §1(part), 2005)

3.40.240 Assessment district modifications--Conduct of modification proceedings.
Proceedings to modify a maintenance assessment district established by the city council in the manner provided by this chapter shall be conducted in the same manner provided by this chapter for the initial establishment of an assessment district following adoption by the city council of a resolution of intention to establish the assessment district. (Ord. 841 §1(part), 2005)

3.40.250 Dissolution of assessment district.
At any time following the establishment of a maintenance assessment district in the manner hereinbefore provided by this chapter, the city council may dissolve such district. Proceedings to dissolve a maintenance assessment district shall be initiated by the city council by adoption of a resolution of intention to dissolve the assessment district. In such resolution of intention, the city council shall identify the maintenance assessment district being dissolved, shall set forth the reasons for the dissolution, and shall set forth the date, time, and place for a hearing at which any owner of property within such district may object to such dissolution. At least ten days prior to the date of a hearing on the dissolution of a maintenance assessment district, the city clerk shall serve a notice of the hearing on each owner of property within the boundaries of the assessment district. If at the conclusion of the hearing on the proposed dissolution of a maintenance assessment district, the city council determines that dissolution of the assessment district is warranted, the council shall adopt a resolution ordering the assessment district dissolved. (Ord. 841 §1(part), 2005)

3.40.260 Adjustment to annual assessments based on increases in consumer price index.
If, on the first day of the city fiscal year commencing on July 1st following the establishment of a maintenance assessment district in the manner provided in this chapter, and on the first day of each fiscal year thereafter that the assessment district remains in effect, there is an increase in the cost of operating and maintaining the public improvements to be funded with assessment district revenues, as measured by an increase in the consumer price index during such period of time, then the total annual assessment levied against all properties within the assessment district, as well as the proportional annual assessment levied against each lot or parcel within the boundaries of the assessment district shall also be increased in proportion to the increase in such costs.

The determination of whether there has been an increase in such costs and the amount of the increase in such assessments which is proportional to the increase in such costs shall be made by the public works superintendent and shall be based exclusively on the percentage increase during such period of time in the consumer price index published by the Federal Bureau of Labor Statistics of all Urban Consumers--U.S. Cities Average (all items) or such other measure employed by the U.S. Department of Labor Statistics in lieu of such consumer price index which measures the cost of living in U.S. cities. (Ord. 841 §1(part), 2005)

3.40.270 Credits against annual assessments based on prior year maintenance costs.
If, on the first day of the city fiscal year commencing on July 1st following the establishment of a maintenance assessment district in the manner provided by this chapter, and on the first day of each fiscal year thereafter that the assessment district remains in effect, the total annual assessment levied during the preceding fiscal year exceeded the actual cost of operating and maintaining the public improvements to be funded with assessment district revenues during such preceding fiscal year, then the total annual assessment levied against property within the assessment district during the ensuing fiscal year shall be reduced by a credit equal to the difference between the total annual assessment levied during the preceding fiscal year and the actual cost of operating and maintaining the public improvements to be funded with assessment district revenues during such preceding fiscal year.

In particular, the total annual assessment levied against all property within the maintenance assessment district shall be reduced during the ensuing fiscal year, and only during the ensuing fiscal year, by an amount equal to the difference between the total annual assessment levied during the preceding fiscal year and the total cost of operating and maintaining the public improvements to be funded with assessment district revenues during such preceding fiscal year, and the annual assessment levied against each individual lot or parcel within the boundaries of the assessment district shall be reduced during the ensuing fiscal year, and only during such ensuing fiscal year, by a portion of such amount which is calculated by the public works superintendent using the method of apportionment set forth in the city engineer’s report as approved by the city council at the time the district was established. (Ord. 841 §1(part), 2005)

3.40.280 Preparation of annual register of maintenance district assessments.
On July 1st of each year following the establishment of a maintenance assessment district pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or as soon thereafter as practical, the public works superintendent shall prepare a register of all assessments having been levied within an assessment district established pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Such register shall identify each maintenance assessment district established pursuant to the provisions of this chapter by its number or other designation, and shall set forth the assessor’s parcel number of every lot or parcel of real property within the boundaries of each such assessment district, the name and address of the owner or owners of such lot or parcel if required by the Lake County auditor, and the amount of the annual assessment levied against such lot or parcel during the current tax year as adjusted for inflation and prior year credits in the manner required by this chapter. Upon completion of such register, the public works superintendent shall file same with the Lake County auditor with a request that the assessments be added to the secured tax roll for the current fiscal year. (Ord. 841 §1(part), 2005)

3.40.290 Collection of maintenance district assessments on secured tax roll.
Upon receipt of the annual register of maintenance district assessments prepared by the public works superintendent in the manner required by this chapter, the Lake County auditor shall cause the maintenance district assessments set forth in the annual register to be added to the secured tax roll of the county. Thereafter, all such maintenance district assessments shall be paid and collected in the same manner and at the same time as the general taxes of the county on real property are paid and collected, and such assessments shall become delinquent at the same time and bear the same proportionate penalties and interest after delinquency as do the general taxes of the county on real property. (Ord. 841 §1(part), 2005)

Title 4
(RESERVED)
Title 5
BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Chapters:

5.04    Business Licenses

5.08    Adult Entertainment Businesses

5.12    Bingo

5.16    Cable Television

5.20    Mobile Catering Businesses

5.24    Solicitation

5.30    Fireworks

5.34    Commercial Cannabis

Chapter 5.04
BUSINESS LICENSES
Sections:

ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS

5.04.010    Definitions.

5.04.020    License required.

5.04.030    Issuance conditions.

5.04.040    Complaint--Notice.

5.04.050    Scope of license.

5.04.060    Content of license--Replacement fee.

5.04.070    Exhibition of license.

5.04.080    Inspector--License collector.

5.04.090    Violation--Penalty.

ARTICLE II. PAYMENT OF TAXES

5.04.100    Advance annual payments.

5.04.110    Due when--Proration--Refunds.

5.04.120    License taxes designated.

5.04.130    Hotels or public roominghouses.

5.04.140    Apartment houses.

5.04.150    Motels, trailer courts or public campgrounds.

5.04.160    Boxing, wrestling and miscellaneous entertainments.

5.04.170    Signboards and billposting.

5.04.180    Vending, musical and gaming machines.

5.04.190    Waiver or remission of taxes.

5.04.200    Evasion of payments.

5.04.210    Delinquent payments--Action.

5.04.220    Deposit of moneys--Reports by clerk.

ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS

5.04.010 Definitions.
A.    For the purpose of this chapter, words used in this chapter in the singular include the plural and the masculine includes the feminine. The word “persons,” whenever used in this chapter, applies to and includes firm, corporation or association of persons, and is also deemed to refer to those who travel about with goods, wares or merchandise which they sell, or who solicit and/or deliver at the same time, or who deliver and distribute goods for others.

B.    A “contractor,” within the meaning of this chapter, is defined as a person, firm or corporation who, for a fixed sum or other compensation except wages, undertakes with another for the construction, alteration, repair, addition to, or improvement of any building, structure, project, development or part thereof, other than personal property, and the term “contractor,” as used in this. chapter, includes subcontractor, but does not include any owner constructing a building by day labor for his own use. Any person holding a state license and registered with the Director of the Department of Professional and Vocational Standards of the state shall be considered a “contractor” under the terms of this chapter.

C.    For the purpose of this chapter, a “peddler,” is defined to be and include every person not having a regular established place of business in the city, who travels from place to place, or has a stand upon a public street, alley or other public place, doorway or any unoccupied room or building, who sells, or offers for sale, any goods, wares or merchandise in his possession and any such peddler shall pay a license tax of twenty dollars per day. (Ord. 365 §§1, 13, 19, 1959)

5.04.020 License required.
It is unlawful for any person, whether as principal, or agent, or owner, or employee, to commence, engage in, transact or carry on, within the corporate limits of the city, any business, trade, calling, profession or occupation specified in this chapter, without first procuring a license to do so as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 365 §2(part), 1959)

5.04.030 Issuance conditions.
The city council may approve or reject any applications for a license and may revoke any license that may be granted provided that such applicant or licensee is not subject to regulations of the state or the federal government, upon a showing that the business conducted thereunder is being carried on in violation of the Constitution or laws of the state, or any ordinance of the county, or of the city; provided, however, that no license shall be revoked except upon written complaint and after a hearing by the city council at a regular meeting, of which the licensee shall have had two weeks’ notice in writing. (Ord. 365 §2(part), 1959)

5.04.040 Complaint--Notice.
When a complaint has been filed, the city clerk shall prepare a notice of the time and place of the hearing of said complaint and shall personally serve the licensee or cause the licensee to be personally served with the notice and copy of the complaint, and if unable to make personal service, shall mail the same by registered or certified mail addressed to the licensee at the place of business of the licensee as set forth in the license, with return signature card, which card shall serve as evidence that service was made. (Ord. 365 §2(part), 1959)

5.04.050 Scope of license.
No license shall authorize any person, firm or corporation, other than the one named in the license, his agents or employees, acting on behalf of the licensee, to transact or carry on such business or calling, nor shall any business or calling be conducted under any one classification other than the one or more named in such license. (Ord. 365 §9, 1959)

5.04.060 Content of license--Replacement fee.
A.    It shall be the duty of the city clerk to prepare and issue a license to every person whose application has been approved by him, and his fee therefor paid, the license to show the fee charged therefor, period of time covered thereby, the name of the person to whom issued, the business, trade, calling, profession or occupation licensed, and the location where same is to be carried on, together with the number of automobiles, trucks, or other delivery vehicles to be used in the business. If the applicant does not have a fixed place of business and carries on his business from an automobile, truck or other vehicle, the license shall state the make of such vehicle, the engine number and license number thereof.

B.    In case of every business which vehicles are used, the city clerk shall also issue to the licensee a tag for each vehicle used in the business, which must be displayed in the cab of the vehicle so that any officer may readily see the same.

C.    If any license or license tag is lost or misplaced, the licensee may apply for a duplicate to the city clerk, and upon payment of one dollar, the city clerk shall issue a duplicate license or tag. (Ord. 365 §3(part), 1959)

5.04.070 Exhibition of license.
A.    Every person having a license under the provisions of this chapter and carrying on a trade, calling, profession or occupation at a fixed place of business shall keep such license posted and exhibited, while in force, in some conspicuous part of said place of business.

B.    Every person having such a license and not having a fixed place of business, but who carries on his business from any truck, auto or other vehicle, shall carry such license with him at all times while carrying on the trade, calling, profession or occupation for which the same was granted and shall also place the truck tag in a conspicuous place in the cab of such vehicle so that the traffic officer can readily see the same.

C.    Every person having a license under the provisions of this chapter shall produce and exhibit the same whenever requested to do so by any police officer, or by any officer authorized to issue, inspect or collect licenses. (Ord. 365 §7, 1959)

5.04.080 Inspector--License collector.
A.    The chief of police is appointed as inspector and ex officio license collector and shall pay over all moneys collected by him to the city clerk. In addition to his several duties, as chief of police, he is required to examine all places of business and persons liable to pay a license, and to see that such licenses are taken out, and shall have and exercise the power:

1.    To make arrests for the violation of any provision of this chapter;

2.    To enter free of charge at any time, any place of business for which a license is required by this chapter and to demand the exhibition of such license for the current term by any person engaged or employed in the transaction of such business, and if such person then and there fails to exhibit such license, such person shall be liable for the penalty provided for a violation of this chapter.

B.    It is made the duty of the chief of police to cause complaints to be filed against all persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter.

C.    Such chief of police as such inspector of licenses shall make out once a month a list of persons, firms or corporations carrying on business within the municipality and having no license, with their addresses, and deliver such list to the city clerk and also report to the city clerk the names of all such persons doing business without a license immediately upon the fact coming to his knowledge.

D.    Any chief of police failing or neglecting for more than thirty days to report any person, firm or corporation who or which is engaged in carrying on business within the city without first having paid the required license shall be guilty of neglect of duty and be either suspended from duty or dismissed from office, in the discretion of the city council. (Ord. 365 S3(part), 1959)

5.04.090 Violation--Penalty.
A.    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than three months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

B.    Every person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punishable therefor as provided by this chapter. (Ord. 365 §24, 1959)

ARTICLE II. PAYMENT OF TAXES

5.04.100 Advance annual payments.
Except as provided in this chapter, all license taxes shall be payable annually in advance in lawful money of the United States to the license collector or at the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 365 §3(part), 1959)

5.04.110 Due when--Proration--Refunds.
A.    The annual license tax provided for in this chapter shall be due and payable to the city during the month of July of each year, and all such licenses shall expire on the last day of June of succeeding year.

B.    All licenses must commence on the. first day of the month of July, except in cases otherwise provided for in this chapter.

C.    When any business or occupation or calling requiring a license shall have commenced after the commencement of the license period, then the license fee required shall be reduced for each month which has elapsed since the beginning of the period, and the city clerk shall issue a license for the remaining portion of the license period and shall receive in payment therefor the sum required for such license for the balance of said license period.

D.    Each license shall authorize the person obtaining the same to transact the business described in such licenses.

E.    A separate license must be obtained for each branch established or separate house or place of business, located in the city; provided, however, that in the event of change of location of such place of business, the license shall apply to such new location.

F.    Anything in this chapter notwithstanding, no license shall be issued for less than five dollars whether for the full term of one year or for a lesser period.

G.    All businesses operating at the commencement of a license period, that is in July of each year, must pay a license fee for a full year; provided, however, upon proper application therefor, any person terminating a business prior to the end of such year, may obtain a refund, pro rata for the balance of the year; provided, further, that such application be made prior to the end of such year, in no case shall a refund be granted for more than seventy-five percent of the license fee paid upon application for such license. (Ord. 365 §5, 1959)

5.04.120 License taxes designated.
A.    A license tax, which shall be paid to the city by every person, firm, association or corporation engaged in, conducting or carrying on any profession, trade, business, calling or occupation within said city, is fixed, established and provided as set forth in this chapter.

B.    For the purpose of this chapter, every person carrying on business in the city shall pay a license tax as follows:

One Hundred Fifty Dollars Plus Ten Dollars Per Employee

Chain stores, nonfranchise

Health spa

One Hundred Dollars Plus Ten Dollars Per Employee

Attorney at law

Auditor, accountant, certified and public

Auto sales agencies

Boat sales and rentals

Chiropractors

Dentists

Drugstore

Lumber, building materials, hardware and paint

Optician, optometrist or oculist

Physicians and surgeons

Real estate sales agency

Title insurance

Veterinarian

Eighty Dollars Plus Ten Dollars Per Employee

Auto body repairs

Cleaner and tailor

Cleaning establishments

Electrical goods and appliances and contractors

General contractors

Laundry, self-service or otherwise

Plumbing goods and appliances and contractors

Sand, gravel, cement sales and contractors

Sheet metal goods and appliances

Specialty contractors not specified in this classification

Seventy-Five Dollars Plus Ten Dollars Per Employee

Auto parts

Bars where alcoholic beverages are sold

Distribution or wholesaling of gasoline, lubricating oil, greases or road oil, etc.

Dry goods stores

Furniture stores

Grocery stores, other than chain

Hardware stores

Liquor stores

Meat sales, wholesale or retail

Newspaper

Restaurants with sale of hard liquor

Sporting goods

Undertakers, mortuary

Variety stores

Sixty Dollars Plus Ten Dollars Per Employee

Beauty shops

Engine repairs

Garages

Jewelers, gifts, paper products

Machine shops

Fifty Dollars Plus Ten Dollars Per Employee

Children’s wear

Ladies wear and/or shoes

Menswear and/or shoes

Printing, card writers, mimeographing

Shoe stores

Theaters

Wholesale distributors

Forty Dollars Plus Ten Dollars Per Employee

Bait shop

Locksmith, gunsmith

Restaurant, grill, lunch counter, etc.

Service station

Tobacco

Thirty Dollars Plus Ten Dollars Per Employee

Draying

Fixit shop

Grinder, cutlery, knives and tool sharpening

Hobby shop

Shooting gallery

Twenty Dollars Plus Ten Dollars Per Employee

Auto washing

Convalescent hospitals

Odd jobs, gardening

Parcel delivery or delivery service, trailer rentals

Piano tuning

Roller skating rink

Shoeshine stands

Taxicabs, messenger service

Window cleaners, janitors

Twenty Dollars

Part-time home occupations

One Hundred Fifty Dollars Per Table

Cardrooms

Twenty-Five Dollars Per Table

Pool rooms

Sixty Dollars

Mobile-based occupation

Ten Dollars Per Unit

Apartments

Ten Dollars Per Space

Trailer park, recreational vehicles, permanent rentals

Two Dollars and Fifty Cents Per Space

Campgrounds

One Hundred Dollars Per Event

Boxing, wrestling, miscellaneous entertainment

Fifty Dollars Per Day

Peddlers

One Hundred Dollars Per Day

Automobile races

Carnivals

Circus, etc.

Motorcycle races

Rodeo

Five Dollars Per Machine

Mechanical musical and amusement devices

Vending machines

Forty Dollars Plus Ten Dollars Per Employee

Businesses not specified in this subsection

Ten Dollars

One-time permit

C.    A person engaged in two or more businesses at the same location shall not be required to obtain separate licenses for conducting each of such businesses but shall be issued one license for the primary use which license shall also specify on its face all businesses carried out by applicant at the location.

D.    Every person engaged in any business not specified in this chapter shall pay an annual license tax of twenty dollars. (Ord. 898 §1, 2015: Ord. 565 §1, 1978; Ord. 365 §11(part), 1959)

5.04.130 Hotels or public roominghouses.
Every person, firm or corporation or association conducting or carrying on a hotel or public roominghouse or lodginghouse or inn shall pay an annual license tax as follows: hotels/motels, five dollars per rentable rooms. (Ord. 565 §4, 1978: Ord. 365 §16, 1959)

5.04.140 Apartment houses.
A.    Every person conducting or running an apartment house, shall pay an annual license tax as follows:

1.    For four apartments, but not more than five, twenty dollars annually;

2.    For six apartments, but not more than nine, thirty-five dollars annually;

3.    For ten apartments or more, fifty dollars annually.

B.    This section shall not apply to any apartment houses of less than four apartments. (Ord. 365 §17, 1959)

5.04.150 Motels, trailer courts or public campgrounds.
Every person conducting or managing, or carrying on a business of a motel, trailer court or public campgrounds or apartments maintained for the traveling public, shall pay an annual license tax as follows:

A.    For five units or less, twenty dollars annually;

B.    For six units, but not more than ten, thirty dollars annually;

C.    Over ten units, forty dollars annually. (Ord. 365 §18, 1959)

5.04.160 Boxing, wrestling and miscellaneous entertainments.
A.    Every person conducting the business of a traveling theatrical show shall pay a license tax of twenty-five dollars for the first day and ten dollars per each day thereafter.

B.    Every person conducting the business of a circus, wild west show, or trained animal show shall pay a license tax of twenty-five dollars per day.

C.    Every person conducting, managing or carrying on a boxing or wrestling contest or connected with a carnival shall pay a license tax of twenty-five dollars per day.

D.    Every person carrying on or conducting automobile races in the city shall pay a license tax of ten dollars per day.

E.    Every person conducting motorcycle races in the city shall pay a license tax of twenty-five dollars.

F.    Every person conducting a rodeo in the city shall pay a license of twenty-five dollars per day.

G.    Every person conducting a carnival in the city shall pay a license tax of fifty dollars per day.

H.    Any show, exhibition or concession mentioned in this section, before beginning operations, must obtain a permit from the city clerk and such permit shall not be granted unless documentary evidence is shown that such person, firm or corporation carries, for the benefit of its patrons, public liability insurance in an amount of not less than one hundred thousand dollars, protecting such patrons against damage or injury and accidental hazards arising from the business carried on by the applicant.

I.    The license tax herein provided for may not be avoided by tie-in with local fraternal or civic organizations or for benefits, charity or other purposes for subterfuge designed to relieve the applicant from the payment of the fee. (Ord. 898 §2, 2015: Ord. 365 §20, 1959)

5.04.170 Signboards and billposting.
A.    Every person, firm, association or corporation carrying on the business of posting bills, posters or advertisements, or sign advertisements by means of billboard or advertising signboards, shall pay a license tax of ten dollars per day.

B.    Every person, firm, association or corporation posting bills advertising circuses, carnivals or fairs shall pay a license tax of ten dollars per day. (Ord. 365 §21, 1959)

5.04.180 Vending, musical and gaming machines.
Every person owning any machine that is so placed that it can be operated by persons other than the owner thereof shall pay an annual license tax as follows:

A.    Vending Machines. For each one-cent machine, two dollars annually; for each five-cent machine or higher money denomination machine, four dollars annually; provided, further that upon payment of such fee the clerk shall issue a sticker license, in a form to be prescribed by the city council, to be attached to each such machine, for which the fee has been paid, and maintained on the machine for inspection.

B.    For each mechanical music device, whether operated as a single unit, or through separate depositories or controls in booths, or at counters, the sum of twelve dollars annually; provided, further that upon payment of such fee the clerk shall issue a sticker license in a form to be prescribed by the city council, to be attached to each such machine for which the fee has been paid, and maintained on the machine for inspection.

C.    For each mechanical amusement device, game or other mechanical device so operated with coins, the sum of twelve dollars annually; provided, further that upon payment of such fees, the clerk shall issue a sticker license in a form to be prescribed by the city council to be attached to each such machine for which the fee has been paid, and maintained for inspection.

D.    The license tax required by this section shall be in addition to any other tax required by this chapter. (Ord. 365 §22, 1959)

5.04.190 Waiver or remission of taxes.
The city council may, upon application, waive or remit the whole or any portion of any license collected for charitable, or for any of the following purposes:

A.    For any show, exhibition, entertainment or lecture if it appears to its satisfaction that the same is to be given or was given for exclusive benefit of any church, church society, school, fraternal order, for any charitable purposes or public benefit;

B.    For vending, hawking, huckstering or peddling or for soliciting orders for goods, wares, or merchandise and delivering the same without maintaining a fixed place of business in the city, if the person vending, hawking, huckstering, peddling, soliciting or selling the same is proven to the satisfaction of the city council by reason of physical deformity or other like deficiency to be unable to follow or carry on any other means of livelihood, or if the article so desired to be sold or vended is a farm product which is raised, grown or produced directly by the person vending or selling the same. Upon such waiver, the license collector shall issue a certificate of waiver on a form to be prescribed by the city council.

C.    Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as making it mandatory upon the city council to remit any license, or any part thereof, as set forth in this chapter, but its judgment therein shall be final and conclusive.

D.    No license shall be required for any person engaged in soliciting orders for any goods, wares or merchandise subject to interstate commerce regulations, and further provided that every person so engaged in interstate commerce shall register with the license collector, exhibiting proof of the nature of his business, the firm by whom employed, and address of home office, and shall pay a registration fee of one dollar therefor for each person registered. A separate registration card on a form to be prescribed by the council shall be issued to each agent or employee of each business. Such registration card shall indicate the period for which issued, which shall not exceed one year from date issued.

E.    Every honorably discharged member of the armed services of the United States who is physically unable to obtain a livelihood by manual labor shall have the right to hawk, peddle and vend any goods, wares or merchandise without payment of any license tax or fee whatsoever, but such honorably discharged member shall register with the license collector and shall exhibit his honorable discharge and doctor’s certificate, and the license collector shall issue to the discharged member of the armed services, without cost, a license therefor, upon the production of such honorable discharge, together with a doctor’s certificate showing that the applicant is unable to obtain a livelihood by manual labor. (Ord. 365 §8, 1959)

5.04.200 Evasion of payments.
The conviction and punishment of any person for transacting any trade, calling, profession or occupation without a license shall not excuse or exempt such person from the payment of any license, or delinquent penalty, due or unpaid at the time of such conviction, and nothing herein shall prevent a criminal prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 365 §10, 1959)

5.04.210 Delinquent payments--Action.
A.    All license taxes not paid at the hour of five p.m. on the last day of July of each year in which any license may be due, shall be delinquent and the license collector shall add to all such licenses remaining unpaid a penalty of fifty percent of the original license fee on each delinquent license and shall enter the same upon his books and collect the same.

B.    It shall be the duty of the city clerk to deliver to the chief of police or other officer designated by the city council, the name of any delinquent licenses, and it shall be the duty of the chief of police, or such other officer, to immediately demand of such licensee payment of license and delinquencies, and if it is not paid forthwith, to charge such delinquent licensee with a misdemeanor, as set forth in Section 5.04.090 of this chapter and to place him under arrest. (Ord. 447 §1, 1969: Ord. 365 §6, 1959)

5.04.220 Deposit of moneys--Reports by clerk.
The city clerk shall immediately deposit with the bank in which the city funds are maintained, all money collected by him for licenses, taking a receipt therefor. The city clerk shall report the amount of money collected, together with an itemized statement of delinquent licenses to the city council at its first meeting in each month. (Ord. 365 S4, 1959)

Chapter 5.08
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES
Sections:

5.08.010    Findings.

5.08.020    Definitions.

5.08.030    Location restrictions.

5.08.040    Violation--Penalty.

5.08.010 Findings.
The city council finds that adult entertainment businesses, because of their very nature, are recognized as having objectionable characteristics, particularly when several of them are concentrated under certain circumstances, thereby having deleterious effect upon the adjacent areas. Special regulation of these businesses is necessary to ensure that the adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhoods. The primary purpose of the regulation is to prevent the concentration or clustering of these businesses in any one area. (Ord. 626 §1, 1984)

5.08.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, adult entertainment businesses are defined as follows:

A.    “Adult bookstore” means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines and other. periodicals whose dominant or predominant character and theme is the depiction of the statutorily enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such materials.

B.    “Adult motion picture theater” means an enclosed building with a capacity of fifty or more persons customarily used for presenting material whose dominant or predominant character and theme is the depiction of the statutorily enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas.

C.    “Adult mini-motion picture theater” means an enclosed building with a capacity for less than fifty persons customarily used for presenting material whose dominant or predominant character and theme is the depiction of the statutorily enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.

D.    “Adult hotel or motel” means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented whose dominant or predominant theme is the depiction of the statutorily enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas.

E.    “Adult motion picture arcade” means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed have a dominant or predominant character and theme which is the depiction of the statutorily enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas.

F.    “Cabaret” means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, or similar entertainers, where such performances have as their dominant or predominant character and theme the depiction of the statutorily enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas.

G.    “Model studio” means any business where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, figure models who display specified anatomical areas are provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by person paying such consideration or gratuity.

H.    “Sexual encounter center” means any business, agency or person who, for any form or consideration or gratuity, provides a place where three or more persons, not all members of the same family, may congregate, assemble, or associate for the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities or exposing specified anatomical areas.

1.    Any other business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment whose dominant or predominant character and theme is the depiction of the statutorily enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas.

2.    For purposes of this section, “specified sexual activities” includes the following:

a.    Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation or unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following depicted sexually oriented acts or conduct: analingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunninlingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or

b.    Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or

c.    Use of human or animal masturbation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, ejaculation; or

d.    Fondling or touching nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or

e.    Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or

f.    Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other contact with an animal by a human being; or

g.    Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation.

3.    For purposes of this section, “specified anatomical areas” shall include the following:

a.    Less than completely and opaquely covered (1) human genitals, pubic region; (2) buttocks, and (3) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and

b.    Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. (Ord. 626 §2, 1984)

5.08.030 Location restrictions.
A.    In those land use districts where the adult entertainment businesses regulated by this chapter would otherwise be permitted uses, it is unlawful to establish any such adult entertainment business if the location is:

1.    Within five hundred feet of any area zoned for residential use; or

2.    Within one thousand feet of any other adult entertainment business; or

3.    Within one thousand feet of any public or private school, park, playground, public building, church, any noncommercial establishment operated by a bona fide religious organization or any establishment likely to be used by minors.

B.    The establishment or any adult entertainment business includes the opening of such business as a new business, the relocation of such business, or the conversion of an existing business location to any adult entertainment business use.

C.    Waiver of Locational Provisions. Any property owner or his authorized agent may apply to the city council for a waiver of any locational provision contained in this chapter. The city council, after a hearing, may waive any locational provision, if all the following findings are made:

1.    That the proposed use will not be contrary to the public interest or injurious to nearby properties, and that the spirit and intent of this section will be observed; or

2.    That the proposed use will not enlarge or encourage the development of a “skid row” area; or

3.    That the establishment of an additional regulated use in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any program of urban renewal; or

4.    That all applicable regulations of the city zoning ordinance will be observed. (Ord. 626 §§3, 4, 1984)

5.08.040 Violation--Penalty.
Any person violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Any violation of this chapter which is committed and continues from day to day, constitutes a separate offense for each and every day during which such violation is committed or continued. (Ord. 626 §6, 1984)

Chapter 5.12
BINGO
Sections:

5.12.010    Purpose.

5.12.020    Definitions.

5.12.030    Operational eligibility.

5.12.040    Location of games.

5.12.050    Personnel restrictions.

5.12.060    Financial interest prohibitions.

5.12.070    Use of proceeds.

5.12.080    Payment of expenses--Recordkeeping.

5.12.090    Limitation on prize moneys.

5.12.100    Hours of operation.

5.12.110    Participants to be present.

5.12.120    Licensing requirements.

5.12.130    License fees.

5.12.140    Suspension or revocation--Hearing.

5.12.150    Violation--Penalty.

5.12.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to legalize bingo games for charity pursuant to Section 19 of Article IV of the State Constitution. (Ord. 559 Art. I, 1978)

5.12.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, “bingo” means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols selected at random. (Ord. 559 §2.01, 1978)

5.12.030 Operational eligibility.
Bingo games shall be conducted only by organizations exempted from the payment of the bank corporation tax by Sections 23701(a), 23701(b), 23701(d), 23701(e), 23701(f), 23701(g) and 23701(1) of the Revenue and Taxation Code and by mobile home park and home owners associations and senior citizens organizations; provided the proceeds of such games are used only for charitable purposes. (Ord. 559 S2.02, 1978)

5.12.040 Location of games.
An organization authorized to conduct bingo games pursuant to Section 5.12.030 of this chapter, shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, and which property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that the property owned or leased by the organization be used or leased exclusively by such organization. (Ord. 559 §2.03, 1978)

5.12.050 Personnel restrictions.
A.    A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the authorized organization which organized it. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game. Only the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game shall operate such game, or participate in the promotion, supervision, or any other phase of such game.

B.    It is a violation of this chapter for a licensee to employ or permit any person to participate in the operation or conducting of any bingo game if such person has been convicted of a felony or of any violation of the state gambling laws. (Ord. 559 §S2.04, 2.08, 1978)

5.12.060 Financial interest prohibitions.
No individual corporation, partnership or other legal entity except the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game. (Ord. 559 §2.05, 1978)

5.12.070 Use of proceeds.
With respect to organizations exempt from payment of the bank and corporation tax by Section 23701(d) of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such profits shall be used only for charitable purposes. With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct bingo games pursuant to this section, all proceeds derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes, except as set out in Section 5.12.080 of this chapter. (Ord. 559 §2.06(part), 1978)

5.12.080 Payment of expenses--Recordkeeping.
A.    The proceeds may be used for prizes.

B.    A portion of the proceeds, not to exceed twenty percent of the proceeds after the deduction for prizes, or one thousand dollars per month, whichever is less, may be used for rental of property, overhead and administrative expenses.

C.    By the fifth day of each month a copy of the records of, receipts, disbursements and special fund balance for the preceding month’s games shall be delivered to the City Hall. If games are held less frequently than at least once per month, the above records shall be delivered not later than ten days following the games. All records and bank accounts pertaining to the bingo games shall be open to inspection by the police department at all reasonable times. (Ord. 685, 1988; Ord. 559 §2.06(part), 1978)

5.12.090 Limitation on prize moneys.
The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo games shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held. (Ord. 559 §2.12, 1978)

5.12.100 Hours of operation.
No bingo game shall be conducted between the hours of twelve midnight and ten a.m. (Ord. 559 §2.11, 1978)

5.12.110 Participants to be present.
No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game, unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. No minor shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. A “minor” is a person under the age of eighteen years. (Ord. 559 §2.10, 1978)

5.12.120 Licensing requirements.
A.    Only an organization licensed by the police department may conduct bingo games.

B.    Application for licenses shall be made to the city on forms provided. In the discretion of the police chief any person in an organization who expects to or does participate in the conduct of the games shall submit to being fingerprinted and photographed by the police department.

C.    The license shall be renewed annually. (Ord. 559 S2.07, 1978)

5.12.130 License fees.
A.    An annual license fee in the amount set forth below shall be payable upon application for the license and on the date of each annual renewal thereof:

1.    More than two games per month, fifty dollars;

2.    Two games per month, thirty-five dollars;

3.    One game per month, twenty-five dollars;

4.    Less than one game per month, fifteen dollars.

B.    If an application for a license is denied, one-half of any license fee paid shall be refunded to the organization. (Ord. 559 §2.09, 1978)

5.12.140 Suspension or revocation--Hearing.
A.    The chief of police is authorized to temporarily suspend or revoke the license of any licensee under this section whenever it appears to him that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter.

B.    Upon suspension or revocation the chief of police shall within ten days, file with the city council written charges against the licensee.

C.    The city council shall set the matter for hearing and notify the licensee at least ten days before the hearing.

D.    The city council shall have the power to revoke or temporarily suspend the license for any such period as it may deem proper, as the facts may warrant. (Ord. 559 §§4.01--4.04, 1978)

5.12.150 Violation--Penalty.
A.    Any person who receives or pays a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game authorized by this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable by a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars, which fine shall be deposited in the general fund of the city.

B.    Any other violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment.

C.    Any violation of this provisions of this chapter shall be cause for immediately suspension or revocation of the license pursuant to Section 5.12.140 of this chapter. (Ord. 559 §§3.01--3.03, 1978)

Chapter 5.16
CABLE TELEVISION
Sections:

ARTICLE I. DEFINITIONS

5.16.010    Definitions.

ARTICLE II. LICENSING REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES

5.16.020    License required.

5.16.030    Scope of license.

5.16.040    License application.

5.16.050    License application--Approval.

5.16.060    License--Conditions.

5.16.070    License--Renewal.

5.16.080    License--Effective date.

5.16.090    License acceptance--Effect.

5.16.100    License--Term--Forfeiture.

5.16.110    License--Payments.

5.16.120    License--Transferability or assignability.

5.16.130    Bond required.

5.16.140    Insurance requirements.

5.16.150    Inspection of property and records.

5.16.160    Financial statement and inspection.

5.16.170    Public use priority.

5.16.180    Compliance with applicable statutes and agreements.

5.16.190    Nonliability of city.

5.16.200    Eminent domain.

5.16.210    Requiring of improvements.

5.16.220    Resolution of disputes.

ARTICLE III. CONSTRUCTION, INSTALLATION AND SERVICE

5.16.230    Commencement of construction.

5.16.240    Location of facilities--Underground.

5.16.250    Removal and abandonment of property.

5.16.260    Removal or relocation of facilities.

5.16.270    Failure to perform street work.

5.16.280    Operational standards.

5.16.290    Office required.

5.16.300    Refusal of service prohibited.

5.16.310    Subscriber contracts.

5.16.320    Installation charges--Adjustment of rates.

5.16.330    Sale of television receivers by licensee prohibited.

5.16.340    Effect of annexation.

5.16.350    Unauthorized connections--Tampering--Prohibited.

5.16.360    Violation--Penalty.

ARTICLE IV. PEG CHANNEL

5.16.400    Provision of channel.

5.16.410    Compliance with the Digital Infrastructure and Competition Act of 2006.

5.16.420    PEG facilities fee.

ARTICLE I. DEFINITIONS

5.16.010 Definitions.
Unless otherwise indicated in this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:

A.    "CATV" means a cable distribution system and any services or signals, television, radio or otherwise, capable of being delivered by the cable distribution system, and shall include, without limitation, a community antenna television system consisting of antenna, cables, wires, wave guides or other conductors, equipment or facilities designed, constructed or used for the purpose of providing or creating television or radio signals through its facilities. "CATV" does not mean or include the transmission of any special program or event for which a separate charge is made to the subscriber in the manner commonly known and referred to as "pay television" and the licensee expressly agrees that no entertainment programs shall be provided in this manner.

B.    "City" and "council" means the city of Lakeport and the city council of the city of Lakeport.

C.    "Gross annual receipts" means any and all compensation and other consideration in any form whatever and any contributing grant or subsidy received directly or indirectly by a licensee from subscribers or users in payment for television or FM radio signals, or service received within the city. "Gross annual receipts" does not include any taxes on services furnished by the licensee imposed directly on any subscriber or user by any governmental unit and collected by the licensee for such governmental unit.

D.    "License" means and includes any nonexclusive authorization granted pursuant to this chapter in terms of a license, permit or otherwise to construct, operate and maintain a CATV system in the city.

E.    "Licensee" means the person, firm or corporation to whom or which a license, under this chapter, is granted by the council and the lawful successor or assignee of said person, firm or corporation, but shall not include a telephone company, whose facilities are constructed, operated and maintained pursuant to its state-granted telephone franchise, furnishing a licensee hereunder with distribution channels for use in a CATV system. No provision of this chapter shall be deemed or construed as requiring the granting of a license hereunder to a telephone company furnishing such a channel service.

F.    “Property of licensee” means all property constructed, installed, operated or maintained by a licensee under the authority of a nonexclusive license issued pursuant to this chapter.

G.    “Service area” means the area in the city in which a licensee is authorized, pursuant to this chapter, to construct, maintain and operate a CATV system.

H.    “Street” means the surface of and the space above and below any public street, highways, alleys, public properties or public easements of the city, now or hereafter existing as such within the city.

I.    “Subscriber” means any person or entity receiving for any purpose the CATV service of a licensee. (Ord. 465 Art. 1 §1, 1971)

ARTICLE II. LICENSING REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES

5.16.020 License required.
A.    No person, firm or corporation shall establish, operate or carry on the business of distributing to any persons in this city, any television signals or radio signals by means of a CATV system, unless a license therefor has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and unless such license is in full force and effect; also, no person, firm or corporation shall construct, install or maintain within any street in the city, or within any other public property of the city, or within any privately owned area within the city which has not yet become a public street, but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street or any tentative subdivision map approved by the city, any equipment or facilities for distributing any television signals or radio signals through a CATV system, unless a license authorizing such use of such street or property or area has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and unless such license is in full force and effect.

B.    Preexisting and operating CATV systems must apply for a license under this chapter within sixty days from the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

C.    Nonexclusive licenses to construct, operate and maintain CATV systems within all or any portion of the area of the city may be granted by the council to any persons, firms, or corporations whether operating under existing licenses or not, who or which offer to furnish and provide such systems under and pursuant to the terms and provisions of this chapter.

D.    No provision of this chapter shall be deemed or construed as to require the granting of a license when in the opinion of the council it is in the public interest to restrict the number of licenses to one or more for a proposed service area or not to grant any licenses for a proposed service area. Neither the granting of any nonexclusive license hereunder, nor any of the provisions contained herein, shall be construed to prevent the city from granting any identical, or similar, nonexclusive license to any person, firm or corporation within all or any portion of the city. (Ord. 465 Art. 6, §1, Art. 1 §2, 1971)

5.16.030 Scope of license.
A.    Any license granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall authorize and permit the licensee to engage in the business of operating and providing a CATV system in the city, and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along any public street, where the city’s interest therein will support the grant of license, such poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to the CATV system; and in addition to use, operate and provide similar facilities or properties rented or leased from other persons, firms or corporations, including but not limited to any public utility or other licensee permitted to do business in the city.

B.    The granting of a license pursuant to this chapter shall not be construed as permission or license to enter on, occupy or otherwise utilize private property without the expressed consent of the owner or agent in possession thereof. (Ord. 465 Art. 1 §3, 1971)

5.16.040 License application.
A.    An application for a license under this chapter shall be in writing and accompanied by a payment to the city of two hundred fifty dollars to reimburse it for expenses incurred in connection with processing the application and shall contain the following information:

1.    The name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the name and address of each partner shall also be set forth. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall also state the names and addresses of its directors, main office, major stockholders and associates, and the names and addresses of parent and subsidiary companies;

2.    A statement and description of the CATV system proposed to be constructed, installed, maintained or operated by the applicant; the proposed location of such system and its various components; the manner in which applicant proposes to construct, install, maintain and operate the same, and particularly, the extent and manner in which existing or future poles or other facilities of other public utilities will be used for such system.

3.    A description, in detail, of the public streets, public places and proposed public streets within which applicant proposes or seeks authority to construct, install, or maintain any CATV equipment or facilities; a detailed description of the equipment or facilities proposed to be constructed, installed or maintained therein; and the proposed specific location thereof.

4.    A statement or schedule in a form approved by the city of proposed rates and charges to subscribers for installation and services, and a copy of proposed service agreement between the licensee and its subscribers shall accompany the application.

a.    The licensee shall provide service to all subscribers within the boundaries of the city as such boundaries are now, or as changed by annexation hereafter. The licensee shall provide a free initial service installation or hookup for all residential users, if the same is applied for during the period of construction of the portion of the system serving such applicant, or within sixty days of the time of the initial turnon of such portion of the system.

b.    Except as limited in this section, the initial service connection shall be made upon payment of such charge therefor, as shall be approved by the city council upon its approval of rates and charges to be made by licensee, and each additional outlet shall be provided upon application at such rate as shall be so approved.

5.    A copy of any contract, if existing, between the applicant and any public utility providing for the use of facilities of such public utility such as poles, lines or conduits;

6.    A statement setting forth all agreements and understandings whether written, oral or implied, existing between the applicant and any person, firm or corporation with respect to the proposed license or the proposed CATV operation. If a license is granted to a person, firm or corporation posing as a front or as the representative of another person, firm or corporation, and such information is not disclosed in the original application, such license shall be deemed void and of no force and effect whatsoever;

7.    A financial statement prepared by a certified public accountant or public accountant satisfactory to the city council, showing applicant’s financial status and his financial ability to complete the construction and installation of the proposed CATV system.

8.    The city council may at any time demand, and applicant shall provide such supplementary, additional or other information as the city council may deem reasonably necessary to determine whether the requested license should be granted.

B.    The city council may, by advertisement or any other means, solicit and call for offers and applications for CATV licenses, and may determine and fix any date upon or after which the same shall be received by the city, or the date before which the same must be received, or the date after which the same shall not be received, and may make any other determination and specify any other times, terms, conditions or limitations respecting the soliciting, calling for, making and receiving of such offers and applications, in addition to the information required pursuant to this section, provided that the city council shall not be required to solicit or call for such offers or applications and may receive or refuse to receive any of the same, solicited, called for, or otherwise, as the city council may elect. (Ord. 465 Art. 5 §1, 1971)

5.16.050 License application--Approval.
Upon consideration of any such application, the city council may refuse to grant the requested license, or the city council may by resolution grant a license for a CATV system to any such applicant as may appear from said application to be in its opinion best qualified to render proper and efficient CATV service to television viewers and subscribers in the proposed service area. The city council’s decision in the matter shall be final. If favorably considered, the application submitted shall constitute and form part of the license as granted. (Ord. 465 Art. 5 §2, 1971)

5.16.060 License--Conditions.
A.    Any license granted pursuant to this chapter shall include the following conditions:

The CATV system herein licensed shall be used and operated solely and exclusively for the purpose expressly authorized by this chapter and no other purpose whatsoever.

B.    Inclusion of the foregoing statement in any such license shall not be deemed to limit the authority of the city council to include any other reasonable condition, limitation or restriction which it may deem necessary to impose in connection with such license pursuant to the authority conferred by this chapter. (Ord. 465 Art. 5 §3, 1971)

5.16.070 License--Renewal.
Upon the expiration of any license granted under this chapter, the licensee may apply to renew its said license in the same manner as herein provided for initial application and the city may solicit and call for offers or applications by others than the licensee; provided, however, that the city council may at its option waive compliance with any or all of the requirements of Section 5.16.040 of this chapter for the application of the original license hereunder. (Ord. 465 Art. 5 §4, 1971)

5.16.080 License--Effective date.
No license granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall become effective unless and until the resolution granting same has become effective, and, in addition, unless and until all things required in this section and Sections 5.16.130 and 5.16.140 of this chapter are done and completed, all of such things being declared to be conditions precedent to the effectiveness of any such license granted hereunder. In the event any of such things are not done and completed in the time and manner required, the city council may declare the license null and void. (Ord. 465 Art. 5 §5, 1971)

5.16.090 License acceptance--Effect.
Within thirty days after the date of the resolution awarding a license, or within such extended period of time as the city council in its discretion may authorize, the licensee shall file with the city clerk of the city his written acceptance, in form satisfactory to the city attorney, of the license, together with the bond and insurance policies, and his agreement to be bound by and to comply with and to do all things required of him by the provisions of this chapter and the license. Such acceptance and agreement shall be acknowledgment by the licensee before a notary public and shall, in form and content, be satisfactory to and approved by the city attorney. (Ord. 465 Art. 5 §6, 1971)

5.16.100 License--Term--Forfeiture.
A.    No license granted by the city council shall be for a term longer than fifteen years following the date of acceptance of such license by the licensee, or renewal thereof.

B.    Any material neglect, failure or refusal to comply with any of the terms or conditions of this chapter or any license granted pursuant thereto which are in licensee’s reasonable power to control, including mutually agreed to changes or additions thereto, during the term of a license by licensee, may be grounds for forfeiture of the license granted by this chapter; provided, however, that the city council shall give licensee at least twenty days’ written notice of its intention to hold a hearing regarding such neglect, failure or refusal. The aforementioned notice shall specifically state the precise neglect, failure or refusal which is to be the subject of the hearing, and licensee shall be given the opportunity to appear at the hearing and present its position regarding the subject matter of the hearing.

C.    The city council may, in its discretion, upon the evidence presented at the hearing, establish a reasonable time within which any deficiencies must be remedied, if any are deemed by the city council to exist. If the deficiencies are not remedied within the time specified by the city council, the city council may grant extensions, or, may thereupon declare the license forfeited. In the event of forfeiture, the licensee shall remove its equipment from the streets within the city within six months after receipt of notice of the council’s declaration that the license has been forfeited. Notice may be given and will be deemed received for the purpose of this section, when deposited in the mail, addressed to the licensee at its address contained in the files of the city council. (Ord. 465 Art. 1 §5, 1971)

5.16.110 License--Payments.
The licensee of any license granted under this chapter shall pay to the city, during the life of such license, a fixed percentage of the gross annual receipts of the licensee as provided in the licensee’s license. The license may provide that at the end of one-half the term of the license, the percentage payable to the city may be renegotiated; provided, however, the percentage shall not exceed any maximum percentage which may be set by law. Such payment by the licensee to the city shall be made annually, or as otherwise provided in the licensee’s license, by delivery of the same to the city clerk, or such other official as the city council may designate. (Ord. 465 Art. 1 S6, 1971)

5.16.120 License--Transferability or assignability.
A licensee shall not sell, transfer, lease, dispose of, or assign its license or any rights thereunder, including any beneficial interest or right to operate thereunder, by voluntary sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, or by operation of law without the prior written consent of the city council. (Ord. 465 Art. 2 S2, 1971)

5.16.130 Bond required.
A.    The licensee shall, concurrently with the filing of an acceptance of award of any license granted under this chapter, file with the city clerk of the city, and at all times thereafter maintain in full force and effect for the term of such license or any renewal thereof, at licensee’s sole expense, a corporate surety bond in a company, and in a form approved by the city attorney, in the amount of five thousand dollars, renewable annually and conditioned upon the faithful performance of licensee, and upon the further condition that in the event licensee shall fail to comply with any one or more of the provisions of this chapter, or of any license issued to the licensee hereunder, there shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety of such bond, any damages or loss suffered by the city as a result thereof, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the licensee as prescribed hereby which may be in default plus a reasonable allowance for attorney’s fees and costs, up to the full amount of the bonds; said condition to be a continuing obligation for the duration of such license and any renewal thereof, and thereafter until the licensee has liquidated all of its obligations with the city that may have arisen from the acceptance of said license or renewal by the licensee, or from its exercise of any privilege therein granted. The bond shall provide that thirty days’ prior written notice of intention not to renew, cancellation or material change be given to the city.

B.    Neither the provisions of this section, nor any bond accepted by the city pursuant hereto, nor any damages recovered by the city thereunder, shall be construed to excuse faithful performance of the licensee or limit the liability of the licensee under any license issued hereunder or for damages, whether to the full amount of the bond or otherwise. (Ord. 465 Art. 4 §1, 1971)

5.16.140 Insurance requirements.
A.    The licensee shall, concurrently with the filing of an acceptance of award of any license granted under this chapter, furnish to the city, and file with the city clerk, and at all times during the existence of any license granted hereunder, maintain in full force and effect, at its own cost and expense, a liability insurance policy in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars, in a company approved by and in a form satisfactory to the city attorney, indemnifying and saving harmless the city, its officers and employees from and against any and all claims, demands, actions, suits, and proceedings by others, against all liability to others, including but not limited to any liability for damages by reason of, or arising out of, any failure by the licensee to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors or licensees of programs to be delivered by the licensee’s CATV system and against any loss, cost, expense and damages resulting therefrom, including reasonable attorney’s fees, arising out of the exercise or enjoyment of its license, irrespective of the amount of the comprehensive liability insurance policy required hereunder. This insurance provision may be satisfied by proper endorsement to the comprehensive liability insurance policy required by subsection B of this section.

B.    Comprehensive Liability Insurance. The licensee shall, concurrently with the filing of an acceptance of award of any license granted under this chapter, furnish to the city, and file with the city clerk, and at all times during the existence of any license granted under this chapter, maintain in full force and effect at its own cost and expense, a general comprehensive liability insurance policy, in protection of the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, in a company approved by and in the form satisfactory to the city attorney, protecting the city and all persons against liability for loss or damage for personal injury, death, property damage, and inverse condemnation, or any combination of these, and regardless of whether or not such liability, claim or damage was unforeseeable at any time before the city approved plans for the installation of license property or after the installation of license property, occasioned by the operations of license under such license, with minimum liability limits of three hundred thousand dollars for personal injury or death of two or more persons in any one occurrence, and fifty thousand dollars for damage to property resulting from any one occurrence.

C.    Additional Insured, Cancellation and Nonconditional. The policies or certificates of insurance representing such policies, mentioned in the foregoing subsection, shall name the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, as additional insured, and shall contain a provision that a written notice of cancellation or reduction in coverage of the policy shall be delivered to the city ten days in advance of the effective date thereof; if such instance is provided by a policy which also covers licensee or any other entity or person other than those named above, then such policy shall contain the standard cross-liability endorsement. The promise and agreement in this section is not conditioned or dependent on whether or not the city has approved any plan(s) or specification(s) in connection with this license, or has insurance or other indemnification covering any of these matters.

D.    By accepting a license, the licensee agrees to save and hold harmless, as set forth in this section, the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees from any and all claims, costs, demands, causes of action, suits, loss, expenses, or other detriment or liability arising from or out of the operations of the licensee from any cause whatsoever, including inverse condemnation and in addition to, and not in lieu of, the surety bond and liability insurance. (Ord. 465 Art. 4 §2, 1971)

5.16.150 Inspection of property and records.
A.    At all reasonable times, the licensee shall permit any duly authorized representative of the city to examine all property of the licensee, together with any appurtenant property of the licensee situated within or without the city, and to examine and transcribe any and all maps and other records kept or maintained by the licensee or under its control which deal with the operations, affairs, transactions or property of the licensee with respect to its license. If any such maps or records are not kept in the city, or upon reasonable request made available in the city, and if the city council shall determine that an examination thereof is necessary or appropriate, then all travel and maintenance expense necessarily incurred in making such examination shall be paid by the licensee.

B.    The licensee shall prepare and furnish to the director of public works and the city attorney, at the times and in the form prescribed by either of said officers, such reports with respect to its operations, affairs, transactions or property, as may be reasonably necessary or appropriate to the performance of any of the rights, functions or duties of the city, or any of its officers in connection with the license.

C.    The licensee shall at all times make and keep in the city full and complete plans and records showing the exact location of all CATV system equipment installed or in use in streets and other public places in the city.

D.    The licensee shall file with the director of public works, upon his demand, on or before the last day of March of each year, a current map or set of maps drawn to scale showing all CATV system equipment installed and in place in streets and other public places in the city.

E.    When any portion of the CATV system is to be installed on public utility poles and facilities, certified copies of the agreements for such joint use of poles and facilities shall be filed with the director of public works. (Ord. 465 Art. 4 §3, 1971)

5.16.160 Financial statement and inspection.
A.    The licensee shall file with the city within sixty days after the expiration of any fiscal year or portion thereof during which such license is in force, a financial statement prepared by a certified public accountant or public accountant showing in detail the gross annual receipts, as defined in this chapter, of licensee during the preceding calendar year or portion thereof.

B.    If shall be the duty of the licensee to pay to the city within fifteen days after the time for filing such statements, the sum prescribed in this chapter or any unpaid balance thereof for the calendar year or portion thereof covered by such statements.

C.    The city shall have the right to inspect the licensee’s records showing the gross receipts from which its license payments are computed and the right of audit and recomputation of any and all amounts paid under this chapter.

D.    No acceptance of any payments shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the city may have for further or additional sums payable under this chapter or for performance or any other obligation hereunder.

E.    In the event that such audit conducted by the city shall show any substantial error or misstatement of facts which entitle the city to additional payments, then licensee shall reimburse the city for its total costs incurred in conducting such audit. (Ord. 465 Art. 1 §7, 1971)

5.16.170 Public use priority.
No privilege or exemption is granted or conferred by any license granted under this chapter except those specifically prescribed in this chapter. Any privilege claimed under a license granted pursuant to this chapter in any street shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of the street or any subsequent occupancy of the street for public purpose. (Ord. 465 Art. 2 §1, 1971)

5.16.180 Compliance with applicable statutes and agreements.
Any license granted pursuant to this chapter is subject to all provisions, regulations and conditions prescribed by federal, state, county and local law heretofore and hereafter enacted or established during the term of any license granted, and shall be in addition to any electrical or encroachment permit required by this code. Any such license granted shall not relieve the licensee of any obligation involved in obtaining pole space from any department of the county, city or utility company, or from others maintaining poles in streets. (Ord. 465 Art. 2 S3, 1971)

5.16.190 Nonliability of city.
The license shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city for any loss, cost, expense, or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of this chapter, or of any license issued hereunder, or because of its enforcement or for the termination or forfeiture of any license as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 465 Art. 2 §4, 1971)

5.16.200 Eminent domain.
Nothing in this chapter shall in any way or to any extent, impair or affect the right of the city to acquire licensee’s property either by purchase or through exercise of the right of eminent domain, and nothing herein shall be construed to contract away or to modify or abridge the city’s right of eminent domain in respect to any licensee. (Ord. 465 Art. 2 §5, 1971)

5.16.210 Requiring of improvements.
During the term of any license granted, the city may require licensee to make reasonable improvements in its construction, operation and maintenance, and if said improvements are not diligently made, the matter may be grounds for forfeiture. (Ord. 465 Art. 2 §6, 1971)

5.16.220 Resolution of disputes.
The city council may do all things necessary and convenient in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this chapter and may determine any question of fact which may arise during the existence of any license granted under this chapter. The city council may adjust, settle or compromise any controversy or cancel any charge arising from the operations of any licensee or from any provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 465 Art. 2 §7, 1971)

ARTICLE III. CONSTRUCTION, INSTALLATION AND SERVICE

5.16.230 Commencement of construction.
A.    Within thirty days after acceptance of any license the licensee shall proceed with due diligence to obtain all necessary permits and authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business, including, but not limited to, any utility joint use attachment agreements, microwave carrier license, and any other permits, licenses and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of CATV systems, or their associated microwave transmission facilities.

B.    Within ninety days after obtaining all necessary permits, licenses, and authorizations, licensee shall commence construction and installation of the CATV system.

C.    Within one hundred eighty days after the commencement of construction and installation of the system, licensee shall proceed to render service to subscribers, and the completion of the construction and installation shall be pursued with reasonable diligence thereafter, so that all channels represented by licensee to be ultimately available to subscribers, shall in fact be available to all subscribers within the city within one year from the issuance and acceptance of the license.

D.    Failure on the part of the licensee to commence and diligently pursue each of the foregoing requirements and to complete each of the matters set forth herein within the time provided, shall be grounds for termination of such license.

E.    The city council in its discretion may extend the time for the commencement and completion of construction and installation for an additional period. (Ord. 465 Art. 3 §1, 1971)

5.16.240 Location of facilities--Underground.
A.    Any poles, wires, cable lines, conduits or other properties of the licensee to be constructed or installed in streets, shall be so constructed or installed only at such locations and in such manner as shall be approved by the director of public works and shall conform to all applicable laws including the city’s encroachment ordinance.

B.    The licensee shall not install or erect any facilities or apparatus in or on other public property, places, or rights-of-way, or within any privately owned area within the city which has not yet become a public street, but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision map approved by the city except those installed or erected upon existing or future public utility facilities, without obtaining the prior written approval of the director of public works and the owner-subdivider.

C.    In those areas and portions of the city where the transmission or distribution facilities of both the public utility providing telephone service and those of the utility providing electric service are underground or hereafter may be placed underground, then the licensee immediately upon written request by the director of public works, shall likewise construct, or reconstruct, operate and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities underground. For the purpose of this subsection, “underground” includes a partial underground system, e.g., streamlining. Amplifiers in licensee’s transmission and distribution lines may be in appropriate housings upon the surface of the ground as approved by the director of public works. The city shall not, in any manner, be responsible for any costs incurred by any licensee in placing his property underground. (Ord. 465 Art. 3 §2, 1971)

5.16.250 Removal and abandonment of property.
A.    In the event that the use of any part of the CATV system is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of six months, or in the event such system or property has been installed in any street or public place without complying with the requirements of this chapter, or the license has been terminated, cancelled or has expired, the licensee shall promptly, upon being given ten days’ notice, remove from the streets or public places all such property and poles of such system other than any which the director of public works may permit to be abandoned in place. In the event of such removal, the licensee shall promptly restore the street or other area from which such property has been removed, to a condition satisfactory to the director of public works.

B.    Any property of the licensee remaining in place six months after the termination, forfeiture or expiration of the license, shall be considered permanently abandoned. The director of public works may extend such time not to exceed an additional thirty days.

C.    Any property of the licensee to be abandoned in place shall be abandoned in such manner as the director of public works shall prescribe. Subject to the provisions of any utility joint use attachment agreement upon permanent abandonment of the property, the licensee shall submit to the director of public works an instrument in writing, to be approved by the city council, transferring to the city the ownership of such property. Any mortgage or security interest existing with regard to any abandoned property shall not prevent the city from removing said property, and the cost of such removal shall constitute a first lien on the property and any other mortgage or security interest shall be subordinate to said lien. The licensee in creating a mortgage or security interest in all instances, shall clearly state that such interest is subject to all the provisions of this chapter and is specifically subject to this provision with regard to abandoned property. (Ord. 465 Art. 3 §3, 1971)

5.16.260 Removal or relocation of facilities.
The licensee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same street or other public place, or remove from the street or other public place, any property of the licensee when required by the director of public works by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, signal lines, and tracks or drains, water pipes, power lines or any other type of structures or improvements by public agencies; provided, however, that the licensee shall in all cases have the privileges and be subject to the obligations to abandon any property of the licensee in place, as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 465 Art. 3 §4, 1971)

5.16.270 Failure to perform street work.
Upon failure of the licensee to commence, pursue, or complete any work required by law or by the provisions of this chapter or by its license to be done in any street or other public place, within the time prescribed, and to the satisfaction of the director of public works, the director of public works may, at his option, cause such work to be done and the licensee shall pay to the city the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the director or public works to the licensees within thirty days after receipt of such itemized report. (Ord. 465 Art. 3 §5, 1971)

5.16.280 Operational standards.
The CATV system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the highest and best-accepted standards of the industry to the effect that subscribers shall receive the highest possible service. In determining the satisfactory extent of such standard, the following, among others, shall be considered:

A.    That the system be installed using all band equipment capable of passing the entire VHF and FM spectrum, and that it have the further capability of converting UHF for distribution to subscribers of the VHF band; provided, however, that licensee shall not convert the UHF signal of any nonprofit translator organization without its written agreement;

B.    That the system, as installed, be capable of passing standard color TV signals without the introduction of material degradation on color fidelity and intelligence;

C.    That the system and all equipment be designed and rated for twenty-four-hour-per-day continuous operation;

D.    That the system provides a nominal signal level of 1,200 microvolts at 75 ohms at the input terminals of each TV receiver;

E.    That the system signal-to-noise ratio is not less than 44 decibels;

F.    That hum modulation of the picture signal is less than five percent;

G.    That the system use components having a VSWR of 1.4 or less;

H.    The operation standards set forth in this section shall be modified to the extent necessary to reflect the signal level available at the respective system antenna sites and normal signal loss experienced in the distribution system assuming that the distribution system is at the time of installation installed and maintained with the highest and best acceptable standards of the industry and is at all times properly maintained.

I.    Licensee shall maintain a good and sufficient quality in its transmission of TV signals; in the event that the quality control is deficient, or below standard, then and in such event, it shall, pursuant to Section 5.16.100 of this chapter and this subsection, be the subject for forfeiture of the license, or, upon hearing pursuant to notice of setting and at the discretion of the city council licensee may be required to prorate service charges for the time proper signal is not provided, if such failure extends beyond a period of twenty-four hours, and the same is caused by improper or negligent operation or maintenance. For the purpose hereof, said council may require the attendance at any such hearing of representatives of the licensee.

J.    The licensee shall provide eight stations as a minimum service to subscribers. All of the said minimum number of stations shall be operable and in use by subscribers within one year from the date of issuance of any licenses hereunder unless otherwise restricted or regulated by the Federal Communications Commission. (Ord. 475 §1(part), 1972; Ord. 465 Art. 4 §4, 1971)

5.16.290 Office required.
The licensee shall maintain an office in the city, and at a location which subscribers may call without incurring added message or toll charges, so that CATV maintenance service shall be promptly available to subscribers. (Ord. 465 Art. 4 §5, 1971)

5.16.300 Refusal of service prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation in the city shall be refused service; provided, however, that the licensee shall not be required to provide service to any subscriber who does not pay the applicable connection fee or monthly service charge. (Ord. 465 Art. ‘4 §6, 1971)

5.16.310 Subscriber contracts.
A.    Before providing antenna service to any subscriber, the licensee shall, if subscriber contracts are required by licensee, obtain a signed contract from the subscriber containing a provision substantially as follows:

Subscriber understands that in providing antenna service (Licensee) is making use of public rights of way within the city of Lakeport, and that the continued use of these public rights of way is in no way guaranteed. In the event the continued use of such rights of way is denied to Licensee for any reason, Licensee will make every reasonable effort to provide service over alternate routes. Subscriber agrees he will make no claim nor undertake any action against the City of Lakeport, its officers, or its employees, if the service to be provided by Licensee hereunder is interrupted or discontinued.

B.    The form of the licensee’s contract with its subscribers shall be subject to approval of the city with respect to the inclusion of this section. (Ord. 465 Art. 4 S7, 1971)

5.16.320 Installation charges--Adjustment of rates.
A.    Licensee may make a charge to subscribers for installation or connection to its CATV system and fixed monthly charges.

B.    Modification to rates or charges, or both, may be made by licensee.

C.    No service or schedule of monthly rates or charges therefor shall be made or provided unless the same are first filed with the city clerk. (Ord. 569 §1, 1978: Ord. 465 Art. 1 §4, 1971)

5.16.330 Sale of television receivers by licensee prohibited.
The licensee or any of his employees, during their course of employment, shall not engage in the business of selling or leasing television or other receivers which make use of signals transmitted by its system, nor shall the licensee or any of his employees, during the course of their employment, engage in the repair of such receivers or the sale of parts for the same. (Ord. 465 Art. 6 §3, 1971)

5.16.340 Effect of annexation.
A.    Whenever any portion of the territory covered by this license shall be annexed to, or otherwise become a part of any municipal corporation or of any other city or any other agency or political subdivision of the state, the city’s rights hereunder shall inure to the benefit of such other public body and its appropriate officers.

B.    In the event that any territory shall be hereafter annexed to the city, then and in such event this chapter shall apply to such annexed territory and such changes as may become necessary in such annexed territory shall be made solely at the expense of the licensee, and said annexed territory shall become entitled to all of the rights and privileges herein provided for subscribers within the present territorial limits of the city. (Ord. 465 Art. 6 §5, 1971)

5.16.350 Unauthorized connections--Tampering--Prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation shall make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively, or otherwise, with any part of a licensed CATV system within the incorporated area of this city for the purpose of taking or receiving television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or sound; also, no person, without the consent of the owner, shall tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires or equipment used for distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or sound; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the wiring or facilities necessary to the addition of additional television sets in a dwelling house. (Ord. 465 Art. 6 §2, 1971)

5.16.360 Violation--Penalty.
Any violation of subsection A of Section 5.16.020 or Section 5.16.330 or 5.16.350 of this chapter constitutes a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than thirty days, or both. (Ord. 465 Art. 6 §4, 1971)

ARTICLE IV. PEG CHANNEL

5.16.400 Provision of channel.
All state franchise holders who have been awarded a state video franchise under the California Public Utilities Code Section 5800 et seq. (the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 [the "Act"]) to operate within the unincorporated boundaries of the county of Lake, shall provide capacity for one public, education and governmental (PEG) access channel in accordance with California Public Utilities Code Section 5870. (Ord. 885 §1(part), 2012)

5.16.410 Compliance with the Digital Infrastructure and Competition Act of 2006.
Said state franchise holders shall comply with the provisions of the Act related to PEG access channels, including the following requirements of California Public Utilities Code Section 5870:

A.    The PEG access channel shall all be carried on the basic service tier.

B.    To the extent feasible, the PEG access channel shall not be separated numerically from other channels carried on the basic service tier and the channel numbers for the PEG access channel shall be the same channel numbers used by the incumbent cable operator, unless prohibited by federal law.

C.    After the initial designation of PEG access channel number, the channel number shall not be changed without the agreement of the county, unless the change is required by federal law.

D.    The PEG access capacity provided shall be of similar quality and functionality to that offered by commercial channels on the lowest cost tier of service, unless the signal is provided to the state franchise holder at a lower quality or with less functionality. (Ord. 885 §1(part), 2012)

5.16.420 PEG facilities fee.
A.    State franchise holder shall pay to the county a PEG fee equal to one percent of gross revenues which shall be exclusively used to support the operation of PEG channel facilities.

B.    The county administrative officer shall prescribe financial accountability and reporting standards to which the county’s designated PEG facilities provider shall be subject in order to qualify for receipt of said PEG fees.

C.    State franchise holders shall remit PEG fees in the same manner as franchise fees as set forth in the Act. Each remittance shall be accompanied by a summary detailing how the PEG support fee was calculated.

D.    The PEG fee may be shown as a separate line item on the regular bill of each subscriber.

E.    If a state franchise holder fails to pay the PEG support fee when due, or underpays the proper amount due, the state franchise holder shall pay interest at the rate per year equal to the highest prime lending rate during the period of delinquency, plus one percent of the maximum rate specified by state law. (Ord. 885 §1(part), 2012)

Chapter 5.20
MOBILE CATERING BUSINESSES
Sections:

5.20.010    Mobile catering defined.

5.20.020    Permit required.

5.20.030    Parking regulations.

5.20.040    Location restrictions.

5.20.045    Performance standards.

5.20.050    Grounds for revocation of permit.

5.20.060    Violation--Penalty.

5.20.010 Mobile catering defined.
Mobile catering means any retail sales of food stuffs conducted out of a motor vehicle, wagon or other mobile business unit. (Ord. 809 (part), 2001)

5.20.020 Permit required.
A.    A person shall be required to obtain a mobile catering business license prior to engaging in the mobile catering business in the city.

B.    Prior to the issuance of any mobile catering business license, the applicant for such a license shall furnish to the city, proof of compliance with all applicable state and county health department regulations and provide the city with copies of all required certificates or clearances. (Ord. 809 (part), 2001)

5.20.030 Parking regulations.
Mobile caterers shall be legally parked at all times when stopped to do business in the city. The term “legally parked” as used in this ordinance shall mean a location where the mobile catering unit does not:

A.    Obstruct or interfere with the free flow of pedestrian traffic. In no case shall any mobile catering unit occupy any portion of a public sidewalk;

B.    Obstruct or interfere with the free flow of vehicular traffic;

C.    Obstruct or interfere with the free flow of pedestrian traffic to or from any business, public building, or private residence;

D.    Conflict with the California Vehicle Code or other city parking regulations; or

E.    Create a safety hazard. (Ord. 809 (part), 2001)

5.20.040 Location restrictions.
A.    Mobile caterers shall not stop for business for more than two hours in any one location. Mobile caterers shall maintain a daily location/duration log which shall be available for review by city staff to verify compliance.

1.    Mobile caterers may submit an application for consideration by the city council for an increase in the two-hour limit in one location. Applications for a time limit waiver shall use the prescribed form and be filed with the city clerk, accompanied by the fee set by resolution of the Lakeport city council.

a.    Applications for a time limit waiver shall be for a specific location and must include specific details regarding the timeframe (business days and hours) of the waiver request.

b.    The city council’s decision shall be discretionary and approval of a time waiver request shall be based on the applicant’s conformance with each of the following criteria and findings. The submitted time waiver application shall address each of the following with specific details pertinent to the applicant’s mobile catering business:

i.    There are special circumstances applicable to the applicant’s mobile catering business which create an unusual hardship in terms of the ability to comply with the standard two-hour time limit.

ii.    The approval of the time limit waiver will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or injurious to the property where the mobile catering activities take place or to other properties or businesses in the vicinity.

iii.    Extended-hours mobile catering business activity shall be located a minimum of one hundred twenty feet from the building corner or property line of the nearest permanent restaurant, whichever is closer.

c.    The burden of proof to establish the evidence in support of the criteria and findings set forth above shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant.

B.    The term “location” as used in this subsection shall be defined as the distance of at least one city block from the last location occupied by the mobile catering unit.

C.    Mobile caterers shall not stop to conduct business in or on a street adjacent to any designated city park facility, unless authorized by written consent approved in advance by the city council for a limited time frame only.

D.    Mobile caterers subject to the two-hour time limit shall be located a minimum of sixty feet from the building corner or property line of the nearest permanent restaurant, whichever is closer. (Ord. 890 §1(1), 2013; Ord. 809 (part), 2001)

5.20.045 Performance standards.
A.    All mobile business units used in conjunction with mobile catering activities shall be maintained in good working condition and, if required, shall be legally registered with the California Department of Motor Vehicles.

B.    All signs associated with a mobile catering business shall be affixed to the mobile business unit. Portable or freestanding signs are prohibited.

C.    Equipment, supplies and materials associated with a mobile catering business shall be stored on or within the mobile business unit. No ancillary equipment, supplies or materials shall be displayed in the immediate vicinity of the mobile business unit.

D.    No furniture associated with the operation of a mobile catering business shall be located within the public right-of-way. (Ord. 890 §1(2), 2013)

5.20.050 Grounds for revocation of permit.
A.    The city council shall revoke a mobile catering permit after two convictions for violations of this chapter in any twelve month period.

B.    The city council shall, prior to any revocation, hold a noticed hearing and allow the mobile caterer to show good cause why his or her permit should not be revoked. (Ord. 809 (part), 2001)

5.20.060 Violation--Penalty.
Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed fifty dollars for a first violation; a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars for a second violation of the same provision within one year; and a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars for each additional violation of the same provision within one year. (Ord. 809 (part), 2001)

Chapter 5.24
SOLICITATION
Sections:

5.24.010    Purpose and intent.

5.24.020    Definitions.

5.24.030    Solicitation permit required.

5.24.040    Exemptions.

5.24.050    Application for permit.

5.24.060    Issuance of permit.

5.24.070    Term of permit.

5.24.080    Identification card.

5.24.090    Revocation of permit.

5.24.100    Appeals.

5.24.110    Manner of solicitation and prohibitions.

5.24.120    Violations--Penalties.

5.24.010 Purpose and intent.
A.    The purpose of this chapter is to regulate solicitation in the city to allow residents to protect their peace and tranquility, to allow the free and safe flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, and to deter fraud and other criminal behavior. It is the intent of this chapter to respect the rights of free expression guaranteed by the California and United States Constitutions; to constitute reasonable, content-neutral, time, place and manner restrictions; and to impose the smallest burden on expressive activity necessary to accomplish the objectives of this chapter. This chapter shall be construed in light of this intent.

B.    The exclusion of religious and political motivations from the purposes for solicitation regulated by this chapter is intended to provide greater protection for such expressive activity as required by such judicial decisions as Watchtower Bible & Tract Society of New York, Inc. v. Village of Stratton (2002) 536 U.S. 150, and not to require city officials to determine what does and does not constitute bona fide religious and political motives except as necessary to do so. Accordingly, in the enforcement of this chapter, city officials shall accept claims that activity is politically or religiously motivated unless evidence is obtained demonstrating those claims to be untruthful. (Ord. 907 §1(part), 2016)

5.24.020 Definitions.
Unless it is apparent from the context that another meaning is intended, the following words in this chapter shall have the meaning ascribed to them by this section:

A.    "Charitable" shall mean and include activity, either actual or purported, that is philanthropic, social service, welfare, benevolent, educational, and fraternal--but not religious or political--in character.

B.    "Solicit" and "solicitation" shall mean the request, directly or indirectly, of money, credit, property, financial assistance, patronage or other things of value; hawking, peddling, or vending for charitable or commercial purposes; or offering to perform services for payment. A "solicitation" shall be deemed completed when made, whether or not the person making the same receives any contribution or makes any sale referred to in this subsection. "Solicit" or "solicitation" includes activity conducted door to door, in any place of public accommodation, in any place of business open to the public generally, on city streets and sidewalks, in the public parks, or in any public places. "Solicit" and "solicitation" shall also mean and include the following methods of securing money, patronage, credit, property, financial assistance or any other thing of value:

1.    Any oral or written request;

2.    The distribution, circulation, posting or publishing of any handbill, written advertisement or other publication, unless such handbill or written advertisement has been placed within a business open to the public generally with the express permission of the owner or operator of such business;

3.    The offer, sale or taking of orders for any goods, services, merchandise, wares or other tangible items. (Ord. 907 §1(part), 2016)

5.24.030 Solicitation permit required.
No person shall engage in solicitation, as that term is defined in Section 5.24.020, within the city without having first obtained a permit from the city manager or his or her designee; but when a permit has been issued to any person, the agents and solicitors for such person shall not be required to obtain individual permits. (Ord. 907 §1(part), 2016)

5.24.040 Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to solicitations made upon premises owned or occupied by the organization on whose behalf such solicitation is made. (Ord. 907 §1(part), 2016)

5.24.050 Application for permit.
A.    An application for permit to solicit, or for renewal of such a permit, shall be made to the city manager upon forms prescribed by the city manager and signed under penalty of perjury. The application shall be filed with the city manager at least seven calendar days before a permit to conduct a solicitation may become effective; provided, however, that the city manager may for good cause shown allow the filing of a late application. The city manager shall grant or deny the permit within five business days after the application is made. In the event the city manager fails to act upon a permit within the time prescribed herein, the permit shall be deemed granted.

B.    An application for a new or renewed solicitation permit shall contain at least the following information: address, telephone and other contact information for the applicant; the purpose for which the solicitation is to be made; the total amount of any funds to be raised thereby, if any; the use or disposition to be made of any receipts; an outline of the method or methods to be used in conducting the solicitations, including dates and times for the commencement, conduct and termination of the solicitation; a statement to the effect that if a permit is granted, it will not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the city or by any department, officer or employee thereof; the names of other cities or unincorporated areas in which the person registering has solicited or proposes to solicit within the month preceding or following the period in which the person seeks to solicit in the city; and if the applicant is unable to provide any of the foregoing information, the reasons why such information is not available.

C.    If, while any application is pending, or during the term of any permit, there is any change in fact, policy, or method that would alter the information given in the application, the applicant shall notify the city manager in writing thereof within twenty-four hours after such change; provided, that notice need not be given the city manager other than on a day when City Hall is open for business. (Ord. 907 §1(part), 2016)

5.24.060 Issuance of permit.
A.    The city manager or his or her designee shall issue a permit for solicitation unless any of the following have been demonstrated:

1.    The applicant has failed to provide the required information or to articulate a reasonable basis for his or her inability to do so;

2.    Any statement made in the application is untrue; or

3.    The proposed time, place or manner of solicitation is inconsistent with any provision of this code or other applicable law, or poses a threat to the public health or safety.

B.    If the city manager denies a permit to any applicant, the city manager, within the time for action on an application set forth in Section 5.24.050(A), shall arrange to send by registered mail or personal delivery written notice of the denial to the applicant, stating the reasons for such denial. The city manager may use fax, email or any other means reasonably calculated to give actual notice to the applicant. (Ord. 907 §1(part), 2016)

5.24.070 Term of permit.
All permits issued under this chapter shall be valid for thirty calendar days unless renewed, revoked or suspended pursuant to this chapter. Upon good cause shown, the city manager may issue a permit valid for more than thirty calendar days, but in no event shall a permit be valid for more than one year. Any permit issued under this chapter shall not be transferable or assignable. (Ord. 907 §1(part), 2016)

5.24.080 Identification card.
All persons to whom permits have been issued hereunder shall furnish an identification card to each of their agents and solicitors, which card is required to be in the possession of each agent and solicitor and presented upon request when soliciting in the city. Identification cards shall include at least the following: the permit number; the name and address of the permittee; a statement describing the permittee’s purpose and activity; the signature of the permittee or one authorized to bind the permittee; the name and signature of the solicitor to whom the card is issued; the period of time during which the solicitation is authorized; and, printed prominently thereon in red, the statement, "This identification card is not an endorsement of any solicitation by the City of Lakeport or any of its officers or employees." (Ord. 907 §1(part), 2016)

5.24.090 Revocation of permit.
If it is shown that any person to whom a permit has been issued under this chapter has violated any provision of this chapter or of any other law in connection with solicitation in the city, the city manager shall immediately suspend the permit and shall notify the permit holder within two business days of the suspension as specified in Section 5.24.060 for a notice of denial of a solicitation application, stating the reasons for the suspension. (Ord. 907 §1(part), 2016)

5.24.100 Appeals.
If an applicant or permittee is aggrieved by any action of the city manager to deny, suspend or revoke a permit, he or she may appeal to the city council by filing within fifteen calendar days of the decision a written statement with the city clerk setting forth reasons for the appeal. The city clerk shall set a time and place for hearing the appeal at the next regularly scheduled council meeting which occurs more than eighty-four hours after the notice of appeal is received and shall notify the applicant or permit holder of the time and place of hearing. The city council may affirm, reverse or affirm with conditions the decision of the city manager and shall apply the standards of this chapter in doing so. Unless the city council unconditionally approves the permit, it shall state the reasons for its decision in writing. The council may delegate its decision to a hearing officer; provided, that the decision of that officer is provided to the appellant not later than eighty-four hours after the council timely acts under this section. The action of the city council or hearing officer shall be final as to the city, but shall be subject to judicial review pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. (Ord. 907 §1(part), 2016)

5.24.110 Manner of solicitation and prohibitions.
No person shall do any of the following when engaged in solicitation:

A.    Solicit without a permit or solicit without carrying on his or her person the identification card required by this chapter.

B.    Solicit after a permit has expired.

C.    Solicit at any dwelling, including but not limited to a house, apartment, or condominium at which is displayed a sign reading "No Solicitations," "Do Not Disturb," or any other indication that the occupants do not wish to be solicited or to have their privacy otherwise disturbed.

D.    Touch, come into physical contact with, or affix any object to the person of any member of the public, without the express permission of that person.

E.    Persistently and importunately solicit any member of the public after such person expresses his or her desire not to be solicited.

F.    Intentionally obstruct the free movement of any member of the public on any street, sidewalk or other place or in any place open to the public.

G.    Threaten any harm to any person who declines to be solicited.

H.    Misrepresent his or her physical or mental health.

I.    Solicit for any purpose other than those specified in the application upon which the permit was issued.

J.    While the occupant of a moving vehicle, solicit, or attempt to solicit, business or contributions of money or other property from a person within the public right-of-way who is not in that same vehicle.

K.    Solicit, or attempt to solicit, business or contributions of money or other property from a person who is the occupant of a moving vehicle or a vehicle stopped in traffic while the solicitor is not in that same vehicle. (Ord. 907 §1(part), 2016)

5.24.120 Violations--Penalties.
Any person who intentionally violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in Chapter 1.08. (Ord. 907 §1(part), 2016)

Chapter 5.30
FIREWORKS
Sections:

5.30.010    Definitions.

5.30.020    General prohibition against possession, sale or use of fireworks.

5.30.030    Exception--Certain public displays and/or special effects.

5.30.040    Certain public displays--Liability insurance.

5.30.050    Certain public displays--Appeals.

5.30.060    Exception--Safe and sane fireworks.

5.30.070    Safe and sane fireworks--Permits required.

5.30.080    Safe and sane fireworks--Application.

5.30.090    Safe and sane fireworks--Denial of application.

5.30.100    Safe and sane fireworks--Prerequisite for issuance of permit.

5.30.110    Deadlines for applications and all other filings.

5.30.120    Safe and sane fireworks--Temporary sales tax permit.

5.30.130    Safe and sane fireworks--Operation of fireworks stand.

5.30.140    Safe and sane fireworks--Temporary fireworks stand.

5.30.150    Safe and sane fireworks--General requirements for permittees.

5.30.160    Nonprofit organization surcharge.

5.30.170    Safe and sane fireworks--Revocation of permit--Appeal.

5.30.180    Safe and sane fireworks--Limitation on places and hours of discharge.

5.30.190    Safe and sane fireworks--Supervision of minors.

5.30.200    Seizure of fireworks.

5.30.210    Fireworks wholesaler public education plan.

5.30.220    Police and fire department illegal fireworks operation plan and after-action report.

5.30.230    Exception--Permit required for agricultural and wildlife fireworks.

5.30.240    Exception--Permit required for model rockets.

5.30.250    Administrative fines and penalties.

5.30.260    Amendment.

5.30.270    Concurrent authorities.

5.30.280    Severability.

5.30.010 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter, are defined as follows:

A.    "Affiliated organizations," for purposes of this chapter, shall be the following:

1.    Organizations incorporated under the same charter or organization and their auxiliaries if the auxiliary is incorporated under the same charter;

2.    Organizations sharing the same officers and/or place of meetings and/or national parent organization;

3.    Subdivisions and/or fractional divisions, however named or delineated, of organizations;

4.    Suborganizations, one of whose primary purposes is to provide financial and/or manpower support to a parent nonprofit organization.

However, different organizations affiliated with and officially recognized by any elementary, junior high and/or high school and/or school district that serves, in whole or in part, the residents of the city or any public or private community college, college and/or university located within the boundaries of the city shall not be presumed to be affiliated organizations unless it can be shown that they serve the same interest area or concern (i.e., boosters of high school football and boosters of high school basketball would be presumed to be two different, nonaffiliated organizations).

B.    "Agricultural and wildlife fireworks" means fireworks designed or used to prevent damage to crops or unwanted occupancy of areas by animals or birds through the employment of sound or light, or both, whenever such fireworks are so classified by the State Fire Marshal.

C.    "Citation" means an administrative citation issued pursuant to this chapter to remedy a violation.

D.    "Citee" means any person served with an administrative citation charging him or her as a responsible person for violation.

E.    "City" means the city of Lakeport.

F.    "Code" means the Lakeport Municipal Code.

G.    "Code enforcement officer" (CEO) means any employee or agent of the city designated by the city council to enforce any provision of this chapter.

H.    "Dangerous fireworks" shall mean dangerous fireworks as defined in Health and Safety Code Sections 12505 and 12561 and the relevant sections of Title 19, Code of Regulations, Subchapter 6, which are hereby incorporated by reference.

I.    "Director" means the city manager or his or her designee.

J.    "Fireworks stand" means any building, counter, or other structure of a temporary nature used in the sale, offering for sale, or display for sale of safe and sane fireworks.

K.    "Hearing officer" means the person appointed by the city manager to serve as the hearing officer for administrative hearings held pursuant to this chapter.

L.    "Issuance" or "issued" means any of the following:

1.    The preparation and service of an administrative fine citation to a citee in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with Article III (commencing with Section 415.10) of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedures; or

2.    Mailing of administrative fine citation to the citee, by certified mail with return receipt, to the address shown on the official records of the county assessor; or

3.    By personally serving the responsible party by personal delivery of the administrative fine citation or by substituted service. Substituted service may be accomplished as follows:

a.    By leaving a copy at the recipient’s dwelling or usual place of abode, in the presence of a competent member of the household, and thereafter mailing by first class mail, postage prepaid, a copy to the recipient at the address where the copy was left; or

b.    In the event the responsible party cannot be served by first class mail, postage prepaid, or cannot be personally served and has a property manager or rental agency overseeing the premises, substituted service may be made upon the property manager or rental agency or may be effected by posting the property with the administrative fine citation and mailing a copy by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the responsible party in violation at the address of the property where the violation exists.

M.    "Nonprofit organization" means any nonprofit association, charity or corporation organized primarily for veteran, patriotic, welfare, civic betterment or charitable purposes which has been recognized as tax-exempt by the Internal Revenue Service or the Franchise Tax Board, or a group which is an integral part of a recognized national organization having such tax-exempt status, or an organization affiliated with and officially recognized by an elementary, junior high and/or high school and/or school district that serves, in whole or in part, the residents of the city or a public and/or private community college, college and/or university which is located within the boundaries of the city.

N.    "Person" means a natural person or a legal entity that is also an owner, tenant, lessee and/or other person with any right to possession or control of the property where a violation of this code occurred.

O.    "Principal and permanent meeting place" includes, but is not limited to, a permanent structure, playing field, geographic area or service population which resides in or is located within the city.

P.    "Public display of fireworks" means an entertainment feature where the public is admitted or permitted to view the display or discharge of fireworks, including but not limited to those defined in this section.

Q.    "Qualified applicants" means any group or organization which has met all of the following criteria for a continuous period of not less than one full year preceding submittal of an application for a permit to sell pursuant to this chapter and which continues to meet the criteria for the duration of any permit to sell issued by the city pursuant to this chapter:

1.    The organization shall be a nonprofit organization pursuant to Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 10, 19, 23, or 26, Section 501(d), or Section 501(e); or a group which is an integral part of a recognized national organization having such tax-exempt status or an organization affiliated with and officially recognized by an elementary, junior high and/or high school and/or school district that serves, in whole or in part, the residents of the city or a public and/or private community college, college and/or university which is located within the boundaries of the city;

2.    The organization shall be organized primarily for veterans, patriotic, welfare, civic betterment, educational, youth development or charitable purposes;

3.    The organization must have its principal and permanent meeting place within the city;

4.    The organization must be one which provides direct and regular community services and benefits to the residents of the city;

5.    The organization has a minimum bona fide membership of at least twenty members who either reside in the city, are employed in the city, or are owners or operators of a business or other establishment located in the city;

6.    The organization has not been found by any court of competent jurisdiction or city administrative hearing officer to be in violation of any civil or criminal local, state or federal law relating to fireworks within twenty-four calendar months prior to the organization’s submittal of an application for a permit to sell;

7.    The organization has not had a permit to sell revoked for cause pursuant to this chapter.

R.    "Safe and sane fireworks" (a.k.a. "state-approved fireworks") means safe and sane fireworks as set forth in Health and Safety Code Sections 12529 and 12562 and the relevant sections of Title 19, Code of Regulations, Subchapter 6, which are hereby incorporated by reference.

S.    "Responsible person" means a person who causes a violation of this chapter to occur or allows a violation to exist or continue, by his or her action or failure to act, or whose agent, employee or independent contractor causes a violation to occur, or allows a violation to exist or continue. There is a rebuttable presumption that the record owner of a residential parcel, as shown on the county’s latest equalized property taxes assessment rolls, and a lessee of a residential parcel has notice of any violation existing on said property. For purposes of this chapter, there may be more than one responsible person for a violation. Any person, irrespective of age, found in violation of any provision of this chapter may be issued a citation in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Every parent, guardian or other person, having the legal care, custody or control of any person under the age of eighteen years, who knows or reasonably should know that a minor is in violation of this chapter, may be issued a citation in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, in addition to any citation that may be issued to the offending minor.

T.    "Violation" or "violates" means any violation of any provision of this chapter.

U.    "Fireworks wholesaler" has the same meaning as in Health and Safety Code Section 12533 and the relevant sections of Title 19, Code of Regulations, Subchapter 6, which are hereby incorporated by reference. (Measure C §2(part), 2009)

5.30.020 General prohibition against possession, sale or use of fireworks.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall possess, sell, use, display or explode any dangerous fireworks including, but not limited to, any rocket, firecracker, roman candle, squib, torpedo, wire core sparkler, wooden core sparkler, black cartridge, aerial shell or other combustible device or explosive substance or any kind of fireworks, by whatsoever name known, or any altered safe and sane fireworks within the city. (Measure C §2(part), 2009)

5.30.030 Exception--Certain public displays and/or special effects.
It shall be unlawful to cause, allow, permit, aid, abet, or suffer any discharge of dangerous fireworks (including a public display) or any use of special effects without having first obtained a permit from the city manager.

The city manager shall have authority to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the granting of permits for those activities contained in Section 12640 of the California Health and Safety Code, including supervised public displays of fireworks by a jurisdiction, fair association, amusement park, other organization, or for the use of fireworks by artisans in pursuit of their trade. Each such use or display shall be handled by a licensed pyrotechnic operator (as defined by Section 12527 of the California Health and Safety Code) in accordance with a city-issued permit, and shall be of such character and so located, discharged or fired as in the opinion of the city manager or his or her designee, after proper investigation, will not be hazardous or endanger any person.

Every application for a permit to conduct a public display of fireworks shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as established by resolution of the city council. This fee shall be in addition to any fee or tax imposed by the city council. Every applicant shall agree to hold the city, its officers and employees harmless from any and all claims for damages or other costs arising out of the activity authorized by the permit. (Measure C §2(part), 2009)

5.30.040 Certain public displays--Liability insurance.
Any person, firm or corporation applying for a public display permit shall furnish to the city manager proof of coverage by a policy of public liability and property damage insurance. The policy shall provide limits of bodily injury and property damage liability of not less than five million dollars combined single limits for each occurrence annually for payments of damages to persons or property which may result from or be caused by such public display of fireworks, or any negligence on the part of the licensee or his/her/its agents, servants, employees and/or subcontractors presenting such public display.

No permit shall be issued until the permittee furnishes the city manager with a certificate of insurance for each policy required, executed by the company issuing said policy and approved as to form by the city attorney. Such policies shall contain a provision which includes the city of Lakeport as an additional insured and declares said insurance to be primary and that no other insurance carried by an insured party shall be called upon for contribution. Such insurance policies shall contain an endorsement that the company issuing such policy or policies will not allow the same to be canceled without serving, by first class mail, thirty days’ notice of cancellation upon the city clerk for the city. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the failure of the permittee to carry such policy or policies in force and to properly renew said insurance during the time covered by such permit shall automatically revoke the permit as of the date of expiration of such insurance policy or policies. A payment of the full amount of the permit fee required by this chapter shall be made to the city before any such revoked permit may be reinstated. (Measure C §2(part), 2009)

5.30.050 Certain public displays--Appeals.
The decision of the city manager or the city manager’s designated representative in acting on an application for a permit to conduct a public display of fireworks in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to an appeal by the applicant to the city council. Notice of such appeal shall be filed with the city council within ten days after the date of the decision regarding such fireworks permit. Upon failure to file such notice within the ten-day period, the action of the city manager or the city manager’s designated representative shall be final and conclusive. (Measure C §2(part), 2009)

5.30.060 Exception--Safe and sane fireworks.
It shall not be unlawful to possess, sell, use, display or discharge, within the city, those fireworks that are defined and classified as "safe and sane fireworks" (a.k.a. "state-approved fireworks") in the California State Fireworks Law (Sections 12500, et seq., of the Health and Safety Code and the relevant sections of Title 19, Code of Regulations, Subchapter 6) as set forth in this chapter. (Measure C §2(part), 2009)

5.30.070 Safe and sane fireworks--Permits required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell safe and sane fireworks within the city without having first applied for and received a permit from the city. (Measure C §2(part), 2009)

5.30.080 Safe and sane fireworks--Application.
A.    No nonprofit organization shall submit more than one application for a permit to sell safe and sane fireworks within the city. If more than one application is submitted on behalf of any nonprofit organization, including an affiliated organization, all such requests shall be voidable at the discretion of the city manager. If a question arises as to whether organizations and/or groups are affiliated, the city council shall have ultimate authority to decide said question. Any attempt to transfer an application shall void any and all applications filed by or on behalf of both the transferor nonprofit organization and the transferee nonprofit organization.

B.    Timing.

1.    All applications for permits to sell safe and sane fireworks shall be in writing to the city clerk on forms supplied by the city. Applications may be filed beginning March 1st of each year up to and including March 31st of the same year, at which time the filing period for that year will be closed.

2.    Applicants for such permits shall be notified by April 15th of each calendar year by the city manager of the approval or disapproval of such application for such permit. All organizations whose permits have been approved shall have up to and including June 1st of that year to pick up such permit.

C.    Contents of Application.

1.    Every application shall set forth the name of the nonprofit organization, address and telephone number of one or more responsible adults who will be in charge of and responsible for the fireworks stand during the period safe and sane fireworks are sold, displayed or stored.

2.    The application shall be made in triplicate. The original of the application shall be retained by the city clerk, one copy shall be transmitted to the fire chief and one copy shall be sent to the city building department. (Measure C §2(part), 2009)

5.30.090 Safe and sane fireworks--Denial of application.
A.    The city manager shall issue the permit to sell safe and sane fireworks unless any of the following apply:

1.    The city manager finds, in writing, that the applicant has failed to provide sufficient plans, information or other data necessary to permit a determination respecting compliance with the requirements of this chapter;

2.    The city manager finds, in writing, that the applicant is not in compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter;

3.    The city manager finds, in writing, that the applicant falls within the provisions of Section 5.30.170(C);

4.    The city manager determines that the number of qualified applicants exceeds the number of permissible permits under Section 5.30.100(B); or

5.    If the governor of the state of California declares a state of emergency for the city of Lakeport or county of Lake related to imminent threat of devastating wildfires and a related imminent peril to people and property, the city council may, by unanimous vote, suspend the sale and use of safe and sane fireworks for the calendar year in which the governor declares the state of emergency.

B.    The city manager must advise, in writing, all qualified applicants of its determination no later than April 15th as well as advise them of the procedures that the city must follow.

C.    Any denial of a permit pursuant to this section may be appealed to the city council. Upon notice of appeal from an applicant, the city manager shall provide the city council with the name of the applicant and a brief statement of the grounds for denial of issuance of the permit. The city council shall consider the appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting. (Measure C §2(part), 2009)

5.30.100 Safe and sane fireworks--Prerequisite for issuance of permit.
A.    All organizations whose permits have been approved shall not be issued a permit unless all of the following are submitted to the city clerk by June 1st:

1.    The location of the fireworks stand; written permission from the owner of record, lessor of record or the property manager of the property (whichever is controlling) upon which said proposed stand will be located; and the zoning of the real property on which the fireworks stand is to be located, which zoning classification shall be obtained from the planning department for the city.

2.    A copy of the requisite state retail sales permit from the office of the California State Fire Marshal.

3.    A certificate evidencing an occurrence-based policy of insurance naming the city of Lakeport as an additional insured thereunder, with the following minimum limits: one million dollars public liability and property damage; and general aggregate coverage of two million dollars.

4.    A copy of a temporary sales tax permit issued by the California State Board of Equalization.

B.    The maximum number of permits which may be issued and the maximum number of safe and sane fireworks stands that will be permitted pursuant to this chapter during any one calendar year shall not exceed four. If the number of qualified applicants exceeds the number of permissible permits under this section, the city shall select the nonprofit organizations to whom permits shall be issued by the following method:

1.    Notwithstanding Section 5.30.010(Q), preference shall be given to any nonprofit organization that was issued a permit to sell safe and sane fireworks in the city in 2007 so long as such nonprofit organization continuously applies for and is issued a permit from year to year, beginning with the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

2.    In the event that any permits are available after issuing permits pursuant to subsection (B)(1) of this section, the city manager or his or her designee shall conduct a drawing in which qualified applicants shall be randomly selected to receive any available permits.

C.    The continued validity of any city permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the requirement that at least one or more representatives of each nonprofit organization, preferably those responsible adults listed on the permit application, shall attend a safe and sane fireworks stand operator safety seminar conducted by the fire department and the licensed fireworks wholesaler that is supplying the safe and sane fireworks to the nonprofit organization. The failure of a nonprofit organization to have a responsible individual(s) attend the safety seminar shall result in the revocation of its permit to sell safe and sane fireworks.

D.    Permits issued pursuant to this section are valid only during the calendar year issued. (Measure C §2(part), 2009)

5.30.110 Deadlines for applications and all other filings.
If the deadline for submitting any type of application, payment of any administrative fine, filing of a notice of appeal, etc., called for within this chapter falls on a day City Hall is closed, the deadline shall automatically be extended to the close of business of the next day City Hall is open. (Measure C §2(part), 2009)

5.30.120 Safe and sane fireworks--Temporary sales tax permit.
Nonprofit organizations licensed and permitted to sell safe and sane fireworks in the city are required to obtain a temporary sales tax permit from the local office of the California State Board of Equalization. (Measure C §2(part), 2009)

5.30.130 Safe and sane fireworks--Operation of fireworks stand.
A.    No person shall knowingly sell fireworks to any person under the age of eighteen. Proof that the fireworks stand operator/organization demanded, was shown and acted in reliance upon bona fide evidence of age and identity in any sale of fireworks forbidden by this chapter shall be a defense for any proceedings for suspension or revocation of its safe and sane fireworks permit or any criminal proceedings for violations of this chapter. For purposes of this section, bona fide evidence of age and identity of purchaser is a document issued by a federal, state, county or municipal government which contains a photograph of the purchaser including, but not limited to, a valid California driver’s license or identification card issued to a member of the Armed Forces.

B.    The sale of safe and sane fireworks shall begin no earlier than nine a.m. on July 1st and shall not continue after nine p.m. on July 4th of the same year. Sale of fireworks shall be permitted only from nine a.m. to nine p.m., daily, on July 1st through July 4th.

C.    No person other than the permitted nonprofit organization(s) shall operate the stand for which the permit is issued or share or otherwise participate in the profits of the operation of such stand.

D.    No person other than the individuals who are members of the permittee or the spouses, parents or adult children of such members shall sell or otherwise participate in the sale of safe and sane fireworks at such stand.

E.    No person under the age of eighteen shall sell or participate in the sale of safe and sane fireworks within such stand.

F.    No person shall be paid any consideration by the permittee nonprofit organization(s) or any wholesaler/distributor of safe and sane fireworks for selling or otherwise participating in the sale of safe and sane fireworks at such stand; provided, however, that compensation may be paid for licensed security personnel during sale or nonsale hours and to the party authorizing the location of the stand on its property. (Measure C §2(part), 2009)

5.30.140 Safe and sane fireworks--Temporary fireworks stand.
All retail sales of safe and sane fireworks shall be permitted from within a temporary fireworks stand, and retail sales from any other building or structure are hereby prohibited. Temporary stands shall be subject to the following provisions:

A.    No fireworks stand shall be located within twenty-five feet of any other building or within one hundred feet of any gasoline pump or distribution point.

B.    Fireworks stands need not comply with the provisions of the building code of the city; provided, however, that all stands shall be constructed in a manner which will reasonably ensure the safety of attendants and patrons; and provided further, that any electrical installation shall comply with all applicable codes.

C.    No stand shall have a floor area in excess of seven hundred fifty square feet.

D.    Each stand shall have at least two exits. Each stand in excess of forty feet in length shall have at least three exits spaced approximately equidistant apart; provided, however, that in no case shall the distance between the exits exceed thirty-two feet. Exit doors shall be not less than twenty-four inches wide and six feet in height and shall swing in the direction of exit travel.

E.    Each stand shall be provided with two two-and-one-half-gallon water type (minimum rating 2A) or soda-and-acid fire extinguishers, in good working order and easily accessible for use in case of fire. (Measure C §2(part), 2009)

5.30.150 Safe and sane fireworks--General requirements for permittees.
A.    All weeds and combustible materials shall be cleared from the location of the fireworks stand to a distance of at least twenty-five feet surrounding the fireworks stand. All trash resulting from the operation of the fireworks stand must be removed on a daily basis.

B.    "NO SMOKING" signs shall be prominently displayed on and in the safe and sane fireworks stand.

C.    Each safe and sane fireworks stand must have an adult in attendance and in charge thereof while fireworks are on sale or stored therein. Sleeping or remaining in the stand after close of business each day is prohibited. On closing of the safe and sane fireworks stand each day, all fireworks must be removed from the premises and taken to a secured location operated by the fireworks wholesaler.

D.    All unsold stock of fireworks in the hands of the permittee after ten p.m. on July 8th shall be returned to the wholesaler/distributor and removed from the city within five days. On closing of the safe and sane fireworks stand, all litter shall be removed from the premises.

E.    No fuel-powered generator or similar equipment shall be allowed within fifty feet of a safe and sane fireworks stand.

F.    Each safe and sane fireworks stand must post its city permit to sell safe and sane fireworks, its temporary sales tax permit from the California State Board of Equalization, its State Fire Marshal retail sales permit, and proof of their required insurance in a prominent place inside the safe and sane fireworks stand.

G.    No person shall smoke within twenty-five feet of the safe and sane fireworks stand. No person shall light, cause to be lighted or permit to be lighted any safe and sane fireworks or combustible material within fifty feet of any safe and sane fireworks stand. (Measure C §2(part), 2009)

5.30.160 Nonprofit organization surcharge.
A.    All nonprofit retail booth locations shall assess a surcharge on all retail sales of state-approved fireworks that occur in the city.

B.    The assessment is intended to raise funds for the city to pay for the costs of administering this chapter, including but not limited to: increased police and fire protection; processing and issuing permits; inspections of stands; public education and awareness campaign; enforcement, including additional personnel time; cleanup of the trash and debris left behind each year; and other costs in connection with the city’s Fourth of July celebration.

C.    The assessment shall be five percent of the gross sales of the fireworks sold in the city that year. Payment of the assessment by each nonprofit retail booth operator shall be due to the city clerk by August 15th of each year. (Measure C §2(part), 2009)

5.30.170 Safe and sane fireworks--Revocation of permit--Appeal.
A.    The city manager or the city manager’s designee may revoke, immediately and without notice or hearing, the permit of any permittee who violates any of the following provisions: Section 5.30.130(A), (B) or (E) or Section 5.30.150(C). If the revocation occurs between June 22nd and July 5th, the city manager shall inform the permittee that the permittee may seek review of the city manager’s decision by the city council at the next regular meeting by submitting a notice of appeal to the city clerk within five business days of receiving the notice of revocation. At the earliest opportunity on the next business day after the revocation, the city manager shall provide the city council with written notice that a fireworks permit has been revoked, including the name of the permittee and a brief statement of the grounds for revocation. If the revocation occurs before or after the specified period, the appeal procedures of subsection (B) of this section shall apply.

B.    The city manager, or the city manager’s designee, may revoke the permit of any permittee who violates any provision of this chapter not specified in subsection (A) of this section. Such revocation shall not take effect for five days, during which time the permittee may appeal the city manager’s decision by submitting a written request to the city clerk for review of the revocation by the city council. The city manager shall provide the city council with written notice that a fireworks permit has been revoked, including the name of the permittee and a brief statement of the grounds for revocation. The city council shall consider the appeal of revocation at its next regular meeting.

C.    Any permittee whose permit has been revoked pursuant to subsection (A) or (B) of this section shall be barred from receiving a permit under this chapter for up to five years from the date of revocation. (Measure C §2(part), 2009)

5.30.180 Safe and sane fireworks--Limitation on places and hours of discharge.
A.    It shall be unlawful to discharge any safe and sane fireworks except during the hours of nine a.m. to ten p.m. on July 1st through July 4th, or during the hours of nine a.m. to eleven p.m. on day of the city’s Fourth of July public display of fireworks.

B.    It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite, discharge, project or otherwise fire or use any safe and sane fireworks, or permit the ignition, discharge or projection thereof, upon or over or onto the property of another without his/her consent, or to ignite, discharge, project or otherwise fire or make use of any safe and sane fireworks within ten feet of any residence, dwelling or other structure used as a place of habitation by human beings. (Measure C §2(part), 2009)

5.30.190 Safe and sane fireworks--Supervision of minors.
It shall be unlawful for any person having the care, custody or control of a minor (under eighteen years) to permit such minor to discharge, explode, fire or set off any dangerous fireworks, at any time, or to permit such minor to discharge or set off any safe and sane fireworks unless such minor does so under the direct supervision of a person over eighteen years of age and during the hours and on the days permitted by this chapter. (Measure C §2(part), 2009)

5.30.200 Seizure of fireworks.
The fire chief, or the fire chief’s designee, may seize, take, remove or cause to be removed, at the expense of the permittee or licensed fireworks wholesaler, whichever is applicable, all stock of fireworks offered or exposed for sale, stored or held in violation of this chapter when such violation creates an imminent threat to public health or safety. (Measure C §2(part), 2009)

5.30.210 Fireworks wholesaler public education plan.
Each fireworks distributor/wholesaler who is supplying one or more of the nonprofit organizations who are permittees under this chapter shall annually submit a public education plan to the city by no later than five p.m. on June 1st. Said public education plan should outline the public safety and education efforts for that year that have been initiated, supported and/or delivered by each fireworks distributor/wholesaler within the city. Said public education plan should include, but is not limited to, samples of all the materials and the extent of distribution of all of the safety and education materials discussed in that wholesaler’s/distributor’s plan. (Measure C §2(part), 2009)

5.30.220 Police and fire department illegal fireworks operation plan and after-action report.
A.    On or before May 1st of every year, both the city’s police and fire departments must present to the city council an operation plan for the thirty-day period surrounding the 4th of July (June 17th through July 16th) for that year. Said operation plan should include, but not be limited to, the following information:

1.    Identification of areas within the city where illegal fireworks were a problem in the previous year;

2.    A detailed explanation of the deployment of fire and law enforcement personnel to deal with those troublesome areas as well as with the balance of the city;

3.    A report on the apparatus and personnel who will be on duty for the period of June 17th through July 16th of that year, and more particularly, on the 1st through the 5th of July, inclusive;

4.    Recommendations on and discussion of what, if any, dedicated illegal fireworks enforcement patrols there should be for that year and all other relevant information and statistics deemed necessary by the city council.

B.    By no later than September 1st of that same year, both police and fire departments must report back to the city council with an after-action report. That report should include, but is not limited to:

1.    An evaluation of the success or failure of that department’s operation plan for that year including a listing of any significant fireworks-related incidents, both dangerous fireworks and safe and sane fireworks;

2.    Relevant incident statistics for the period of June 17th through July 16th, arrest and citation statistics for all crimes, but more particularly for the possession, sale and/or use of dangerous fireworks, altered safe and sane fireworks and misuse of safe and sane fireworks outside the strict limitations of this chapter;

3.    A report on how many calls there were regarding suspected dangerous fireworks, how many of those calls either of the departments responded to, how many of those calls resulted in seizures and/or administrative fine citations, the status of payment of those administrative fines, and how many fireworks seizures resulted in no citations, and if so, why. (Measure C §2(part), 2009)

5.30.230 Exception--Permit required for agricultural and wildlife fireworks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, sell, furnish, or give away, or offer or expose for sale, or fire, discharge, or explode, any agricultural and wildlife fireworks in the city without first obtaining a permit from the city manager.

The permit shall not be transferable, and shall particularly describe the place where agricultural and wildlife fireworks are to be stored, sold, or discharged. Such permit shall be for such length of time as the city manager shall determine, but in any event not to exceed twelve months. (Measure C §2(part), 2009)

5.30.240 Exception--Permit required for model rockets.
The sale, purchase, storage, firing or discharge of model rockets may be allowed by written permit from the city manager which shall include, but not be limited to, the conditions contained in Title 19 of the California State Administrative Code and any other conditions which the city manager may deem to be reasonably necessary for the safety and welfare of the public and the community. (Measure C §2(part), 2009)

5.30.250 Administrative fines and penalties.
A.    Purpose.

1.    This chapter authorizes the imposition of administrative fines on any person who violates any provision of this chapter in order to encourage and obtain compliance with the provisions of this chapter for the benefit and protection of the entire community. This section governs the imposition, enforcement, collection and administrative review of all administrative fines related to: the possession, use, storage, sale and/or display of those fireworks classified as dangerous fireworks in California Health and Safety Code Section 12500 et seq., with the exception of a pyrotechnic licensee when operating pursuant to that license; and the use of safe and sane fireworks as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 12500 et seq. on or at dates, times and/or locations other than those permitted by this chapter. Said administrative fines are imposed under authority of Government Code Section 53069.4, Health and Safety Code Section 12557, and the police power of the city.

2.    The issuance of citations imposing administrative fines may be performed at the discretion of the officials of the city authorized hereunder, and the issuance of a citation to any person constitutes but one remedy of the city to redress violations of this code by any person. By adopting this chapter, the city does not intend to limit its authority to employ any other remedy, civil or criminal, to redress any violation of this code by any person which this city may otherwise pursue.

3.    The imposition of fines related to dangerous fireworks under this chapter shall be limited to persons who possess, sell, use and/or display, or the seizure of, less than twenty-five pounds (gross weight) of such dangerous fireworks.

4.    Fines collected pursuant to this chapter related to dangerous fireworks shall not be subject to Health and Safety Code Section 12706, which section provides that certain fines collected by a court of the state be deposited with, and disbursed by, the county treasurer. However, the city shall provide cost reimbursement to the State Fire Marshal pursuant to regulations to be adopted by the State Fire Marshal addressing the State Fire Marshal’s cost for the transportation and disposal of dangerous fireworks seized by the city, which costs will be part of any administrative fine imposed. Unless and until said regulations have been adopted by the state of California, the city shall hold in trust two hundred fifty dollars or twenty-five percent of any fine collected, whichever is greater, to cover the cost reimbursement to the State Fire Marshal for said cost of transportation and disposal of the dangerous fireworks.

5.    Because of the serious threat of fire or injury posed by the use of dangerous fireworks that can result from persistent or repeated failures to comply with the provisions of this code and the effect of such conditions or activities on the safety and the use and enjoyment of surrounding properties and to the public health, safety and welfare, this chapter imposes strict civil liability upon the owners of residential real property for all violations of this code existing on their residential real property. Each contiguous use, display and/or possession shall constitute a separate violation and shall be subject to a separate administrative fine.

6.    At least fifty percent of the fines collected pursuant to this chapter must be placed in a segregated fund entitled "Lakeport illegal fireworks enforcement fund." The sole and exclusive purpose of this fund is to pay for increased fire and police deployment, protection and investigation of and against illegal fireworks in the city for the thirty-day period surrounding the 4th of July (June 17th through July 16th).

B.    Issuance of Administrative Citation--Contents.

1.    Whenever a code enforcement officer (CEO) determines that a violation of the code has occurred, the CEO may issue an administrative citation on a city-approved form listing the code violation(s) and the amount of the administrative fine required to be paid by the responsible person(s) in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

2.    Each administrative citation shall contain the following information:

a.    The name, mailing address, date of birth, CDL number, and home or business telephone number of the responsible person charged with any violation of this code;

b.    The address or description of the location of the violation;

c.    The date or dates on which the person violated this code;

d.    The section or sections of this code that were violated;

e.    A description of the violation(s);

f.    The amount of the administrative fine for each violation, the procedure in place to pay the fines, and any late fee and interest charge(s), if not timely paid, and notice that if the city is required to take action to collect such fines, the responsible person may be charged costs and attorney’s fees;

g.    Notice of the procedure to request an administrative hearing to contest the citation (including the form to be used, how to obtain the form, and the period within which the request must be made in order for it to be considered timely);

h.    The name and signature of the CEO who issued the citation and the name and signature of the citee, if he or she is physically present and will sign the citation at the time of its issuance. The refusal of a citee to sign a citation shall not affect its validity or any related subsequent proceedings, nor shall signing a citation constitute an admission that a person is responsible for a violation of the code;

i.    Any other information deemed necessary by the director for enforcement or collection purposes.

C.    Administrative Fines.

1.    Each person who violates any provision of this code as it relates to the possession, use, storage, sale and/or display of dangerous fireworks shall be subject to the imposition and payment of an administrative fine or fines as provided below:

 

Number of Offenses in 1-Year Period

Amount of Administrative Penalty

Late Charge

Total Amount of Penalty plus Late Charge

First

$1,000

$250

$1,250

Second

$3,000

$500

$3,500

Third

$5,000

$1,000

$6,000

2.    Each person who uses safe and sane fireworks on or at dates, times and/or locations other than those permitted by this chapter shall be subject to the imposition and payment of an administrative fine or fines as provided below:

Number of Offenses in 1-Year Period

Amount of Administrative Penalty

Late Charge

Total Amount of Penalty plus Late Charge

First

$250

$75

$325

Second

$500

$150

$650

Third

$750

$300

$1,050

3.    In the case of a violation of any of the provisions listed above, the administrative fine(s) shall be due and payable within thirty calendar days from the issuance of the administrative fine citation, and the citee shall be required to abate the violation and surrender all dangerous fireworks to the CEO immediately. For penalties not paid in full within that time, a late charge in the amount set forth above is hereby imposed and must be paid to the city by the citee. Fines not paid within the time established by this section shall accrue interest at the prevailing established rate. On the second and each subsequent time that a person is issued a citation for the same violation in any twelve-month period, the fine is increased as indicated above and the citee shall be liable for the amount of the new fine until it is paid, in addition to being responsible for payment of previous fines.

4.    All administrative fines and any late charges and interest due shall be paid to the city at such a location or address as stated on the citation, or as may otherwise be designated by the city manager. Payment of any fine or fines shall not excuse the citee from complying with the provision of the code so violated. The issuance of the citation and/or payment of any fine shall not bar the city from employing any other enforcement action or remedy to obtain compliance with the provisions of the code so violated including the issuance of additional citations and/or criminal prosecution.

5.    Upon confirmation of the citation or when the citation is deemed confirmed, all unpaid administrative fines, late fees and/or interest shall constitute a judgment which may be collected in any manner allowed by law for collection of judgments including but not limited to recordation to create a lien on any real property owned by the responsible person. The city shall be entitled to recover its attorney’s fees and costs incurred in collecting any administrative fines, late charges and/or interest.

6.    Payment of the administrative fine shall not excuse or discharge a citee from the duty to immediately abate and correct a violation of this chapter, nor from any other responsibility or legal consequences for a continuation or a repeated occurrence(s) of a violation of this chapter.

D.    Right to an Administrative Hearing.

1.    Any citee may contest the violation(s), or that he or she is a responsible person, by filing a request for an administrative hearing on a city-approved form with the city clerk within thirty calendar days from the issuance date of a citation. If the city clerk does not receive the request in the required time period, the citee shall have waived a right to a hearing and the citation shall be deemed confirmed and final.

2.    No fees shall be charged for the filing of a request for a hearing.

3.    Citees must deposit the full amount of the penalty listed on the citation on or before the request for a hearing is filed. Failure to deposit the full amount of all penalties within the required time period, or the tender of a nonnegotiable check, shall render a request for an administrative hearing incomplete and untimely. Penalties that are deposited with the city shall not accrue interest. Penalties deposited shall be returned to the person who deposited them if the citation is overturned.

4.    A request for a hearing shall contain the following:

a.    The citation number;

b.    The name, address, telephone number and any facsimile numbers and e-mail addresses of each person contesting the citation;

c.    A statement of the reason(s) why a citation is being contested;

d.    The date and signature of the citee(s).

5.    The city will notify all persons who filed a request for a hearing in writing by first class mail of the date, time and place set for the hearing at least ten calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. Service of this notice is deemed complete at time of mailing. The failure of a citee to receive a properly addressed notice shall not invalidate the citation or any hearing, city action or proceeding conducted pursuant to this chapter.

6.    The hearing will be conducted within sixty days of the date a timely and complete request is received by the city clerk.

7.    If the CEO submits an additional written report concerning the citation to the city for consideration at the hearing, the CEO shall also serve a copy of such report by first class mail on the person requesting an administrative hearing no less than seven calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. Failure to receive said report shall not invalidate the citation or any hearing, city action or proceeding pursuant to this chapter.

E.    Administrative Hearing--Procedures.

1.    The hearing officer designated or appointed by the city manager shall hear all requests for administrative hearings of administrative fines in accordance with the procedures established herein.

2.    Administrative hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. The city bears the burden of proof to establish a violation and responsibility therefor by a preponderance of evidence. The citation is prima facie evidence of the violation, however, and the CEO who issued the citation is not required to attend or participate at the hearing. The citee(s) and CEO, if present, shall have an opportunity to present evidence and witnesses and to cross-examine witnesses. A citee may bring an interpreter to the hearing provided there is no expense to the city. The hearing officer may question any person who presents evidence or who testifies at any hearing.

3.    A citee may appear at the hearing in person or by written declaration executed under penalty of perjury. Said declaration and any documents in support thereof shall be tendered to and received by the city at least seven business days prior to the hearing. If the citee fails to attend or does not submit a written declaration in a timely manner, he or she shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing. In such an instance, the hearing officer shall cancel the hearing and not render a decision. In such instances, the citation shall be deemed confirmed.

4.    Hearings may be continued once at the request of a citee or the officer who issued the citation. The hearing officer may also continue the hearing for cause.

F.    Hearing Decision--Right of Appeal.

1.    After considering all the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision to uphold or overturn the citation and shall state the reasons therefor.

2.    The hearing officer shall serve citee(s) by first class mail with a copy of the written decision. The date the decision is deposited with the U.S. Postal Service shall constitute the date of its service. The failure of a citee to receive a properly addressed decision shall not invalidate any hearing, city action or proceeding conducted pursuant to this chapter.

3.    Decisions of the hearing officer may be appealed to the city council within thirty days after the date of their service. Each decision shall contain a statement advising the citee of this appeal right and the procedure for its exercise. A citee shall file a notice of appeal with the city within twenty calendar days after the date of service of the hearing officer’s decision.

4.    If a hearing officer’s decision is not appealed in a timely manner, the decision shall be deemed confirmed.

5.    The city council is the sole reviewing authority and an appeal from a hearing officer’s decision is not appealable to the superior court. If a responsible person prevails on appeal, the city shall reimburse his or her fine deposit within thirty calendar days of the city council’s decision on the appeal. (Measure C §2(part), 2009)

5.30.260 Amendment.
This chapter shall not be repealed or amended except by a vote of the people of the city of Lakeport. (Measure C §2(part), 2009)

5.30.270 Concurrent authorities.
Any provisions of the Lakeport Municipal Code in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. This chapter supersedes any conflicting provisions of the Uniform Fire Code, International Fire Code, and the Uniform Building Code. (Measure C §2(part), 2009)

5.30.280 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter that is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The people of the city of Lakeport hereby declare that they would have passed this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Measure C §2(part), 2009)

Chapter 5.34
COMMERCIAL CANNABIS
Sections:

5.34.010    Purpose and intent.

5.34.020    Definitions.

5.34.030    Permit requirement.

5.34.040    Permit applications.

5.34.050    Application review, appeal, and suspension.

5.34.060    Permit issuance.

5.34.070    Transfer of permit or modifications to permit.

5.34.080    Standard provisions for all commercial cannabis activities.

5.34.090    Commercial cannabis performance standards.

5.34.100    Fees.

5.34.110    Enforcement.

5.34.120    Liability.

5.34.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose of these regulations is to ensure that the development of commercial cannabis does not adversely impact adjacent parcels or the surrounding neighborhood and that they are developed in a manner which protects the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents, landowners, and businesses in the city. These regulations shall apply to all commercial cannabis activities in the city. (Ord. 915 §1(part), 2018)

5.34.020 Definitions.
A.    "Cannabis" means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, or any other strain or varietal of the genus Cannabis that may exist or be discovered, or developed, whether growing or not, including but not limited to the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. Any reference to cannabis or cannabis products shall include medical and nonmedical cannabis and medical and nonmedical cannabis products unless otherwise specified. "Cannabis" does not mean industrial hemp as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 11018.5, as may be amended from time to time.

B.    "Cannabis business owner" means any of the following:

1.    Each person or entity having an ownership interest in the commercial cannabis business other than a security interest, lien, or encumbrance on property that will be used by the commercial cannabis business;

2.    If the commercial cannabis business is a publicly traded company, the chief executive officer or any person or entity with an aggregate ownership interest of five percent or more; or

3.    Each person who participates in the direction, control, or management of, or has a financial interest in, the commercial cannabis business.

C.    "Cannabis cultivation" means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, processing, or trimming of cannabis, including cannabis nurseries.

D.    "Cannabis retailer" means a facility, whether fixed or mobile, operated in accordance with state and local laws and regulations, where cannabis and/or cannabis products are offered for retail sale, including a facility that delivers cannabis and/or cannabis products as part of a retail sale.

E.    "Cannabis distribution" means a facility where a person conducts the business of procuring cannabis from licensed cultivators or manufacturers for sale to licensed cannabis retailers, and the inspection, quality assurance, batch testing by a Type 8 licensee, storage, labeling, packaging and other processes, prior to transport to licensed cannabis retailers. This facility requires a Type 11 license pursuant to MAUCRSA or a state cannabis license type subsequently established.

F.    "Cannabis manufacturing" means a facility that produces, prepares, propagates, or compounds manufactured cannabis or cannabis products, directly or indirectly, by extraction methods, independently by means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis, and is owned and operated by a state licensee for these activities.

G.    "Cannabis microbusiness" means a facility that cultivates less than ten thousand square feet of cannabis and acts as a licensed distributor, Level 1 manufacturer, and cannabis retailer and excludes cannabis testing. This facility requires a Type 12 license pursuant to MAUCRSA, or a state cannabis license type subsequently established.

H.    "Cannabis nursery" means a state licensee that produces only clones, immature plants, seeds, and other agricultural products used specifically for the planting, propagation, and cultivation of cannabis.

I.    "Cannabis products" means cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients.

J.    "Cannabis testing service" or "cannabis testing laboratory" means a laboratory, facility, or entity that offers or performs tests of cannabis or cannabis products, including the equipment provided by such laboratory, facility, or entity.

K.    "City manager" means the city manager or the city manager’s designee, if any.

L.    "Commercial cannabis activities" means any commercial cannabis activity licensed pursuant to the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act ("MAUCRSA"), including, but not limited to, cultivation, possession, distribution, laboratory testing, labeling, retail, delivery, sale or manufacturing of cannabis or cannabis products.

M.    "Medical cannabis" or "medicinal cannabis" means cannabis that is intended to be used for medical cannabis purposes in accordance with the Compassionate Use Act (Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5), the Medical Marijuana Program Act (Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7 et seq.), the Medical Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act ("MCRSA," Business and Professions Code Section 19300 et seq.), and MAUCRSA.

N.    "Primary caregiver" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7, as the same may be amended from time to time.

O.    "Qualifying patient" or "qualified patient" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7, as the same may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 915 §1(part), 2018)

5.34.030 Permit requirement.
No cannabis business may engage in any commercial cannabis activity in the city without obtaining the appropriate permit to operate within the city. The permit is specific to the location where the commercial cannabis activity will occur. Multiple operating locations for the same cannabis business will require separate permits as outlined in Sections 5.34.080 and 5.34.090. (Ord. 915 §1(part), 2018)

5.34.040 Permit applications.
A.    Applications for a commercial cannabis permit and other matters pertaining to this chapter shall be filed with the city manager on an official city application form.

B.    The application shall be filed with all required fees, deposits, information, and materials as specified by this chapter.

C.    The application shall be signed by each cannabis business owner under penalty of perjury, certifying that the information submitted, including all supporting documents, is, to the best of the applicant’s knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete, and by the property owner for purposes of certifying that s/he has reviewed the application, and approves the use of the property for the purposes stated in the application. The signature of both the cannabis business owner and the property owner shall constitute evidence of their express consent to allow any city official or employee to enter upon and inspect the premises upon reasonable notice.

D.    The information required by this section shall be confidential, and shall not be subject to public inspection or disclosure except as may be required by federal, state or local law. Disclosure of information pursuant to this section shall not be deemed a waiver of confidentiality by the applicant or any individual named in the application. The city shall incur no liability for the inadvertent or negligent disclosure of such information.

E.    Permit applicants are encouraged to contact the city manager before submitting an application to verify materials necessary for completing an application. (Ord. 915 §1(part), 2018)

5.34.050 Application review, appeal, and suspension.
A.    Review of Application. The city manager shall consider the application, and the results from any investigation into the application, as deemed necessary by the police chief.

B.    Disapproval of Application. If the city manager disapproves an application, he or she shall notify the applicant in writing, stating the reasons for the disapproval. Notification of disapproval shall be deemed complete upon deposit by first class mail to the applicant to the address indicated on the application. No permit shall be issued unless a successful appeal of the disapproval is made within the requisite time frame.

C.    Appeal of Disapproval.

1.    Within ten days after the city manager serves notice of disapproval, an applicant may appeal the disapproval by notifying the city clerk in writing of the appeal, the reasons for the appeal, and paying any applicable fees.

2.    The city clerk shall set a hearing on the appeal and shall fix a date and time certain, within thirty days after the receipt of the applicant’s appeal, unless the city and the applicant agree to a longer time, to consider the appeal. In no case will a hearing be continued for more than ninety days from receipt of applicant’s appeal. The city clerk shall provide notice of the date, time and place of hearing, at least seven days prior to the date of the hearing.

3.    The city council shall hear the applicant’s appeal, determine the order of procedure, and rule on all objections to admissibility of evidence. The applicant and the city manager shall each have the right to submit documents, call and examine witnesses, cross-examine witnesses and argue their respective positions. The proceeding shall be informal, the technical rules of evidence shall not apply, and all evidence shall be admissible which is of the kind that reasonably prudent persons rely upon in making decisions.

4.    An appellant’s failure to attend a hearing shall constitute an abandonment of the appeal and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies.

5.    The city council shall issue or cause to be issued a written decision within twenty-one days after the close of the hearing. The decision of the city council shall be final.

6.    An appellant may seek judicial review of the city council’s decision by filing a petition for review with the superior court, pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6, within ninety days after the effective date of the city council’s notice of decision.

D.    Grounds for Denial, Revocation or Suspension of Permit. The granting of a permit or a renewal thereof may be denied and an existing permit revoked or suspended if:

1.    The cannabis business owner has knowingly made a false statement in the application or in any reports or other documents furnished to the city.

2.    The cannabis business owner has been convicted of an offense that is substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of the cannabis business for which the application is made, which includes but is not limited to:

a.    A violent felony conviction, as specified in Penal Code Section 667.5(c).

b.    A serious felony conviction, as specified in Penal Code Section 1192.7.

c.    A felony conviction involving fraud, deceit or embezzlement.

d.    A felony conviction for hiring, employing, or using a minor in transporting, carrying, selling, giving away, preparing for sale, or peddling any controlled substance to a minor; or selling, offering to sell, furnishing, offering to furnish, administering, or giving any controlled substance to a minor.

e.    A felony conviction for drug trafficking with an enhancement pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 11370.4 or 11379.8.

3.    The cannabis business or a cannabis business owner has been sanctioned by a licensing authority or other city or county for unauthorized commercial cannabis activity.

4.    The granting or renewing of the permit would perpetuate or encourage any of the following:

a.    Distribution of cannabis or cannabis products to minors;

b.    Generation of revenue from the sale of cannabis or cannabis products to fund criminal enterprises, gangs or cartels;

c.    Diversion of cannabis or cannabis products to jurisdictions outside of the state where cannabis and cannabis products are unlawful under state or local law;

d.    Trafficking of other illegal drugs or facilitation of other illegal activity;

e.    Violence and the use of firearms in the cultivation and distribution of cannabis and cannabis products;

f.    The use of public lands in the cultivation of cannabis; or

g.    The use of federal property for commercial cannabis activity.

5.    For any other reason that would allow the state to deny a license under MAUCRSA.

6.    Fails to pay required city fees and taxes.

7.    Violates any provision of MAUCRSA, this chapter or any other permits issued by the city for the commercial cannabis activity, such as a conditional use permit.

8.    Except as provided in subsections (D)(2)(d) and (e) of this section, an application for a permit shall not be denied if the sole ground for denial is based upon a prior conviction of either Section 11350 or 11357 of the Health and Safety Code. An application for a permit also shall not be denied if the state would be prohibited from denying a license pursuant to either Section 26057, subdivision (b)(5), or Section 26059 of the Business and Professions Code. Conviction of any controlled substance felony subsequent to permit issuance shall be grounds for revocation of a permit or denial of the renewal of a permit.

E.    Suspension and Revocation.

1.    If the city manager deems continuation of any commercial cannabis activity will cause a significant threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, the city manager may suspend the permit and all rights and privileges thereunder until the city council renders a written decision on the revocation of the permit.

2.    The city manager shall give notice to the cannabis business of his or her intent to revoke a permit in the same manner as notice of disapproval and provide the city clerk with a copy of the notice.

3.    The appeal rights and hearing for the revocation of the permit shall be set and conducted in the same manner as an appeal of disapproval under subsection C of this section. The decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 915 §1(part), 2018)

5.34.060 Permit issuance.
A.    Before issuing any permit the city manager shall determine that all of the following requirements have been met:

1.    The application is complete and all applicable city taxes and fees have been paid.

2.    All land use permits have been approved and all conditions of approval have been met or are in good standing.

3.    There are no outstanding notices of nuisance or other unresolved code compliance issues at the site of the proposed commercial cannabis activity or related to the cannabis business owner(s).

B.    By accepting the permit, each permittee agrees to indemnify, defend and hold harmless to the fullest extent permitted by law the city, its officers, agents and employees from and against any and all actual and alleged damages, claims, liabilities, costs (including attorney’s fees), suits or other expenses resulting from and arising out of or in connection with permittee’s operations, except such liability caused by the sole active negligence or willful misconduct of city, its officers, agents and employees.

C.    The permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. (Ord. 915 §1(part), 2018)

5.34.070 Transfer of permit or modifications to permit.
A.    A permit is nontransferable to another location, and no transfer to another cannabis business owner or modifications to a permitted facility may be made except in accordance with this section.

B.    A request for change in permit ownership shall be submitted to the city manager on a city form at least sixty days prior to the anticipated transfer, together with any applicable fee(s). Requests submitted less than sixty days before the transfer will be processed only in the city’s discretion and may be subject to an expedited processing fee. A new owner(s) shall meet all requirements for applicants of an initial permit. The request shall include the following information:

1.    Identifying information for the new cannabis business owner(s) and management as required in an initial permit application;

2.    A written certification by the new cannabis business owner(s) as required in an initial permit application;

3.    The specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and

4.    Acknowledgement of full responsibility for complying with the existing permit.

C.    A request to modify the security plan shall be submitted to the city manager on a city form at least thirty days prior to the anticipated change, together with the applicable fee.

D.    A request for change in cannabis business contact information shall be submitted to the city manager on a city form at least thirty days prior to the anticipated change, together with the applicable fee.

E.    A request for change in cannabis business trade or business name shall be submitted to the city manager on a city form at least thirty days prior to the anticipated change, together with the applicable fee.

F.    A permit renewal application and any applicable fees must be submitted to city manager at least sixty days before the expiration of the permit. Failure to submit a renewal application prior to the expiration date of the permit will result in the automatic expiration of the permit on the expiration date. Permit renewal is subject to the laws and regulations effective at the time of renewal, which may be substantially different than the regulations currently in place and may require the submittal of additional information to ensure that the new standards are met. No person shall have any entitlement or vested right to receive a permit under this chapter. (Ord. 915 §1(part), 2018)

5.34.080 Standard provisions for all commercial cannabis activities.
A.    All commercial cannabis activities shall have all appropriate state licensing required prior to commencement of use.

B.    No permittee shall sell cannabis or cannabis products to persons under twenty-one years of age; allow any person under twenty-one years of age on its premises; or employ or retain persons under twenty-one years of age. No permittee shall sell medicinal cannabis products to persons under eighteen years of age unless accompanied by a parent or guardian.

C.    All commercial cannabis activities shall maintain a six-hundred-foot distance from all properties containing schools, preschools, licensed day care facilities, and parks.

D.    All commercial cannabis activities shall obtain and maintain a business license from the city.

E.    Commercial cannabis activities shall not be allowed as a home occupation.

F.    All applications shall provide an operations plan containing at a minimum the following items:

1.    General Project Information.

a.    Site plan providing both a graphic and written representation of the applicant’s intended development. The plan shall adhere to the general site plan standards contained in Section 17.29.030 and shall include all structures, storage and circulation patterns of the site.

b.    Written project description containing:

i.    General project description.

ii.    A statement of present and proposed ownership.

iii.    A complete list of all individuals and entities with a financial interest in the operation.

iv.    A list and description of all uses shown in the provided site plan.

c.    Floor plan showing the locations of all proposed activities.

d.    Sign plan consistent with the provisions outlined in Chapter 17.52.

e.    Agreement to maintain at all times commercial general liability providing coverage on an occurrence basis for bodily injury, including death, of one or more persons, property damage and personal injury with limits of not less than one million dollars per occurrence and comprehensive automobile liability (owned, non-owned, hired) providing coverage on an occurrence basis for bodily injury, including death, of one or more persons, property damage and personal injury, with limits of not less than one million dollars. The commercial general liability policy shall provide contractual liability, shall include a severability of interest or equivalent wording, shall specify that insurance coverage afforded to the city shall be primary, and shall name the city, its officials and employees as additional insured. Failure to maintain insurance as required herein at all times shall be grounds for suspension of the permit immediately, and, ultimately, revocation.

2.    Security Provisions.

a.    Operations shall provide adequate security on the premises, including lighting, security cameras, security personnel and alarms, to ensure the safety of persons and to protect the premises from theft. Security camera footage shall be retained a minimum of thirty days.

b.    The plan shall include the name, phone number and email of community relations staff who may be contacted at any time regarding operational problems associated with the commercial cannabis activity.

c.    A current register of the names of all employees currently employed by the use shall be provided and maintained on site. Employee register and contact information shall be current and up-to-date at all times. Any changes made to the employee register shall be provided to the city manager within thirty days.

d.    All employees either direct or via contract shall undergo a background check by the city police department. An individual may fail the background check if they have been convicted of an offense that is substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of the business or profession for which the application is made, except that if the police chief determines that the applicant, owner, or licensee is otherwise suitable to be issued a license, and granting the license would not compromise public safety, the police chief shall conduct a thorough review of the nature of the crime, conviction, circumstances, and evidence of rehabilitation of the applicant, owner, licensee to be issued a license based on the evidence found through the review. In determining which offenses are substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of the business or profession for which the application is made, the police chief shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

i.    A violent felony conviction, as specified in subdivision (c) of Section 667.5 of the Penal Code.

ii.    A serious felony conviction, as specified in subdivision (c) of Section 1192.7 of the Penal Code.

iii.    A felony conviction involving fraud, deceit, or embezzlement.

iv.    A felony conviction for hiring, employing, or using a minor in transporting, carrying, selling, giving away, preparing for sale, or peddling, any controlled substances to a minor; or selling, offering to sell, furnishing, offering to furnish, administering, or giving any controlled substance to a minor.

v.    A felony conviction for drug trafficking with enhancements pursuant to Section 11370.4 or 11379.8 of the Health and Safety Code.

vi.    Any other conviction that may disqualify an applicant/owner or permittee under state law.

e.    Verification that the security provisions for the operation have been reviewed and approved by the city police department prior to the issuance of a development permit.

3.    Public Health and Safety Provisions.

a.    Facility improvement plan demonstrating that the operation is compliant with all applicable public health and safety provisions of the International Building Code. The facility improvement plan shall be reviewed and approved by the applicable fire agency and city building division prior to the issuance of a development permit.

b.    Statement of proposed water usage.

c.    Wastewater disposal plan reviewed and approved by the city utilities division prior to the issuance of any development permit. The wastewater disposal plan shall include any specific designs for pretreatment of waste prior to entering municipal sewer system. No waste containing hazardous materials or other containments shall be permitted to enter the municipal sewer system consistent with Chapter 13.20 concerning "Sewer Use And Pretreatment."

d.    Solid waste disposal plan, including the management of cannabis related waste.

e.    Hazardous waste management plan to be approved by Lake County health department.

f.    Odor prevention plan that will prevent obnoxious odors or fumes from being emitted beyond the operation limits that are perceptible by a reasonable person. Minimum design specifications should include odor absorbing ventilation and exhaust systems.

G.    All commercial cannabis activities shall submit an annual performance review report demonstrating compliance with required provisions of this section and all specific operating provisions and licensing required at the time of development approval. Failure to submit an annual report or failure to comply with required provisions will result in revocation of the operating permit. The annual performance review report shall include inspection by city.

H.    All permittees shall comply with the state track and trace requirements for cannabis and cannabis products.

I.    The rights and privileges to conduct commercial cannabis activities on a specific parcel do not attach to title to the property and are not conveyed with the lease or sale of the property. Accordingly, a permit may not be sold, assigned, leased or otherwise conveyed or transferred by the person or entity holding the permit to any third party not named on the application without complying with this chapter and any other applicable law.

J.    Except as provided herein, all other cannabis activities are prohibited. (Ord. 915 §1(part), 2018)

5.34.090 Commercial cannabis performance standards.
A.    Commercial Cannabis Cultivation Standards (Type 1A, 1C, 2A, 3A, 4 and 12).

1.    Use type includes:

a.    Cultivation of cannabis.

b.    Cannabis nursery including the production of clones, immature plants, seeds, and other agricultural products used specifically for the planting, propagation, cultivation of cannabis for sale to licensed commercial cannabis cultivators and licensed retail establishments. No retail sales are permitted.

c.    Cannabis processing such as drying, curing, grading, or trimming.

d.    Accessory uses related to the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or the trimming of cannabis.

2.    Specific Provisions.

a.    All commercial cannabis cultivation operations shall not engage in the retail sale of any product goods or services, excluding microbusiness with retail. Only wholesale activities are permitted.

b.    All cultivation activities shall take place indoors, out of sight of the general public. No greenhouses shall be allowed.

c.    All cannabis cultivation that includes processing such as drying, curing, grading, or trimming shall take place indoors.

d.    The permittee shall use best management practices to minimize water use with cannabis cultivation. This would include the use of low flow irrigation. The permit shall include a plan for water use associated with the cultivation.

e.    If manufacturing of cannabis takes place on the site of the cannabis cultivation, compliance with the manufacturing standards of this chapter are also required.

f.    The applicant shall prepare an integrated management plan consistent with the regulations associated with the California Department of Toxic Substances Control for all chemical, biological and cultural methods to control or prevent the introduction of pests on the cultivation site.

B.    Commercial Cannabis Manufacturing Standards (Type 6 and 7).

1.    Use type includes:

a.    Extractions using mechanical methods or nonvolatile solvents.

b.    Extractions using volatile solvents.

2.    Specific Provisions.

a.    Commercial cannabis manufacturing activities shall not conduct or engage in the retail sale of any product goods or services. Only wholesale activities are permitted.

b.    Applicant shall enact sufficient methods or procedures to capture or otherwise limit risk of explosion, combustion, or any other unreasonably dangerous risk to public safety created by volatile solvents.

c.    All commercial cannabis manufacturing shall take place indoors.

d.    The permittee shall use best management practices to minimize water use with cannabis manufacturing.

e.    The permittee shall provide a list to the public works director and Lakeport fire department of all solvents, gases and/or chemicals prior to commencement of use. No solvents, gases and/or chemicals shall be allowed to enter the city’s wastewater system.

f.    Manufacturing processes that use solvents exclusively within a closed-loop system that meets all of the following requirements:

i.    The system uses only solvents that are generally recognized as safe pursuant to the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. Section 301 et seq.).

ii.    The system is designed to recapture and contain solvents during the manufacturing process, and otherwise prevent the off-gassing of solvents into the ambient atmosphere to mitigate the risks of ignition and explosion during the manufacturing process.

iii.    Receives and maintains approval from the local fire official for the closed-loop system, other equipment, the extraction operation, and the facility and meets the following: the California Fire Code; the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) standards; International Building Code (IBC); and the International Fire Code (IFC).

C.    Commercial Cannabis Testing Standards (Type 8).

1.    Use type includes:

a.    Testing of cannabis and cannabis products.

b.    Businesses and research institutions engaged in the research of cannabis and cannabis products, or devices used for the use of cannabis and cannabis products.

c.    Business offices related to cannabis.

d.    Accessory uses related to the testing of cannabis and cannabis products.

2.    Specific Provisions.

a.    Commercial cannabis testing operations shall not conduct or engage in the retail sale of any product goods or services.

b.    The permittee shall use best management practices to minimize water use with cannabis testing.

D.    Distribution of Commercial Cannabis (Type 11).

1.    Use type includes:

a.    Businesses engaged in the distribution of commercial cannabis, cannabis products, or devices used for the use of cannabis products.

b.    The procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and cannabis products between entities licensed under state law.

c.    Transporting cannabis or cannabis products.

d.    Conducting quality assurance review to ensure compliance with labeling and packing requirements.

e.    Accessory uses related to the procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and cannabis products.

2.    Specific Provisions.

a.    A distributor permittee shall be bonded and insured at a minimum level established by the licensing authority.

b.    All cannabis and cannabis products held bought, and sold be a cannabis distributer shall be obtained from a legal source and shall have the state issued track and trace information.

E.    Commercial Cannabis Retailers Standards (Type 10 and 12).

1.    Use type includes:

a.    Retailer storefront with sales of cannabis, cannabis products or devices is prohibited.

b.    Retailer storefront with the delivery of cannabis, cannabis products or devices is prohibited.

c.    Retailer delivery of cannabis, cannabis products or devices.

d.    Storefront retail with on-site consumption is prohibited.

e.    Microbusinesses with storefront retail included are prohibited.

f.    Microbusinesses with retailer delivery of cannabis, cannabis products or devices.

2.    Specific Provisions.

a.    A commercial cannabis permit for retailer issued in compliance with Section 5.34.040 shall be required for any cannabis retailer operating within the city. Cannabis retailers shall also be subject to permit requirements and regulations established by the state and those established by the city council through resolution or ordinance. Additionally, cannabis retailers must comply with all other applicable building codes and requirements, including accessibility requirements. Permits shall only be issued to cannabis retailers coming under state cannabis license Types 10 (retailers) and 12 (microbusiness). Commercial cannabis permits for retailers shall be subject to the requirements and limitations set forth in this chapter.

b.    No exterior signage or symbols shall be displayed which advertise the availability of cannabis using drug-related symbols which are attractive to minors or which are carried out in a manner intended to encourage persons under twenty-one years of age to consume cannabis or cannabis products, nor shall any such signage or symbols be displayed on the interior of the facility in such a way as to be visible from the exterior.

c.    No cannabis retailer shall hold or maintain a license from the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control to sell alcoholic beverages, or operate a business that sells alcoholic beverages on the same premises. No alcoholic beverages shall be allowed or consumed on the premises.

d.    No cannabis retailer shall conduct or engage in the commercial sale of any product, good or service unless otherwise approved by the permit. A retailer may sell live starter plants, clones and seeds from qualified nurseries, but shall not cultivate or clone cannabis (unless the retailer holds a microbusiness or cultivation license from the state and such activities are allowed on the same premises under state law).

e.    No cannabis shall be smoked on the premises. The term "premises" includes the actual building, as well as any accessory structures, parking areas, or other immediate surroundings.

f.    The following signs, in measurements of not less than eight by ten inches, shall be clearly and legibly posted in a conspicuous location inside the retailer where they will be visible to customers in the normal course of a transaction, stating:

i.    "The sale of cannabis without a state license is illegal."

ii.    "Smoking cannabis on this property, within twenty feet (20’) of the retailer, or in any public place is illegal under California law."

iii.    For medical cannabis retailers: "No one under the age of eighteen (18) shall be allowed on the premises, unless they are a qualified patient or a primary caregiver."

iv.    For nonmedical cannabis retailers: "No one under the age of twenty-one (21) shall be allowed on the premises."

g.    Any commercial cannabis permit issued to microbusiness with a Type 12 state license, or a state cannabis license type subsequently established, that contains a retailer operation will be subject to the permit procedures and requirements for cannabis retailers under this subsection E. Any commercial cannabis permit issued to a microbusiness with a cultivation, manufacturing and/or distribution component will also be subject to the requirements of subsections A, B, C and/or D of this section for those operations.

h.    Except as provided in subsection (E)(2)(g) of this section for microbusinesses, commercial cannabis cultivation and manufacturing are prohibited on the same premises.

i.    Cannabis retailers shall contain no window displays that are visible by normal unaided vision from a public place.

j.    All cannabis deliveries shall have all records identifying the originating location and terminus of the cannabis or cannabis products, as well as all corresponding licenses consistent with all applicable state licensing requirements.

k.    The operating plan for all cannabis deliveries shall include driver identification and license information for all employees engaged in delivery operations. Vehicle information including license, year, make and model shall also be listed in the operating plan.

l.    Vehicles used in the delivery of cannabis shall have no signage and shall be unmarked.

m.    The sale of ancillary products, including books, herbal supplements, and devices facilitating the consumption of cannabis, shall occur in a manner consistent with this section, and in compliance with all state requirements.

n.    The maximum retail days and hours of operations shall be Monday through Sunday, nine o’clock a.m. through seven o’clock p.m.

F.    Cannabis events within the city are prohibited. (Ord. 915 §1(part), 2018)

5.34.100 Fees.
The city council shall, by resolution, establish a schedule of fees for commercial cannabis license applications, amendments, renewals and other matters pertaining to this chapter. The schedule of fees may be changed or modified by resolution of the city council. Applicants and permittees also shall pay the amount as prescribed by the Department of Justice of the State of California for the processing of applicant’s fingerprints. None of the above fees shall be prorated, or refunded in the event of a denial, suspension or revocation of the permit. Failure to pay the applicable fees is grounds for denial of an application. (Ord. 915 §1(part), 2018)

5.34.110 Enforcement.
A.    Any person violating any provision of this chapter or misrepresenting any material fact in demonstrating compliance with requirements for engaging in a commercial cannabis activity shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment for not more than twelve months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

B.    Any violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance as defined in Section 370 of the Penal Code, Section 3480 of the Civil Code and Chapter 8.22 and shall be subject to injunctive relief, revocation of the certificate of occupancy for the property, disgorgement and payment to the city of any and all monies unlawfully obtained, costs of abatement, costs of investigation, attorney’s fees, and any other relief or remedy available at law or equity. The city may also pursue any and all remedies and actions available and applicable under local and state law for any violation committed by the commercial cannabis owner, its managers, members or any person related or associated with the commercial cannabis activity.

C.    Any violation of the terms and conditions of the commercial cannabis activity in this chapter shall be grounds for suspension and revocation of the permit. (Ord. 915 §1(part), 2018)

5.34.120 Liability.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to protect the record property owner(s) of a legal parcel associated with any commercial cannabis activity, his or her lessees, tenants, and other participants in the operation of a commercial cannabis activity, and/or members of collectives and/or cooperatives associated with such activity from prosecution pursuant to any laws that may prohibit the cultivation, sale, and/or possession of controlled substances. Moreover, cultivation, sale, possession, distribution, and use of cannabis remain violations of federal law as of the date of adoption of the ordinance creating this chapter and this chapter is not intended to, and does not, protect any of the above described persons from arrest or prosecution under those federal laws. The record property owner(s) of a legal parcel associated with any commercial cannabis activity, his or her lessees, tenants, and other participants in such activity, and/or members of collectives and/or cooperatives associated with such use assume any and all risk and any and all liability that may arise or result under state and federal criminal laws from engaging in a commercial cannabis activity. Further, to the fullest extent permitted by law, any actions taken under the provisions of this chapter by any public officer or employee of the city or the city itself shall not become a personal liability of such person or the liability of the city. (Ord. 915 §1(part), 2018)

Title 6
ANIMALS
Chapters:

6.04    General Provisions

6.08    Animal Control Officer

6.12    Animal Control Regulations Generally

6.16    Licensing

6.20    Impoundment Procedures

6.24    Spay and Neuter Program

6.28    Rabies Control

6.32    Vicious Animals

6.35    Feeding Wild Ducks and Other Waterfowl Prohibited on Public Properties

Chapter 6.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

6.04.010    Statutory authority.

6.04.020    Title of provisions.

6.04.030    Definitions.

6.04.040    Violation--Penalty.

6.04.010 Statutory authority.
This title is adopted pursuant to the general police power of this city and Sections 25800 et seq. of the Government Code. (Ord. 459 §101, 1970)

6.04.020 Title of provisions.
This title shall be titled as above, and may in all pleadings or proceedings be referred to as the "animal control ordinance." (Ord. 459 §102, 1970)

6.04.030 Definitions.
As used in this title:

A.    At Large. Any animal, except working animals, shall be deemed "at large" when off the premises of the owner and not under restraint by leash and physical control of its owner.

B.    "Commercial kennel" or "kennel" means any lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises whereupon five or more dogs over the age of four months are kept, whether in special buildings or runways or not.

C.    "Domestic animal" means any bovine animal, horse, mule or burro, sheep, swine, chicken or other valuable animal or fowl customarily confined and cultivated by man for domestic or commercial purpose and other than a pet except that "domestic animal" does not include dogs, cats, skunks, rabbits, birds or other such animals.

D.    "Leash" means any rope, leather strap, chain, or other material not exceeding six feet in length being held in the hand of the person capable of controlling and actually controlling the dog to which it is attached.

E.    "Owner" means any person, firm or corporation having interest in or having control, custody or possession of an animal; provided, however, that any occupant of premises upon which an animal is found shall be deemed prima facie the owner of said animal for the purpose of this title unless the occupant either presents the animal to the animal control officer for inspection or permits the animal control officer to take custody of the animal.

F.    "Person" means any person, individual, firm, partnership, corporation or unincorporated association.

G.    "Pet shop" means any premises devoted or partly devoted to the commercial trade of selling live animals for use as pets.

H.    "Wild animal" means any animal which is by its natural state wild and not considered a pet such as a dog or cat, mouse, rabbit, hamster or the like, and not including domestic animals or birds. "Wild animal" includes ducks and other waterfowl. (Ord. 860 §2, 2006; Ord. 682 §5, 1988; Ord. 498 §4, 1974; Ord. 459 §§103--107, 1970)

6.04.040 Violation--Penalty.
Violation of any provision of this title is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars for the first offense; for the second offense within a period of twelve months, a fine of not less than fifty dollars or imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months, or both; provided, however, that in no event shall the fine exceed the sum of five hundred dollars. (Ord. 459 §701, 1970)

Chapter 6.08
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER
Sections:

6.08.010    Office established--Appointment--Oath.

6.08.020    Duties designated.

6.08.030    Citation issuing authority.

6.08.040    Right of entry.

6.08.050    Badge--Uniform.

6.08.060    Obstruction of officer prohibited.

6.08.070    Employment of contractor permitted.

6.08.080    Employment of contractor--Restrictions.

6.08.010 Office established--Appointment--Oath.
A.    There is established in this city the office of animal control officer.

B.    The animal control officer shall be appointed by the city council.

C.    Deputy animal control officers shall be appointed by the animal control officer from a list of eligible candidates.

D.    The animal control officer and his deputies shall take and subscribe an oath of office and file the same with the city clerk. (Ord. 459 §201, 1970)

6.08.020 Duties designated.
The duties of the animal control officer are as follows:

A.    To operate the public pound and any branches thereof within the city at such place or places as may be designated by the city council; provided, however, that nothing in this title shall prevent the city council from entering into a contract with the county Humane Society or other organization for the operation of a public pound.

B.    To provide for the sale and issuance of licenses and to enforce all provisions of this title and all laws of the state relating to the control of dogs and other animals, domestic or wild.

C.    Keep a record of the number, description and disposition of all animals impounded showing in detail in the case of each animal the date or receipt, date and manner of disposal, name of persons reclaiming, redeeming, the reason for destruction, the fines, charges, proceeds received on account thereof, and such additional records as may be deemed necessary. A monthly report of all rabies control activities shall be submitted to the health officer containing the same information required in Section 2606.4, Title 17, California Administrative Code. In the event that the pound is conducted by the Humane Society or other organization under contract with this city, then the above records shall be kept by said organization and shall be open to inspection by those agents of the city designated in such contract at any reasonable time and shall be delivered to the animal control officer on termination of the contract. (Ord. 459 §202, 1970)

6.08.030 Citation issuing authority.
The animal control officer and his deputies shall, upon appointment and qualifications, become and be vested with the powers and duties of peace officers of the city as limited by Section 830 of the Penal Code of the state and each shall have the power, and it shall be their duty, to issue citations for violation of any provisions of this title. (Ord. 459 §203, 1970)

6.08.040 Right of entry.
For the purpose of discharging his duties imposed by this title the animal control officer and his deputies are authorized and directed to enter upon any enclosed or unenclosed property upon which any animal is kept or found in violation of the provisions of this title, and to demand from the person owning or having charge or control of the animal, exhibition of the license and tag for such animal if it is required to be licensed by this title. No entry shall be made except upon reasonable evidence that such violation is occurring or has in fact occurred. (Ord. 459 §204, 1970)

6.08.050 Badge--Uniform.
A.    The animal control officer and his deputies, while engaged in the execution of their duties, shall each wear in plain view a badge on which shall be engraved the words “Deputy Animal Control Officer” as is appropriate.

B.    The animal control officer, subject to approval by the city council, may authorize appropriate uniforms for his deputies with uniform allowances consistent with allowances in other city enforcement agencies, and necessary immunizations. The cost of immunizations shall be a proper city expense. (Ord. 459 §205, 1970)

6.08.060 Obstruction of officer prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to resist, hinder or obstruct the animal control officer or the health officer or any of their deputies in the exercise of their duties as imposed by this title. (Ord. 459 §903, 1970)

6.08.070 Employment of contractor permitted.
The city council may enter into a contract to provide for the enforcement and carrying out of the requirements of this title with the county or with private persons as the city council may from time to time deem necessary or advisable. (Ord. 459 §906, 1970)

6.08.080 Employment of contractor--Restrictions.
A.    The city council may contract with any responsible organization for the performance of all or any portion of those duties imposed upon the animal control officer. Provision may be made in said contract for appointment and compensation of the animal control officers other than as provided in Section 6.08.010 of this chapter, but no person appointed by such organization shall become a peace officer as provided by Section 6.08.030 of this chapter until such person has been approved by the city council.

B.    Any contract executed pursuant to this section which provides that the impounding function shall be handled by other than the animal control officer shall provide that such agency shall make adequate provisions for receiving animals from the animal control officer or his deputies during regular business hours. (Ord. 459 §904, 1970)

Chapter 6.12
ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS GENERALLY
Sections:

6.12.010    Acts requiring impoundment.

6.12.020    Notice to owner of impounded livestock.

6.12.030    Prohibited acts by owners--Cruelty to animals.

6.12.040    Confinement of animals.

6.12.050    Response to complaints.

6.12.010 Acts requiring impoundment.
It is the duty of the animal control officer to take up within the incorporated area of this city and impound:

A.    Any animal not having attached to its body a current license tag where such is required by this title;

B.    Any animal when there is reason to believe said animal has been abandoned by the owner thereof;

C.    Any animal found trespassing on public or private property when such animal has destroyed anything of value on said property;

D.    Any female dog running at large while in heat;

E.    Any patently vicious animal not under the immediate control of its owner or keeper;

F.    Any dog trespassing upon any farm whereon livestock or domestic fowl are kept;

G.    Any animal staked or tied on any street or other public place or upon any private property without consent of the owner or occupant thereof; provided, that this subsection shall only be enforced upon complaint of an interested party;

H.    Any animal when, in the opinion of the animal control officer, such taking up is necessary for the health and safety of the community;

I.    Any animal at large in violation of any law of this state;

J.    Any animal when such impounding is, in the opinion of the animal control officer, necessary to facilitate investigation, prosecution or enforcement of this title or any other law of this city or state. (Ord. 459 S401, 1970)

6.12.020 Notice to owner of impounded livestock.
The animal control director shall within twenty-four hours after the impounding of any other animal, including bovine animals, horses, mules or burros (except weekends and holidays), cause to be mailed to the place of business or residence of the owner or keeper of the animal, if known to him, a written notice that such animal has been impounded and the date of the impounding. If such owner or keeper is not known to the animal control director, and the animal is not claimed within fourteen days, it shall be disposed of in the manner prescribed by this section and the Food and Agricultural Code. (Ord. 682 §4, 1988)

6.12.030 Prohibited acts by owners--Cruelty to animals.
It is unlawful within the incorporated area of this city for any person owning, harboring or controlling any animal, knowingly to:

A.    Abandon said animal in the incorporated area of the city;

B.    Permit said animal to trespass on public or private property so as to damage or destroy anything of value thereon, or to commit a nuisance thereon;

C.    Permit the animal to run at large when he knows, or should have known, that the animal is vicious to the safety of any person or animal;

D.    In the case of a female dog, to permit such dog to run at large or remain accessible to other dogs running at large while said female dog is in heat or breeding condition;

E.    To permit such dog to trespass on any farm whereon livestock or domestic fowl are kept;

F.    Permit the animal to be staked or tied on any street or other public place, or upon any private property without the consent of the owner or occupant thereof, provided that this subsection shall only be enforced upon complaint of an interested party;

G.    To refuse to display the animal to the animal control officer upon his reasonable request together with a current license tag for such animal if such is required by this title;

H.    Refuse to obey the conditions of a lawfully imposed quarantine;

I.    Permit any dog under the age of four months to run at large;

J.    In the case of a dog required to be licensed pursuant to this title to permit to remain attached to the dog a license issued by the city council or any other city or county in the state for the current or immediately preceding year when the license was not issued for that dog;

K.    In addition to other provisions contained herein, permit it to be at large or be pastured or kept on any street or other public place, on private property against the wishes of the owner or occupant, or in any manner or place to the injury of the owner or occupant of any other property. As used in this section, “at large,” means an animal not under restraint by leash, not in an enclosed area, or not under the direct control of the owner. A hunting dog is to be presumed to be under direct control of its owner when performing in the act of legally hunting game, upland or waterfowl or within the area of confines of its owner’s property. A stock dog is presumed to be under direct control of its owner when performing its herding duties. (Ord. 485 §1, 1973; Ord. 459 §402, 1970)

6.12.040 Confinement of animals.
A.    Every person owning or having charge, care, custody or control of a dog shall keep it exclusively upon his own premises; provided, however, that such dog may be off such premises if it is under the control of a competent person and restrained by a substantial chain or leash not exceeding six feet in length.

B.    The following purposes are permitted and excepted herefrom, provided the dog does not present a hazard to the public safety and welfare, does not trespass upon private property, cause a nuisance or violate any other provision of this title or state law:

1.    Lawful hunting;

2.    Livestock herding and control on public lands;

3.    An animal being used by peace officers in the pursuit of their duties;

4.    Organized field trials;

5.    Tracking, obedience training/or show and other recognized work activities when under the direct control of the owner or handler. (Ord. 682 §6, 1988)

6.12.050 Response to complaints.
Whenever the animal control officer receives two or more complaints in writing from affected persons, no one of which is a member of the same household, that the animal is a habitual nuisance by reason of its barking, howling or making such other noise with such frequency and in such manner as to disturb the peace of the immediate neighborhood, he shall investigate and if he finds such a condition to exist, he shall send notice in writing to abate the same upon the person owning or keeping or harboring such animal. Failure to so abate the condition within ten days after receipt of said notice shall constitute a separate offense punishable as provided in Section 6.04.040 of this title. (Ord. 485 §2, 1973; Ord. 459 §403, 1970)

Chapter 6.16
LICENSING
Sections:

ARTICLE I. DOG LICENSING

6.16.010    Required--Fees.

6.16.020    New residents--Requirements.

6.16.030    Tags--Attachment--Replacement.

6.16.040    Recordkeeping--Certificate requirements.

6.16.050    Duplicate licenses.

ARTICLE II. KENNELS

6.16.060    Required.

6.16.070    Inspection and approval required.

6.16.080    Issuance conditions.

6.16.090    Tag issuance.

6.16.100    Design and maintenance of premises.

6.16.110    Revocation--Hearing.

6.16.120    Display on premises.

6.16.130    Transfer of ownership--Requirements.

ARTICLE III. WILD ANIMAL PERMITS

6.16.140    Required.

6.16.150    Application required.

6.16.160    Term--Fee.

6.16.170    Revocation.

ARTICLE IV. MISCELLANEOUS LICENSING PROVISIONS

6.16.180    Guide dogs--Exemptions.

6.16.190    Unauthorized use of licenses.

ARTICLE V. ANIMAL CONTROL FUND

6.16.200    Source--Use of revenue.

ARTICLE I. DOG LICENSING

6.16.010 Required--Fees.
Annually, prior to November 1st of the year for which the license is to be issued (or October 1st if said dog has attached to it a license properly issued for said dog by any city or county of the state for the immediately preceding year) every owner of a dog shall procure a license for said dog from the animal control officer and shall pay therefor a fee of:

A.    Three dollars for a dog that has been spayed or neutered (proof must be provided);

B.    Six dollars for all other dogs, plus any additional fee required under Chapter 6.28 of this chapter. Except as provided in Section 6.16.020 of this chapter, every owner to whom a license is issued for which application was made on or after November 1st of the year for which the license is issued shall pay an additional fee of five dollars and shall be subject to such other penalties as may be duly imposed for violation of this chapter; or

C.    Ten dollars for all other dogs, plus any additional fee required under Chapter 6.28 of this chapter. Four dollars of the license fee collected for all dogs which are not spayed or neutered shall be applied to the spay or neuter program established hereunder. Except as provided in Section 6.16.020 of this chapter, every owner to whom a license is issued for which application was made on or after November 1st of the year for which the license is issued shall pay an additional fee of five dollars and shall be subject to such other penalties as may be duly imposed for violation of this chapter. (Ord. 682 §1, 1988; Ord. 623 §1, 1983: Ord. 459 §501, 1970)

6.16.020 New residents--Requirements.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 6.16.010 of this chapter, any owner who brings his dog into this city after November 1st of the year for which the license is to be issued or the owner whose dog reaches the age of four months after November 1st of the year in which the license is to be issued or any owner of a dog for which an individual license was not theretofore required shall procure a license for such dog from the animal control officer within a period of thirty days after such dog brought into the incorporated area of this city, become four months of age, or becomes subject to the individual licensing provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that as to any dog brought into the incorporated area of this city to which there is attached a license issued by any county or city in the state for the current or immediately preceding year, the license shall be obtained within sixty days after said dog is brought into the city. Any owner failing to procure a license within the time limit established in this chapter shall be subject to such other penalties as may be duly imposed for violation of this section. (Ord. 459 §502, 1970)

6.16.030 Tags--Attachment--Replacement.
A.    The tag issued by the animal control director at the time the dog license is obtained shall be attached to the dog for which the license is issued and shall be attached in a clearly visible manner.

B.    In the event the license tag becomes lost from the body of any dog for which the same was issued, the owner shall within thirty days procure a duplicate license for the dog from the animal control director, at a cost of one dollar per duplication. (Ord. 623 §4, 1983: Ord. 459 §504, 1970)

6.16.040 Recordkeeping--Certificate requirements.
A.    The animal control officer is directed to procure suitable applications and license tags.

B.    The animal control officer shall keep a file of all applications made pursuant to this chapter.

C.    Fees shall be paid at the time said application is filed with the animal control officer.

D.    No tags shall be issued until the applicant has also exhibited to the animal control officer a certificate of vaccination certifying that the dog has been vaccinated in compliance with this chapter.

E.    If any person applies to license a dog under this chapter and pays all fees required but thereafter fails to exhibit to the animal control officer the certificate of vaccination within thirty days after his application was filed, that person shall forfeit the fees paid and shall be required to reapply and pay the fees due as if no application had been made previously. (Ord. 459 §521, 1970)

6.16.050 Duplicate licenses.
In the event the license tag becomes lost from the body of any dog for which the same was issued the owner shall, within thirty days, procure a duplicate license for the dog from the animal control officer at a cost of fifty cents. (Ord. 459 §522, 1970)

ARTICLE II. KENNELS

6.16.060 Required.
A.    Every person who is the legal owner or actually in control of or operates a commercial kennel or pet shop, unless otherwise exempt, shall apply to and procure a kennel license for each calendar year or a portion thereof from the animal control officer.

B.    Application for such kennel license shall be made on the form provided and on or before October 31st of the year for which the license is to be issued.

C.    No kennel shall be hereinafter established unless the person proposing to act as kennel operator shall first apply for a receive a kennel license pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 459 §511, 1970)

6.16.070 Inspection and approval required.
No original kennel license shall be issued unless and until the premises have been inspected and approved by the animal control officer as meeting the appropriate standards set forth in Section 6.16.110 of this chapter. No such inspection shall be prerequisite to renewal of kennel or pet shop licenses and the fact of such renewal shall not be construed as an approval of the conditions of the kennel or the manner in which it is operated. (Ord. 459 S512, 1970)

6.16.080 Issuance conditions.
A.    The animal control officer shall issue a commercial kennel or pet shop license for the calendar year upon filing with him a properly completed application and payment of the prescribed fee.

B.    The fee for a kennel or pet shop license for five to seven dogs or cats, shall be forty dollars; for eight to fifteen dogs or cats, seventy-five dollars; and for sixteen or more dogs or cats, one hundred and twenty-five dollars.

C.    The animal control director shall not issue an original kennel or pet shop license until the planning commission has certified that the zoning regulations of the city permit the maintenance of a kennel at the proposed location.

D.    No kennel license shall be issued unless the applicant therefor displays at the time of application, certificates showing that all dogs permanently kept within said kennel have been vaccinated against rabies. Any license which was properly issuable more than thirty days prior to the actual date of issuance shall be subject to a penalty fee of ten dollars. (Ord. 623 §2, 1983: Ord. 459 §513, 1970)

6.16.090 Tag issuance.
A.    At the time of issuance of a kennel license the animal control officer shall issue without further charge up to and including nine license tags to said licensee.

B.    No dog kept by the kennel shall be taken therefrom without having attached to its body a tag issued pursuant to this section unless said dog is otherwise licensed and has attached to it a tag issued pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 459 §514, 1970)

6.16.100 Design and maintenance of premises.
A.    All commercial kennels and pet shops shall be:

1.    Designed to provide adequate exercise area and to permit the premises to be kept in a clean and sanitary condition;

2.    Constructed so as to prevent animals confined therein from running at large;

3.    Maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and conducted in such a manner that they will not cause detriment or nuisance in the immediate neighborhood.

B.    Periodic inspections of licensed kennels and pet shops shall be made by the animal control officer at such intervals as he deems necessary. Such inspections may also be made by the health officer or his designated agent at the request of the animal control officer or on his own initiative. Inspecting officers shall use reasonable caution to prevent contamination of any pet shop or kennel during inspection. (Ord. 459 §515, 1970)

6.16.110 Revocation--Hearing.
A.    When, in his opinion, conditions exist which he believes warrant the revocation of commercial kennels or pet shop license, the animal control officer or health officer shall report such facts to the city council with a recommendation that such permit be revoked.

B.    The licensee’s refusal to permit reasonable inspection of the licensed premises by the animal control officer, or his failure to make the premises available for inspection after reasonable notice, shall constitute a valid ground for revocation.

C.    After receipt of such recommendation and upon ten days’ written notice of the time and place thereof, the city council shall hold a hearing on the recommendation and at the conclusions thereof may permit the continued operation under the permit or revoke the permit. Should the council revoke the permit it may direct that no similar permit shall be issued to the licensee for a period not to exceed one year following the revocation. The action of the city council shall be final.

D.    This section shall not be interpreted to limit any power granted to the health officer under any other provisions of law. (Ord. 459 §516, 1970)

6.16.120 Display on premises.
Kennel licenses issued as required by this chapter shall be conspicuously displayed upon the kennel premises. (Ord. 459 §518, 1970)

6.16.130 Transfer of ownership--Requirements.
Within thirty days after the transfer of ownership of any kennel or pet shop licensed pursuant to this article, or any other license issued pursuant to this chapter, the new owner shall apply to the animal control officer for the transfer of said license to his name. Such transfer shall be subject to a fee of one dollar per license. The fact of the transfer shall not be construed as an approval of the condition of any kennel or the manner in which it is observed. (Ord. 623 §3, 1983: Ord. 459 §519, 1970)

ARTICLE III. WILD ANIMAL PERMITS

6.16.140 Required.
No person shall keep in captivity a wild animal except upon securing a permit from the animal control officer. (Ord. 498 §5(part), 1974)

6.16.150 Application required.
A.    The permit application shall contain the following information:

1.    Name of applicant;

2.    Address of applicant;

3.    The proposed location of the animal(s);

4.    Description of the type or variety of animals; and number;

5.    A brief plan for keeping the animals; and

6.    A plan of the housing facilities.

B.    Upon receipt of the application, animal control officer shall consider the application and may secure the recommendation of the director of public works, the planning commission, the health department and any other appropriate county or state agency, so as to ensure complete safety for members of the community and safe, humane treatment for the wild animal or animals. (Ord. 498 §5(part), 1974)

6.16.160 Term--Fee.
The permit shall be issued on an annual basis and shall be renewable each year on the anniversary of issuance. The fee for such permit and renewal shall be set by resolution of the city council. The permit and fee shall be for the number of animals described in the permit. A renewal permit shall be considered delinquent at the end of thirty days following the anniversary of the application or next preceding renewal and the penalty shall attach. (Ord. 498 §5(part), 1974)

6.16.170 Revocation.
A permit may be revoked if the animal control officer makes any of the following findings:

A.    The owner permits any violation of Section 597 of the Penal Code, this chapter, or any violation of health or safety regulations; or

B.    The owner has failed to keep the animals in a safe, healthy or sanitary manner; or

C.    The owner has a the place for which the permit is issued failed to provide any wild animal with proper food, water, shelter or attention;

D.    The owner has violated any rules, regulations or conditions adopted by the animal control officer as necessary to ensure that wild animals will not endanger the health or safety of any person or property. (Ord. 498 §5(part), 1974)

ARTICLE IV. MISCELLANEOUS LICENSING PROVISIONS

6.16.180 Guide dogs--Exemptions.
The blind owner of a guide dog shall not be subject to license fees as provided in Sections 6.16.010 and 6.16.020, but shall be subject to Section 6.16.030 of this chapter. No guide dog shall be destroyed except upon written direction of the health officer. (Ord. 459 §901, 1970)

6.16.190 Unauthorized use of licenses.
No person shall attach a license issued by this city or any other city or county in this state for the current or immediately preceding year to a dog when such person knows or should know that said license was not issued for said dog. (Ord. 459 §901.5, 1970)

ARTICLE V. ANIMAL CONTROL FUND

6.16.200 Source--Use of revenue.
A.    All fees for the issuance of dog license tags and all fines collected pursuant to this chapter shall be paid into the city treasury or to such agency as may be agreed upon by the city council and the county, and shall constitute a fund to be known as the “Animal Control Fund” which shall be used:

1.    To pay fees for the issuance of dog license tags;

2.    To pay fees, salaries, costs, expenses or any or all of them for the enforcement of this chapter;

3.    To pay damages to owners of livestock which are killed by dogs.

B.    At the end of each fiscal year the surplus amount in the animal control fund not needed for the regulatory program shall be transferred to the general fund of the city; provided, however, that such surplus accumulates incidentally to the regulatory program, that the fees imposed are not disproportionate to the requirements of the program, and that a sufficient sum remains in the fund to adequately carry out the regulatory needs, including indemnifying owners of livestock killed by dogs. (Ord. 459 §907, 1970)

Chapter 6.20
IMPOUNDMENT PROCEDURES
Sections:

6.20.010    Applicability.

6.20.020    Dogs--Notice of impoundment.

6.20.030    Redemption of animals.

6.20.040    Livestock--Notice of impoundment.

6.20.050    Impoundment fees.

6.20.060    Service fees.

6.20.070    Retention by animal control officer.

6.20.080    Disposition of wild animals.

6.20.010 Applicability.
Except as provided in Chapter 6.28 of this title, all public pounds shall be conducted pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 459 §301, 1970)

6.20.020 Dogs--Notice of impoundment.
A.    Any dog impounded as set forth in this chapter shall be cared for by the animal control officer for a period of seventy-two hours, and after the expiration of said time, if not redeemed, shall be placed in a bona fide home or humanely destroyed by the impounding agency; provided, that prior to the disposal of any licensed dog duly impounded a written notice shall be sent to the last address of the owner as shown on the licensing records, notifying said owner that said dog is subject to disposal unless redeemed within fourteen days after notice shall have been mailed to the owner; provided, that the animal control officer is authorized and empowered to forthwith destroy any animal lawfully impounded, which is by reason of injury, disease or other cause, unfit for further use, or is dangerous to keep impounded. (Ord. 459 §302, 1970)

6.20.030 Redemption of animals.
Except as provided in Section 6.20.070 of this chapter, any animal taken up and impounded under the terms of this chapter may be redeemed by the owner thereof at any time prior to actual disposal of the animal, upon the payment of all fees and costs as provided by provisions of Section 6.20.050 of this chapter, and upon presentation of evidence that the animal is duly licensed where such is required. A signed declaration of ownership shall be prima facie evidence of ownership and shall justify release of the animal to the declared owner. (Ord. 498 §2, 1974: Ord. 459 §304, 1970)

6.20.040 Livestock--Notice of impoundment.
The animal control officer shall within twenty-four hours after the impounding of any other animal, including bovine animals, horses, mules or burros, except weekends and holidays, cause to be mailed to the place of business or residence of the owner or keeper of the animal, if known to him, a written notice that such animal has been impounded and date of impounding. If such owner or keeper is not known to the animal control officer, and said animal is not claimed within ten days, it shall be disposed of in the manner prescribed by this section and the Food and Agricultural Code. (Ord. 498 §3, 1974: Ord. 459 §305, 1970)

6.20.050 Impoundment fees.
A.    The animal control officer shall charge and collect the following fees for impounded animals when claimed:

1.    For every dog, four dollars;

2.    For every cat, rabbit, bird, fowl or other small animal not otherwise provided for in this section, two dollars;

3.    For feeding and caring for animals the following additional sums per day, one dollar;

4.    For each other animal not specified, fifty cents.

B.    By resolution the city council may from time to time amend the foregoing fees.

C.    Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, any organization contracting with this city for the maintenance of a public pound shall make charges for, feed and care as are provided by such contract. (Ord. 459 §307, 1970)

6.20.060 Service fees.
A.    The animal control officer may establish reasonable charges for destruction of animals, placement of animals in bona fide homes or for other disposal, when such service is requested by the owner or the animals, but shall not charge less than the reasonable cost of such services; provided, however, that upon the animal control officer’s written certification that such charges in a given case would probably result in the abandonment of an animal, he may accept such animal from its owner with no charge.

B.    No schedule of charges established under this chapter shall be effective unless and until the same is approved by the city council. (Ord. 459 §308, 1970)

6.20.070 Retention by animal control officer.
If, in his discretion, the animal control officer determines that any animal impounded under the terms of this chapter should be retained by the county to facilitate investigation, prosecution or other enforcement of this chapter or other county or state law, he may refuse to permit redemption of the animal until, in his opinion, the need for retention no longer exists. The cost of such retention, but not including any damages claimed by the owner, shall, after attempted redemption by the owner be borne by the city. (Ord. 459 §309, 1970)

6.20.080 Disposition of wild animals.
Wild animals shall be either returned to their natural habitat or destroyed in the discretion of the animal control officer, but no disposition thereof shall be in violation of any law of this state providing for the protection or regulation of wild animals. (Ord. 459 §306, 1970)

Chapter 6.24
SPAY AND NEUTER PROGRAM
Sections:

6.24.010    Established.

6.24.020    Eligibility.

6.24.030    Purpose of program.

6.24.040    Amount of reimbursement.

6.24.050    Requirements for dogs--Deposit.

6.24.060    Dogs--Failure to spay or neuter--Forfeit of deposit.

6.24.070    Requirements for cats--Deposit.

6.24.080    Cats--Failure to spay or neuter--Forfeit of deposit.

6.24.090    Restrictions.

6.24.100    Compliance required.

6.24.110    Exemptions.

6.24.010 Established.
There is established in the city a spay and neuter program to help control the population of unwanted dogs. (Ord. 682 §3(part), 1988)

6.24.020 Eligibility.
Only dogs which are licensed in the city owned by permanent residents of Lakeport shall be eligible to participate in the program established by this chapter. (Ord. 682 §3(part), 1988)

6.24.030 Purpose of program.
Any owner of a dog eligible under Section 6.24.020 of this chapter, may receive a partial reimbursement for the owner’s costs of a spay or neuter surgical operation if such owner provides the animal control director, within thirty days, of the qualifying spay or neuter surgical operation, a certificate of spay or neuter and a copy of the receipt of the veterinarian charges for the spay or neuter operation. (Ord. 682 §3(part), 1988)

6.24.040 Amount of reimbursement.
Any owner of a dog eligible under Section 6.24.020 of this chapter who has fulfilled the requirements of Section 6.24.030 of this chapter shall receive a reimbursement in the amount of one-half of the actual spay or neuter surgical fee charged by the veterinarian, however, in no case shall any reimbursement exceed sixty dollars. The reimbursement shall be limited to surgical fees only and shall not include other fees or supplies. (Ord. 682 §3(part), 1988)

6.24.050 Requirements for dogs--Deposit.
A.    No public pound, society for the prevention of cruelty to animals’ shelter, or humane shelter shall sell or give away any dog that has not been spayed or neutered, unless a deposit for spaying or neutering the dog has been tendered to the pound or shelter.

B.    The deposit shall be in the amount determined by the pound or shelter to be comparable to the lowest fee charged by veterinarians in the locale, but shall not exceed forty dollars for female dogs or thirty dollars for male dogs.

C.    The pound or shelter shall return the deposit to the person purchasing or receiving the dog upon presentation of a written statement or receipt from the veterinarian or clinic that the dog has been spayed or neutered.

D.    The deposit may also include an amount necessary to recover any additional costs under this chapter. (Ord. 682 §3(part), 1988)

6.24.060 Dogs--Failure to spay or neuter--Forfeit of deposit.
A.    Any dog over six months of age at the time it is sold or given away by the pound or shelter shall be spayed or neutered within thirty days, or the deposit shall be deemed unclaimed.

B.    Any dog six months of age or younger at the time it is sold or given away by the pound or shelter shall be spayed or neutered within thirty days after reaching the age of eight months, or the deposit shall be deemed unclaimed.

C.    Any deposit not claimed under Section 6.24.050 of this chapter shall be deposited in the animal control director’s trust fund. (Ord. 682 §3(part), 1988)

6.24.070 Requirements for cats--Deposit.
A.    No public pound, society for the prevention of cruelty to animals’ shelter, or humane shelter shall sell or give away any cat that has not been spayed or neutered, unless a deposit for spaying or neutering the cat has been tendered to the pound or shelter.

B.    The deposit shall be in the amount determined by the pound or shelter to be comparable to the lowest fee charged by veterinarians in the locale, but shall not exceed twenty-five dollars for female cats or fifteen dollars for male cats.

C.    The pound or shelter shall return the deposit to the person purchasing or receiving the cat upon presentation of a written statement or receipt from the veterinarian or clinic that the cat has been spayed or neutered.

D.    The deposit may also include the amount necessary to recover any additional costs under this chapter. (Ord. 682 §3(part), 1988)

6.24.080 Cats--Failure to spay or neuter--Forfeit of deposit.
A.    All cats over six months of age at the time they are sold or given away by the pound or shelter shall be spayed or neutered within thirty days, or the deposit shall be deemed unclaimed.

B.    All cats six months of age or younger at the time they are sold or given away by the pound or shelter shall be spayed or neutered within thirty days after reaching the age of six months, or the deposit shall be deemed unclaimed.

C.    Any deposits not claimed under Section 6.24.070 of this chapter shall be deposited in the animal control director’s trust fund. (Ord. 682 §3(part), 1988)

6.24.090 Restrictions.
No person shall own, harbor, or keep within the city of Lakeport, a dog or cat over the age of four months, which has not been spayed or neutered unless the dog or cat is exempted from the provisions of this section pursuant to Section 6.24.110 of this chapter. (Ord. 848 §1(part), 2005)

6.24.100 Compliance required.
Any person intentionally providing care or sustenance for a dog or cat shall be deemed the owner of such dog or cat and shall comply with Chapter 6.24 of this title. (Ord. 848 §1(part), 2005)

6.24.110 Exemptions.
The following animals are exempt from the provisions of Section 6.24.090 of this chapter:

A.    Dogs documented as having been appropriately trained and actually being used by public law enforcement agencies for law enforcement activities, or such dogs designated as breeding stock by an appropriate agency or organization approved by the director of animal care and control after consultation with knowledgeable professionals;

B.    Dogs having been appropriately trained and actually being used as a service dog, such as a guide dog, hearing dog, assistance dog, seizure alert dog, or social/therapy dog, or such dogs designated as breeding stock by an appropriate agency or organization approved by the director of animal care and control after consultation with knowledgeable professionals;

C.    Dogs documented as having been appropriately trained and actually being used by search and rescue agencies for search and rescue activities, or such dogs designated as breeding stock by an appropriate agency or organization approved by the director of animal care and control after consultation with knowledgeable professionals;

D.    Dogs or cats certified by a licensed veterinarian as having a health reason for not being spayed/neutered;

E.    Dogs which are appropriately trained and actually being used for herding of other animals, or as livestock guardian dogs, hunting dogs, or such dogs designated as breeding stock by an appropriate agency or organization approved by the director of animal care and control after consultation with knowledgeable professionals;

F.    Dogs or cats boarded in a licensed kennel or a business, which boards such animals for professional training or resale;

G.    Dogs or cats which are registered with the American Kennel Club, the Cat Fancier Association or other recognized registry or trained or kept for the purpose of show, field trials or agility trials. (Ord. 848 §1(part), 2005)

Chapter 6.28
RABIES CONTROL
Sections:

6.28.010    Administration.

6.28.020    Vaccination required.

6.28.030    Vaccination required for licensing.

6.28.040    Transmittal of vaccination certificate.

6.28.050    Procedures when rabies is suspected.

6.28.060    Biting animals--Isolation.

6.28.070    Biting animals--Isolation.

6.28.080    Applicability of statutory provisions.

6.28.090    Capture of wild animals prohibited.

6.28.010 Administration.
A.    The health officer shall exercise general supervision and control over those portions of the animal control program related to rabies control.

B.    The animal control officer shall, in addition to continued cooperation with the health officer in this area, provide adequate time in which the health officer shall instruct the animal control officer, deputies and assistants in the detection and control of rabies. (Ord. 459 §601, 1970)

6.28.020 Vaccination required.
It is unlawful for any person to keep, harbor or control within the incorporated area of the city any dog over the age of four months if such dog has not been vaccinated as provided in this title. (Ord. 459 §602, 1970)

6.28.030 Vaccination required for licensing.
The animal control officer shall not issue license tags for any dog until it has been vaccinated with an antirabies vaccine, administered by a licensed veterinarian. (Ord. 459 §603, 1970)

6.28.040 Transmittal of vaccination certificate.
A.    Any person who vaccinates a dog with antirabies vaccine shall provide the county animal control director with a copy of each official rabies vaccination certificate within thirty days after vaccination.

B.    Any person violating the requirements of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 682 §2, 1988)

6.28.050 Procedures when rabies is suspected.
A.    Any person having knowledge of the whereabouts of an animal or the carcass of an animal known to have or suspected of having rabies shall immediately notify the animal control officer.

B.    Any person having such information who refuses to disclose the same after demand therefor by the officer, the animal control officer, or their deputies, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable as provided in this title.

C.    When notified of the whereabouts of such an animal, the animal control officer shall notify the health officer who shall direct the animal control officer as to the immediate disposition of the animal and shall thereafter cause an inspection or examination of such animal to be made until the existence or nonexistence of rabies in such animal is established such animal shall be kept isolated in a pound, veterinary hospital or other adequate facility, in a manner approved by the health officer and shall not be killed, released or disposed of in any manner except on direction of the health officer.

D.    The health officer or his duly authorized representative is authorized and empowered upon reasonable evidence that an animal with symptoms of rabies is present to enter upon private property where any dog or other animal is kept or believed by him to be kept for the purpose of ascertaining whether such dog or other animal is afflicted or infected with rabies. (Ord. 459 §604, 1970)

6.28.060 Biting animals--Isolation.
A.    The health officer shall be notified when any person is bitten by an animal of a species subject to rabies, whether or not the animal is suspected of having rabies.

B.    Any animal which bites or otherwise exposes a person or other animal shall, in the discretion of the health officer, be isolated for such time and under such conditions as may be directed by the health officer. (Ord. 459 §605, 1970)

6.28.070 Recovery of costs of impounding.
The costs of impounding any animal, when such impounding is ordered by the health officer, shall be a proper charge against the funds budgeted for animal control; provided, however, that in the case of rabies, where it cannot be proven that a dog so impounded has been vaccinated against rabies as required by law, then the owner of such dog shall pay all expenses of such impounding. (Ord. 459 §606, 1970)

6.28.080 Applicability of statutory provisions.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of the Health and Safety Code and Administrative Code of the state relating to rabies shall control when the provisions are more stringent than those provided in this chapter. (Ord. 459 §607, 1970)

6.28.090 Capture of wild animals prohibited.
No person shall trap or capture wild animals of a species subject to rabies within the incorporated area of this city for the purpose of selling the animals alive for profit unless the person first files with the health officer a complete statement of such contemplated activities and thereafter complies with such rules and regulations relating to rabies control as may be prescribed by the health officer. (Ord. 459 §905, 1970)

Chapter 6.32
VICIOUS ANIMALS
Sections:

6.32.010    Teasing or harassing of animals prohibited.

6.32.020    Vicious animal defined.

6.32.030    Scope of provisions.

6.32.040    Confinement required.

6.32.050    Nuisance declared.

6.32.060    Report investigation.

6.32.070    Service of abatement order--Appeal.

6.32.080    Content of abatement order.

6.32.090    Hearing on abatement.

6.32.100    Failure to comply with order--Prohibited.

6.32.110    Failure to comply with order--Actions by city.

6.32.120    Seizure and impoundment of animals.

6.32.130    Compliance with procedures.

6.32.140    Hearing procedures.

6.32.150    Change in owner residence--Requirements.

6.32.010 Teasing or harassing of animals prohibited.
A.    No person, except a peace officer in the performance of his duty, shall incite an animal to vicious acts.

B.    No person shall tease any animal.

C.    No parent shall allow or knowingly permit a minor child to incite any animal to vicious acts or to tease any animal. (Ord. 459 §902, 1970)

6.32.020 Vicious animal defined.
A.    “Vicious animal” means an animal, except a dog assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties, which demonstrates any or all of the following behaviors:

1.    An attack, without provocation which requires a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury and/or property damage in a place where such person is conducting himself peaceably and lawfully;

2.    An attack, without provocation, on another animal or livestock which occurs off the property of the owner of the attacking animal;

3.    An attack, without provocation, that results in an injury to a person in a place where such person is conducting himself peaceably and lawfully;

4.    Any behavior, without provocation, that constitutes a physical threat of bodily harm to a person in a place where such person is conducting himself peaceably and lawfully.

B.    “Vicious animal” also means an animal which has been found to be a vicious animal pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 682 §7(part), 1988)

6.32.030 Scope of provisions.
A person is peaceably and lawfully upon the private property of an owner of the animal when he is on such property in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by laws of the state or county, or by the laws or postal regulations of the United States, or when he is on such property upon invitation, expressed or implied. (Ord. 682 §7(part), 1988)

6.32.040 Confinement required.
It is unlawful for the owner and/or possessor of a vicious animal to maintain the animal within the city unless it is penned, muzzled or otherwise confined so that is cannot bite, attack or cause injury to any person or other animal. (Ord. 682 §7(part), 1988)

6.32.050 Nuisance declared.
A vicious animal in violation of this chapter constitutes a public nuisance. (Ord. 682 §7(part), 1988)

6.32.060 Report investigation.
Whenever the animal control director has reasonable cause to believe a vicious animal is being maintained within the city, the animal control director shall conduct an investigation. (Ord. 682 §7 (part), 1988)

6.32.070 Service of abatement order--Appeal.
A.    If, upon investigation, the animal control director finds that the animal is vicious as defined in this chapter, the animal owner and/or possessor shall be personally served or served by mail with an abatement order summarizing the results of the investigation.

B.    If the owner and/or possessor cannot be ascertained and located, an abatement order shall be served by posting the abatement order on the property where the animal was found.

C.    The abatement order may impose conditions and restrictions for maintenance of the animal pursuant to Section 6.32.080 of this chapter. The abatement order shall state that the owner and/or possessor of the animal has five days from the date of service thereof to comply with the order or to file a request for a hearing before the city council.

D.    If the owner and/or possessor fails to file a timely appeal, the abatement order of the animal control director shall become final.

E.    Filing of a timely appeal shall stay the abatement order until a determination is made by the city council pursuant to Section 6.32.090 of this chapter. (Ord. 682 §7 (part), 1988)

6.32.080 Content of abatement order.
The abatement order may impose restrictions and conditions for maintaining a vicious animal to protect the public safety and the safety of other animals. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:

A.    Written proof (a true copy) of a public liability insurance policy in the single-incident amount of fifty thousand dollars for bodily injury or death of any person(s) or for damage to property which may result from the ownership or maintenance of such animal. The insurance policy shall provide that no cancellation of the policy be made unless ten days’ written notice is first given to the county department of animal control;

B.    Requirements as to size, construction and design of an enclosure for the animal;

C.    Requirements as to the location of the animal’s residence;

D.    Requirements as to the type and method of restrains and/or muzzling of the animal;

E.    Photographing of the animal for purposes of identification. (Ord. 682 §7(part), 1988)

6.32.090 Hearing on abatement.
A.    If the owner files a timely appeal pursuant to Section 6.32.070 of this chapter, a hearing shall be conducted before the city council who shall decide whether to sustain, modify or overrule the abatement order.

B.    The owner and/or possessor shall be served in person or by mail with the decision of the city council. (Ord. 682 §7(part), 1988)

6.32.100 Failure to comply with order--Prohibited.
It is unlawful for an owner and/or possessor to fail to comply with an abatement order issued pursuant to Section 6.32.060 of this chapter unless a timely appeal is filed and pending in accordance with Section 6.32.070 of this chapter. (Ord. 682 §7(part), 1988)

6.32.110 Failure to comply with order--Actions by city.
In the event that an owner and/or possessor fails to comply with an abatement order, the animal control director may take one or more of the following actions:

A.    Cite the owner and/or possessor of the animal for violation of this chapter. Each day that a violation occurs is a separate offense;

B.    Refer the matter to the district attorney or the city attorney for prosecution of the alleged violation or for abatement of the public nuisance;

C.    Impound the animal in accordance with the procedures specified in this chapter. The owner and/or possessor may redeem an impounded animal prior to its final disposition by the animal control director in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; provided, that the owner and/or possessor agrees to comply and is able to comply with the abatement order and has paid all applicable fees and charges. (Ord. 682 §7(part), 1988)

6.32.120 Seizure and impoundment of animals.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 6.32.100 of this chapter, the animal control director may immediately seize and impound a vicious animal for any of the following reasons:

A.    The animal is at large or is otherwise in violation of this chapter;

B.    Whenever the owner and/or possessor consents to immediate impoundment of the animal;

C.    The animal control director reasonably believes that immediate impoundment is necessary for preservation of the public’s health or safety, the safety of other animals, or the animal involved. Relevant factors in making this determination include whether the animal has attacked and caused serious bodily injury to a person or animal, whether the owner and/or possessor has suffered or permitted the animal to run at large and whether the animal owner and/or possessor is immediately willing and able to confine the animal as required in Section 6.32.040 of this chapter. (Ord. 682 §7(part) 1988)

6.32.130 Compliance with procedures.
Whenever an animal is immediately impounded without serving a preseizure notice on the owner or keeper, the animal control director shall comply with the procedures for immediate impoundment specified in this chapter. (Ord. 682 §7(part), 1988)

6.32.140 Hearing procedures.
A.    If a hearing is requested by the owner or keeper on the question of whether their animal was lawfully seized, it shall be conducted by the city council and shall be scheduled no later than fourteen days after the date the appeal is filed.

B.    The decision of he city council shall be based on the weight of the evidence and shall be final.

C.    The owner and/or possessor shall be given notice of the decision in person or by mail. The city council shall determine whether the impoundment and/or destruction is authorized under this chapter. If the impoundment is found to be unlawful, the animal shall be released forthwith to the owner, and the costs of impoundment shall be borne by the city. If the animal is determined to be a vicious animal, it may either be handled by bringing action against the owner of such animal pursuant to Civil Code Section 3342.5, or released with conditions or humanely destroyed. (Ord. 682 §7 (part), 1988)

6.32.150 Change in owner residence--Requirements.
The owner and/or possessor of a vicious animal which has been the subject of an abatement order shall notify the animal control director within ten days of making a change in the residence or ownership of the animal and provide the new residence address and, when applicable, the name of the new owner. The owner or possessor is also required to provide a copy of the abatement order to the new owner on or before the transfer of ownership of the animal. (Ord. 682 §7 (part), 1988)

Chapter 6.35
FEEDING WILD DUCKS AND OTHER WATERFOWL PROHIBITED ON PUBLIC PROPERTIES
Sections:

6.35.010    Feeding ducks and other waterfowl prohibited.

6.35.020    Enforcement and penalties.

6.35.030    Signs.

6.35.010 Feeding ducks and other waterfowl prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to feed, cause to be fed, or offer food to any duck or other waterfowl, or to scatter food, seed, or other forms of matter edible to ducks or other waterfowl on any public properties (which include but are not limited to public buildings, streets, street rights-of-way, sidewalks, driveways, parks, or any other public property) or portions thereof in the city which have been posted with a sign(s) warning that it is illegal to feed the ducks or waterfowl on the posted public property. (Ord. 860 §3(part), 2006)

6.35.020 Enforcement and penalties.
A.    Enforcement of this chapter shall be implemented by the city manager or his/her designee.

B.    A violation of this chapter is an infraction, which shall be subject to a fine of not more than twenty-five dollars for the first offense nor more than one hundred dollars for each subsequent offense. (Ord. 860 §3(part), 2006)

6.35.030 Signs.
Signs which designate no feeding of ducks or waterfowl in accordance with this chapter shall be clearly, sufficiently, and conspicuously posted in places covered by this chapter. (Ord. 860 §3(part), 2006)

Title 7
(RESERVED)
Title 8
HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapters:

8.01    Alarm Systems

8.04    Camping on Vacant Lots

8.08    Environmental Protection Procedures and Guidelines

8.09    Nonnative Invasive Aquatic Plants

8.11    Outside Burning

8.12    Fire Inspections

8.16    Solid Waste, Garbage Collection and Disposal

8.20    Nuisances

8.22    Abatement of Nuisances

8.24    Streambed Obstructions

8.28    Weeds and Rubbish

8.30    Administrative Citation and Appeal Procedures

8.31    Administrative Citation Appeal Hearing Process

8.32    Fire Prevention Systems

8.35    Nuisance Vehicles

8.36    Maintenance of Water, Sewer and Storm Drainage Utilities That Are Located on Private Property

8.37    Building Sewer Maintenance Requirements

8.40    Stormwater Management Ordinance

8.44    Smoking Prohibited in Parks and Certain Public Places

Chapter 8.01
ALARM SYSTEMS
Sections:

8.01.010    Findings.

8.01.020    Definitions.

8.01.030    Standards of equipment and installation.

8.01.040    Alarm permits.

8.01.050    Fees.

8.01.060    Permit and response suspension.

8.01.070    Hearings.

8.01.080    Appeals of hearing decisions.

8.01.090    General provisions.

8.01.010 Findings.
The city declares that it is necessary and desirable to regulate the installation and attendant response of law enforcement to residential and commercial burglary or emergency alarms in order to promote the health, welfare and safety of the public. The sale and installation of substandard alarm equipment and false alarms arising therefrom constitutes a hazard to the safety of law enforcement and the public in general.

False burglary and robbery alarms enhance the dangers to peace officers. Responding to alarms that are historically false promotes complacency which may allow successful felonious attacks against peace officers. The dangers of automobile collisions while responding to alarms are increased as are officer man-hour costs which diverts law enforcement resources from other essential duties. (Ord. 756 §1(part), 1993)

8.01.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:

A.    “Alarm system” means any device designated for the detection of an unauthorized entry, or attempted unauthorized entry on premises or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act, or both, and when activated, emits a sound, light or transmits a signal or message.

B.    “Alarm business” means any person engaged in leasing, moving or installing any alarm system, or causing to be sold, maintained, serviced or repaired, altered, replaced, removed or installed an alarm system in or on any building, place or premises.

C.    “Audible alarm” means a device designated for the detection of unauthorized entry on premises, and, when activated, generates an audible sound on the premises.

D.    “False alarm” means an alarm signal necessitating response by the Lakeport police department where an emergency situation does not exist.

E.    “Proprietor alarm” means an alarm which is not serviced by an alarm business.

F.    “Direct alarm” means an alarm device which produces a signal on the alarm panel of the Lakeport police department communications center, without other interventions.

G.    “Trouble status alarm” means an alarm signal arising from the interruption of telephone service at a point between the protected location and the police department or central receiving station.

H.    “Verified false alarm” means any false alarm except:

1.    Trouble status alarms;

2.    Accidental alarm activation during the first three months of installation of a new alarm system for any reason, including equipment malfunction or owner/operator error;

3.    False alarms caused as a result of power failures, power surges, natural disasters or other acts of nature. The person claiming such cause as a valid excuse for the false alarm shall have the burden of proving or establishing that the malfunction was beyond his or her control.

I.    “Subscriber” means a person contracting with an alarm business for the installation, servicing or maintaining of an alarm system.

J.    “Person” means any individual, partnership, business, establishment corporation or other entity. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to audible alarms affixed to automobile, boats, recreational vehicles, or other forms of surface transportation. (Ord. 756 §1(part), 1993)

8.01.030 Standards of equipment and installation.
A.    All alarm systems, devices or components thereof, installed in the incorporated areas of Lakeport shall be listed on the Burglary Protection Equipment List of Underwriters Laboratory, Inc.

B.    The chief of police or his designee may grant an exception to the requirement wherein non-Underwriters Laboratory, Inc. listed alarm systems, devices or components thereof, are determined by the chief or his designee to be substantially equivalent to, or exceed, the applicable Underwriters Laboratory, Inc. alarm testing standards.

C.    The chief of police or his designee may require the applicant to present documentation and certification from a qualified authority to make the exception determination set forth in subsection B of this section.

D.    All alarm systems installed in compliance with this chapter shall be equipped with a thirty second delay with an audible or visual indicator to notify any person on the premises of a potential false alarm, thereby affording such authorized individual an opportunity to avoid the completion of such false alarm.

E.    No audible alarm may sound for a period of more than fifteen minutes upon each activation. (Ord. 756 §1(part), 1993)

8.01.040 Alarm permits.
A.    Any person owning, using or possessing an alarm system shall obtain an alarm permit from the Lakeport police department prior to the installation, activation or operation of such alarm system.

B.    Alarm businesses shall obtain and process applications for subscribers for whom such systems are installed and maintained. Such alarm business shall obtain a completed application form from the subscriber, and shall collect the permit fee from the subscriber. The fee shall be then paid to the city and the application forwarded to the Lakeport police department for review, approval and registration.

C.    Where a proprietor alarm system is proposed or in operation the application for the permit and payment of fees shall be made directly by the owner or operator of such alarm system to the Lakeport police department.

D.    Alarm system permits shall be valid until surrendered by the permit holder, or suspended or revoked pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 756 §1(part), 1993)

8.01.050 Fees.
A.    Alarm Permit Fee. A fee of twenty-five dollars shall be paid to the city for each alarm permit issued.

B.    Monitoring Fee. A monthly monitoring fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars shall be paid to the Lakeport police department for each direct alarm connected to the alarm panel of the communications center without regard to any other provision of this chapter.

C.    False Alarm Fee. A fee of fifty dollars for the third and each successive verified false alarm (as defined in subsection D of Section 8.01.020 within any twelve-month period shall be assessed and paid to the Lakeport police department by the permittee.

D.    Failure to pay the false alarm fee or monitoring fee within thirty days of the billing date shall result in the suspension of any alarm permit issued until payment is received. Suspension of the alarm permit under the provisions of this section may result in the discontinuation of law enforcement response to additional alarm activations until such time as the permit is reinstated by payment of any fee(s) due. The chief or his designee shall have discretion not to suspend any permit if the alarm is required by federal law or regulation, or if it is used to safeguard items essential to the national defense or security.

E.    The fees in this section shall be considered a debt due and owing the city and may be collected by any lawful means.

F.    No fees for verified false alarms shall be assessed for a system under repair if both the police department communications center and any intermediate answering service or alarm business are notified in advance that the system is under repair. Notice shall also be given upon completion of repairs. Notification of the commencement of repairs to the communications center shall be made in person by the individual making the repairs, who shall present his alarm agent’s permit and such other evidence as may be required showing his authority to undertake repairs. Notice of the completion of repairs may be made by telephone to the communications center. (Ord. 756 §1(part), 1993)

8.01.060 Permit and response suspension.
The chief may suspend or revoke an alarm system permit and/or law enforcement response to a permitted alarm system on the following grounds:

A.    The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with the same;

B.    Failure to comply with any permit requirement related to the alarm system;

C.    Intentional activation of the alarm system by the permittee or his representative when in fact no crime or emergency was taking place and this was known by such person;

D.    Installation of any alarm system equipment, component or device in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 756 §1(part), 1993)

8.01.070 Hearings.
A.    Notice of a proposed suspension or revocation of the alarm permit and law enforcement response shall be sent to the permittee at least ten calendar days prior to the proposed effective date of said suspension and revocation. The notice shall include:

1.    The proposed effective date of the action;

2.    A statement in ordinary and concise language of all the specific facts or omissions upon which the proposed action is based;

3.    A statement advising the permittee(s) of the right to respond to the proposed action either orally at an informal hearing or in writing and the time within which the response may be made and to whom the response is to be made;

4.    A statement that the permittee shall be given a minimum of ten calendar days from the time of receipt of said notice to respond.

B.    If a hearing before the chief or his designee is requested by the permittee, such request must be made by the permittee within three days of the permittee’s receipt of the notice of proposed action.

C.    When requested pursuant to this section, the chief or his designee shall hold an informal hearing to allow the permittee to present oral or written evidence in response to the proposed suspension or revocation.

D.    Following the permittee’s response and the completion of the hearing, if any, written notice of the action taken, if any, shall be forwarded to the permittee, including instructions for filing a formal appeal pursuant to Section 8.01.080.

E.    The permittee may, within ten calendar days after receipt of the notice of action, appeal the action pursuant to Section 8.01.080. (Ord. 756 §1(part), 1993)

8.01.080 Appeals of hearing decisions.
If a permittee feels the proposed action is incorrect, the permittee may appeal through the following process:

A.    Upon receipt of the notice of action, the permittee may, within ten calendar days, file an appeal with the city council. Such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk to the council requesting a hearing within the next two council meeting dates for which the agenda has not yet been set. At the appointed hearing time, such permittee shall be prepared to present facts and evidence to support their case.

B.    Within two regular meetings of the council after the hearing is closed, the council should announce its decision on the appeal. (Ord. 756 §1(part), 1993)

8.01.090 General provisions.
A.    Time limits may be waived by mutual written consent of the principal parties involved.

B.    All council hearings regarding alarm permit suspensions/revocations and law enforcement response suspension shall be held in public.

C.    In conducting the hearing, the city council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. (Ord. 756 §1(part), 1993)

Chapter 8.04
CAMPING ON VACANT LOTS
Sections:

8.04.010    Prohibitions.

8.04.010 Prohibitions.
It is a misdemeanor for any person to camp or to occupy overnight, any portion of a vacant lot or unoccupied lot within the boundaries of the incorporated area of the city, or for any owner of a vacant lot to give permission to anyone to camp on such a lot unless the lot is equipped with sanitary and garbage facilities. (Ord. 473 §1, 1972)

Chapter 8.08
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION PROCEDURES AND GUIDELINES
Sections:

8.08.010    Intention to adopt.

8.08.010 Intention to adopt.
The city council declares that it shall adopt the necessary environmental protection guidelines by appropriate resolution and further delegates to the planning commission those duties as set forth in the appropriate resolution. (Ord. 580 §1, 1979)

Chapter 8.09
NONNATIVE INVASIVE AQUATIC PLANTS
Sections:

8.09.010    Purpose.

8.09.020    Findings and declaration of public nuisance.

8.09.030    Definitions.

8.09.040    Regulated nonnative, invasive aquatic plants.

8.09.050    Restrictions.

8.09.060    Exemptions.

8.09.070    Enforcement.

8.09.080    Penalties.

8.09.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the aquatic resources of Lake County from the introduction of nonnative, invasive aquatic plants by prohibiting the possession, sale, propagation or release of specific species and declaring such plants as nuisances. As such, these nonnative, invasive aquatic plants are considered noxious weeds, as referenced in Government Code Section 25824. (Ord. 862 §1(part), 2007)

8.09.020 Findings and declaration of public nuisance.
The city council of the city of Lakeport finds that non-native, invasive aquatic plant species spread rapidly and eliminate the native flora and fauna biodiversity otherwise found in the lakes and streams of Lake County, most notably Clear Lake, with detrimental effects. Further, the city council declares that the most effective way to protect these aquatic areas from nonnative, invasive plant species is to prevent the introduction of these plants and also declares that such invasive plant species are public nuisances. (Ord. 862 §1(part), 2007)

8.09.030 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be interpreted as follows:

A.    "Aquatic plant" means any plant including a floating, emergent, submersed, or ditchbank species growing in, or closely associated with, an aquatic environment, and includes any part or seed of such plant.

B.    "Commissioner" means the agricultural commissioner for the county of Lake or his duly appointed agent(s).

C.    "Department" means the county of Lake department of agriculture.

D.    "Gift" means any aquatic plant that is freely given or bestowed from one person to another.

E.    "Nonnative, invasive aquatic plant" means aquatic plants that have been identified as being not native to Lake County and exhibit the characteristics of invasive growth pattern(s). For the purposes of this chapter, the following plants of concern are identified as nonnative, invasive aquatic plants:

1.    Hydrilla (Hydrilla verticillata);

2.    Spatter dock or yellow pondlily (Nuphar polysepala);

3.    Water hyacinth (Eichornia crassipes);

4.    Purple loosestrife (Lythrum salicaria);

5.    Giant salvinia (Salvinia molesta);

6.    Eurasian watermilfoil (Myriophyllum spicatum);

7.    South American spongeplant/frogbit (Limnobium laevigatum);

8.    Parrotfeather (Myriophyllum aquaticum);

9.    Brazilian waterweed (Egeria densa).

F.    "Person" means any person, firm, joint venture, joint stock company, corporation, partnership, association, club, company, business trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.

G.    "For sale" means the action of attempting to sell.

H.    "Sell" includes, in any of its variant forms, to offer for sale, keep for sale, expose for sale, barter, exchange, trade, rent, transfer of ownership or control, or lease.

I.    "Unviable" means incapable of sprouting, developing, growing, or reproducing; nonviable. (Ord. 862 §1(part), 2007)

8.09.040 Regulated nonnative, invasive aquatic plants.
The plant species set forth in Section 8.09.030(E) and any parts of those plants capable of propagation shall be considered the nonnative, invasive aquatic plants covered by the restrictions of this chapter. (Ord. 862 §1(part), 2007)

8.09.050 Restrictions.
A.    Except as provided in subsection D of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to transport nonnative, invasive aquatic plants into the city of Lakeport.

B.     Except as provided in subsection D of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess, release, sell or offer for sale, gift or plant nonnative, invasive aquatic plants in the city of Lakeport.

C.    It shall be unlawful for any shipment of nonnative, invasive aquatic plants to be off-loaded in the city of Lakeport.

D.    No provision of this chapter shall be deemed to place restrictions upon shipments of nonnative, invasive aquatic plants that are in transit through the city of Lakeport to a destination outside of the city of Lakeport. (Ord. 862 §1(part), 2007)

8.09.060 Exemptions.
A.    Any interested person may petition the commissioner, as provided below, to obtain an exemption from this chapter for a variety or cultivar of a listed nonnative, invasive aquatic plant that has been scientifically proven to be noninvasive.

B.    The interested person shall complete the appropriate form supplied by the commissioner’s office, entitled "Petition for Exemption." The petition will not be considered if any portion of the form is left blank or incomplete. If the commissioner needs additional information, the interested person will be notified within fifteen days of submission of the petition.

C.    After review of the petition and further research, as needed, the commissioner will make a determination as to the claim of nonviability. The petitioner will be notified of this decision no later than forty-five days after the initial submission date of the petition. If additional information is requested by the commissioner, then the decision will be rendered no more than thirty days after receipt of all requested information.

D.    A written copy of the commissioner’s decision will be provided to the petitioner upon its issuance. The decision will declare if the petition was accepted or rejected. In either case, the reasoning for the decision will also be given. If the decision requires the amendment of this chapter, the commissioner will implement the necessary actions to effect such change.

E.    The decision of the commissioner is final. If the petitioner feels that the decision rendered by the commissioner is incorrect, he or she may file a second petition, attaching to it any new data or information that was previously overlooked or otherwise unavailable for consideration. The time frames listed in subsections B and C of this section apply to this second petition. This second petition shall represent the final attempt to obtain an exemption from this chapter for the variety or cultivar listed. The procedure listed in subsection D of this section will also apply to a second petition. (Ord. 862 §1(part), 2007)

8.09.070 Enforcement.
The commissioner shall cause any nonnative, invasive aquatic plant or plants found in violation of this chapter to be placed under a hold order. Such an order will, among other things, prohibit any further movement of said plant(s) without the expressed consent of the commissioner. It will be the responsibility of the person named on the hold order to, at his or her own expense, either ship the said plant(s) out of the city of Lakeport within forty-eight hours or to destroy them. In either case, the commissioner will physically release the hold order to effect shipment or will be present and witness their destruction. The hold order will be considered released when the appropriate signature from the commissioner appears on the hold order. (Ord. 862 §1(part), 2007)

8.09.080 Penalties.
A violation of any provision of this chapter is punishable as an infraction by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars; or as a misdemeanor by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each separate day or any portion thereof on which any violation occurs shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense punishable as herein provided. (Ord. 862 §1(part), 2007)

Chapter 8.11
OUTSIDE BURNING
Sections:

8.11.010    Prohibition of all burning within incorporated city limits.

8.11.010 Prohibition of all burning within incorporated city limits.
Outside burning of all kinds within the incorporated limits of the city of Lakeport is prohibited. The following exceptions shall apply:

A.    Cooking of food products using an appropriate barbecue on public or private property; and

B.    Fire department/district training exercises that include burning of a building or other structure when under the supervision of fire chief or his/her designee, and in compliance with applicable air pollution regulations.

Violation of this section shall constitute an infraction and shall be punishable in accordance with Section 1.08.010(C) of this code. (Ord. 817 §1, 2002)

Chapter 8.12
FIRE INSPECTIONS
Sections:

8.12.010    Authority.

8.12.020    Purpose and scope of provisions.

8.12.030    Fees.

8.12.010 Authority.
The fire chief for the city and such paid firemen and volunteers as the chief may designate shall inspect all buildings and residences in the city as often as the chief finds necessary for the enforcement of applicable fire regulations. (Ord. 566 §1, 1978)

8.12.020 Purpose and scope of provisions.
The inspection and examination authorized by this chapter shall be for the purpose of reporting and correcting the following fire hazards pertaining to buildings and their occupants:

A.    Disrepair;

B.    Age and dilapidated condition;

C.    Faulty or unapproved construction;

D.    Inadequate fire escapes or lack of means of egress;

E.    Inadequate fire alarm protection;

F.    Inadequate fire extinguishing equipment;

G.    Materials and buildings especially susceptible to fire;

H.    Conditions endangering other property or occupants;

I.    Any other fire hazards dangerous to life or property. (Ord. 566 §2, 1978)

8.12.030 Fees.
The fee for the inspection required under this chapter shall be fifteen dollars per year, which fee shall be assessed on all residential dwellings and commercial buildings in the city. (Ord. 566 §3, 1978)

Chapter 8.16
SOLID WASTE, GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
Sections:

8.16.010    Purpose.

8.16.020    Definitions.

8.16.030    Solid waste accumulations.

8.16.040    Solid waste containers.

8.16.050    Placement of containers.

8.16.060    Interference with solid waste.

8.16.070    Contract and payment for solid waste collection service.

8.16.080    Solid waste collection.

8.16.090    Franchises for solid waste collection.

8.16.100    Collection and transportation times and days.

8.16.110    Solid waste disposal.

8.16.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the collection and transportation of solid waste to a city-designated disposal site. The city has determined that public health and safety require the collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste to be controlled and regulated. (Ord. 827 §1(part), 2003)

8.16.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall mean as follows:

“Bin” means a solid waste container satisfying the requirements of subsection (C) of Section 8.16.040.

“Bulky items” means and includes, but not by way of limitation, discarded items such as white goods (i.e. major household appliances): water heaters, furniture, tires, carpets, mattresses and similar large items which have weights or volumes greater that the capacity of an allowed covered container, but excluding construction waste and special waste.

“City” means the city of Lakeport.

“City manager” means the city manager of Lakeport.

“Commercial collector” means any person or persons, natural or legal, other than as an employee, authorized by license, franchise, contract, operations agreement or otherwise with the city to collect, transport and dispose of solid waste from commercial customers within the city.

“Commercial occupant” means any person or persons, natural or legal, who owns property used for commercial, industrial or school purposes or developed as an apartment or a duplex, triplex, condominium or townhome complex or mobilehome park for which the conditions, covenants and restrictions or operating documents of such complex or park require bin service. A commercial occupant shall mean the owner of such property. For the purposes of this chapter, an apartment shall contain four or more units. With the city manager’s approval, a residential occupant who owns a business within the city and disposes of residentially generated solid waste at the business shall be deemed a part of the commercial occupant and not a residential occupant. A commercial occupant shall be deemed a commercial customer.

“Combustible trash” means and includes all waste and refuse, capable of burning readily, from and incidental to the use of homes and places of business, such as coffee grounds, egg shells, newspapers, magazines, wrappings, discarded clothing, empty packing cases, packing materials such as paper, hay straw, shavings, excelsior and sawdust; also lawn and tree trimmings and cuttings, weed and leaves from property used for residential purposes; provided, that all such trimmings, weeds and leaves, in order to be classified either as “trash” or as “combustible trash” and collected under the provisions of this chapter and shall be cut in lengths no longer than forty-eight inches and be placed in the appropriate “green waste bin”; “combustible trash” shall not include or be construed to include any of the following: dead animals, dirt or earth, ashes or any waste materials, including construction, alteration or repairs, or resulting from manufacturing processes.

“Discards” means all putrescible and non-putrescible waste materials which have been abandoned or discarded and placed for collection by residential or commercial customers including all trash; refuse; animal feces; food waste; wastepaper; garbage; household goods; ashes; wearing apparel; and all worthless, useless, unused, rejected or cast-off solid or semi-solid matter, including street sweeping waste; construction waste; and any other material not otherwise defined in this chapter.

“Disposal site” means any recycle center, materials recovery facility, intermediate processing center, incineration facility or landfill where solid waste may be taken for intermediate processing or final disposal-as approved by the city manager.

“Drop box” means a solid waste container satisfying the requirements of subsection (C) of Section 8.16.040.

“Drop box transporter” means any person or persons, natural or legal, other than as an employee, authorized by license, franchise, contract, operations agreement or otherwise with the city to rent drop boxes for use in the city.

“Garbage” means and includes all refuse, fruit and vegetable material that attend the preparation, use, cooking dealing in or storage of meats, fish, fowl, fruits or vegetables and any other materials used for foodstuffs.

“Hazardous materials” means any material defined as hazardous in the state Health and Safety Code, as may be amended from time to time; a waste that is hazardous according to the criteria set forth in the California Code of Regulations, as may be amended from time to time, or any waste that must be disposed of in a hazardous waste landfill.

“Noncombustible trash” means all waste and refuse from residences and places of business such as metals, tin cans, bottles, broken glass, ashes and any other materials not capable of burning readily. “Noncombustible trash” does not include any of the following: dead animals, dirt or earth, rocks, stones or any waste materials, including plaster, resulting from building construction, alteration or repair, or resulting from manufacturing processes. No individual piece of noncombustible materials shall be considered “noncombustible trash” within the definition hereof, as prescribed in this chapter, nor shall be subject to collection as provided in this chapter, which is of a size in excess of two feet by one foot by five feet and/or a weight of fifty pounds.

“Receptacle” means a solid waste container satisfying the requirements of subsection (A) of Section 8.16.040.

“Recyclables” means paper, newspaper, glass aluminum and bi-metal cans, cardboard, plastic, bulky items and other material that is to be recycled.

“Recycling” means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating and reconstituting solid waste that would otherwise be disposed of, and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace.

“Residential collector” means any person or persons, natural or legal, other than as an employee, authorized by license, franchise, contract, operations agreement or otherwise with the city to collect, transport and dispose of solid waste from residential customers within the city.

“Residential occupant” means any person or persons, natural or legal, who owns a dwelling unit, notwithstanding the fact that there is a valid home occupation permit issued to the address of the dwelling unit. A dwelling unit is a single-family dwelling or a duplex, triplex, condominium or townhome or mobilehome for which the conditions, covenants, and restrictions or other operation documents of the complex or park do not require bin service. A residential occupant shall mean the owner of such property regardless of whether such person or persons resides at such property. If approved by the city manager, occupants of a duplex or triplex on one parcel may share solid waste collection services, as long as the weekly set-out capacity does not exceed the single-family service limitations identified in the resolution setting residential collection fees, and if so approved shall be deemed one residential occupant. A residential occupant shall be deemed a residential customer.

“Solid waste” means discards; recyclables; bulky items; yard waste; any or all of which may contain small amounts of consumer products with the characteristics of hazardous substances; excluding special wastes.

“Special waste” means but is not limited to, flammable waste; containerized waste (e.g., a drum, barrel, portable tank, box, pail, etc.); waste transported in a bulk tanker; liquid waste; sewage sludge; waste from a pollution control process; residue and debris from the cleanup of a spill or release of chemical substances, or reclamation; dead animals; waste water; explosive substances; radioactive materials; materials which have been exposed to highly infectious or contagious diseases; hazardous materials; and hazardous waste.

“Toter” means a solid waste, green waste or recycling container satisfying the requirements of subsection (A) of Section 8.16.040.

“Trash” means and includes all those items and things included within the definition of the terms “combustible and noncombustible trash” as defined in this section and limited, and ashes; provided, that the term “trash” does not mean or include any of the following: dead animals, dirt or broken concrete, or any waste materials, including plaster, resulting from manufacturing processes.

“Yard waste” means materials generated from the maintenance or alteration of public, commercial or residential landscapes, including grass clippings, tree and shrubbery trimmings and pruning, vegetative cuttings, leaves, brush, weeds and related compostable materials. (Ord. 827 §1(part), 2003)

8.16.030 Solid waste accumulations.
A.    No person, natural or legal, shall accumulate, keep or deposit solid waste upon any sidewalk, street, roadway, alley or driveway or upon any real property, whether public or private, other than in bins, toters, drop boxes or receptacles and in accordance with Sections 8.16.040 and 8.16.050. Solid waste shall be kept free of all hazardous materials and special wastes, and placed in a closed toter, receptacle, bin or drop box.

B.    No person, natural or legal, shall place or cause to be placed solid waste in any toter, bin, drop box or receptacle located on any sidewalk, street, roadway, alley or driveway or upon any real property, whether public or private, other than real property owned or leased by such person.

C.    No person, natural or legal, shall set out or cause to be set out for collection any solid waste other than solid waste originating on the abutting premises.

D.    No person, natural or legal, shall dispose of solid waste in or near litter receptacles placed by the city in public places for the incidental use of pedestrian or motorists.

E.    No person, natural or legal, shall accumulate, keep or deposit any solid waste in such a manner that a public nuisance is created, including, but not limited to, allowing fires, mosquitoes or rodents to breed therein. (Ord. 827 §1(part), 2003)

8.16.040 Solid waste containers.
A.    Receptacles (toters) shall be made of metal or plastic if barrels, or plastic if bags, and of sufficient strength to prevent them from being broken under ordinary conditions. They shall have a maximum capacity of thirty-two gallons for solid waste and ninety-five gallons for recyclables, unless issued by the commercial collector, in which case they may have a maximum capacity as approved by the hauler. Receptacles (toters) shall be equipped with a vermin and animal resistant cover or seal, which shall be utilized at all times. Receptacles shall be in a condition such that their contests can be fully enclosed and such that they shall stand upright and leave no sharp, jagged or otherwise dangerous corners or edges.

B.    Bins which shall be utilized at all times, the top of which shall not exceed sixty inches in height from the surface of the ground. They shall have a capacity of at least one cubic yards but not more than six cubic yards. Bins shall be constructed of metal or other material as approved by the city. All bins must be rented or purchased from the city or a commercial collector or residential collector.

C.    Drop boxes shall have a capacity of at least ten cubic yards. They shall be constructed of metal or other material as approved by the city. All drop boxes must be rented or purchased from the city of a commercial collector or residential collector or from a drop box transporter.

D.    Receptacles, toters, drop boxes and bins shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. Customer will be responsible for general and routine cleaning of receptacles (toters).

1.    Inspection of Receptacles, Toters, Bins or Drop Boxes. The city health officer shall cause to be inspected at regular intervals, the receptacles, toters, drop boxes or bins used in depositing solid waste in the city and such inspector shall be the sole judge of the condition of such receptacles, as to their fitness for such use.

2.    The city health officer shall cause red tags to be placed on each and every receptacle which he deems inadequate, either by reason of its condition or size, to hold the garbage in the prescribed manner for any of the other reasons set forth in this chapter.

3.    The residential or commercial collector or drop box transporter shall replace the tagged receptacle within five days for residential toters with a suitable replacement receptacle. The time period for a suitable replacement of commercial bins is thirty days.

4.    The city may assess a penalty fee to the residential or commercial collector or drop box transporter for failure to replace a tagged receptacle in the allotted time as outlined in this chapter. (Ord. 827 §1(part), 2003)

8.16.050 Placement of containers.
A.    Any bin or drop box shall be placed for collection on any street, roadway or alley only as provided in this chapter.

B.    Any receptacle or toter shall be placed for collection on a sidewalk, parkway or alley only on the day established for the collection of solid waste on the particular route or after five-thirty p.m. on the day immediately prior to such collection, and shall not remain on the street, parkway or alley for more than eighteen hours after it has been emptied.

C.    Any receptacle or toter placed for collection on a sidewalk or parkway shall be placed between the curb line and the property line as close to the curb line or edge of the street or roadway as practicable.

D.    Any receptacle, toter, bin or drop box placed for collection in any alley shall be placed as close to the property line as practicable.

E.    Any bin or drop box placed in any street, roadway or alley shall require an encroachment permit from the city pursuant to this code, with the exception of a temporary drop box or bin.

F.    No receptacle, toter or bin shall be stored in any required side yard that abuts any public street or in any required front yard. Every receptacle or bin shall be stored in a manner such that it is screened from public view and not visible from the sidewalk, street, roadway or alley. The only exception would be a temporary roll-off drop box or bin for the purposes of clean up. (Ord. 827 §1(part), 2003)

8.16.060 Interference with solid waste.
No person other than a residential or commercial collector, or customer shall interfere in any manner with any receptacle, toter bin or drop box or the contents thereof, remove any receptacle, toter, bin or drop box from the location where it was placed by the residential or commercial collector or customer, or remove the contents of any receptacle, toter, bin or drop box. (Ord. 827 §1(part), 2003)

8.16.070 Contract and payment for solid waste collection service.
A.    The city shall provide for the weekly collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste generated on private property in the city. Every commercial occupant and residential occupant shall contract for solid waste collection service (mandatory service). With the city manager’s approval, the obligation to contract for solid waste collection service may be waived due to extraordinary financial costs or as a result of physical access limitations. Owners or occupants shall not be required to contract for solid waste collection service where such owner or occupant accumulates no garbage or rubbish, or who has an agreement with the city whereby the garbage or rubbish is being collected at least as often as the municipal collection in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and who complies with all health requirements. In order to receive such exemption, the owner or occupant shall be required to file with the city manager, or his/her designee, an application stating the reasons for exemption from the payment of such fees. The city manager or his or her designee shall make such investigation as he or she deems necessary to determine if the applicant should be granted such exemption. If the city manager or designate finds that the applicant does not qualify for such exemption, he or she shall immediately notify the applicant of his or her findings and determination. Every commercial occupant and residential occupant who is required to contract for solid waste collection service shall pay a collection fee, established by resolution of the city council, for the maximum amount of solid waste to be collected at any one time from the subject property without the imposition of additional service charges. The collection fee shall be a civil debt owning to the city, except that if the city provides for solid waste collection by means of a license, franchise or contract then the civil debt shall be owed to the licensee, franchisee or contractor. It shall be unlawful for any commercial occupant or residential occupant to fail to pay the collection fee within the time period specified on the billing statement, which time period shall not be less than thirty days from the date notice is mailed.

B.    The failure of any occupant to promptly remit the collection fee when due and payable shall entitle the city or, in the case of a license, franchise, or contract, the licensee, franchisee or contractor to collect a late fee from that occupant. Any partial payment by a customer shall be deemed to be a payment toward the overall service meaning water, sewer and garbage and applied likewise. The maximum amount of the late fee shall be established by resolution of the city council. The maximum amount of solid waste to be collected at any one time from the property of commercial and residential occupants without the imposition of any additional service charges shall be determined by resolution of the city council. The occupant shall be charged an additional service charge for all solid waste in excess of the above limits on any given collection day.

C.    Pursuant to applicable government and health and safety codes, and upon the direction of the city council, any debt and all penalties may be collected and annually transferred to the county auditor for inclusion on the next year’s tax bill of the respective property owner. An action in the name of the city may be commenced in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent fees or charges and if legal action is brought by the city or its designee to enforce the collection of any amount charged and due under this section, any judgment rendered in favor of the city shall include costs of suit incurred by the city or its designee including a reasonable attorney’s fee if allowable by statute. (Ord. 829 §1, 2004: Ord. 827 §1(part), 2003)

8.16.080 Solid waste collection.
No person or persons, natural or legal, other than as an employee, shall collect, enter into an agreement to collect or provide for the collection, transportation or disposal of solid waste, unless such person or persons is authorized by the city to operate within the city by means of a license, franchise, contract, operations agreement or otherwise. (Ord. 827 §1(part), 2003)

8.16.090 Franchises for solid waste collection.
The city reserves the right to grant an exclusive or nonexclusive license, franchise, contract, operations agreement or otherwise for the collection, transportation or disposal of solid waste from sources and for the rental of drop boxes within the city under such terms and conditions as are contained in this chapter and as may be prescribed by the city council. The city may require monetary compensation from commercial and residential collectors and drop box transporters, in exchange for the license, franchise, contract, operations agreement or otherwise. A written agreement between the city and the commercial or residential collector or drop box transporter shall be required when the city exercises its right to license, franchise or otherwise contract for the collection, transportation, and disposal of solid waste. (Ord. 827 §1(part), 2003)

8.16.100 Collection and transportation times and days.
A.    No residential collector or drop box transporter servicing a residential customer shall collect solid waste in the city or pick up or deliver drop boxes except between the hours of five a.m. and six p.m., Monday through Friday, nor at any time on Saturdays or Sundays except as provided in subsection (D) of this section.

B.    No commercial collector or drop box transporter servicing a commercial customer shall collect solid waste in the city except between the hours of five a.m. and six p.m., Monday through Friday and between the hours of seven a.m. and three p.m., on Saturdays, nor at any time on Sundays except as provided in subsection (D).

C.    No residential or commercial collector or drop box transporter shall collect or transport solid waste within two hundred feet of a public or private elementary, middle or high school during the one-half hour before the commencement of the regular school day and one-half hour following the conclusion of the regular school day. It shall be the responsibility of the collector or drop box transporter to ascertain the various starting and ending times for schools in the city.

D.    Whenever a holiday recognized by the city or any disposal site falls upon a regularly scheduled collection day, the solid waste scheduled for collection that day, and for the remainder of the week, may be picked up one day later than scheduled. The collector or drop box transporter shall provide the city with at least seven days prior written notice of the collection schedule for each applicable holiday and the collector shall place advertisements in one daily newspaper servicing the city notifying customers of the change. (Ord. 827 §1(part), 2003)

8.16.110 Solid waste disposal.
A.    The city shall approve where solid waste generated in the city is transported for disposal. No collector or drop box transporter shall dispose of solid waste at a disposal site owned or controlled by the collector or its parent or holding company unless expressly granted by the city.

B.    No person, including a collector or drop box transporter, shall burn any solid waste within the city at any time, except as otherwise permitted by law.

C.    No person, including a collector or drop box transporter, shall bury or dump any solid waste within the city, except at a designated disposal site and then only in accordance with the rules and regulations governing the use of such disposal site.

D.    No residential collector shall provide less than weekly collection of solid waste from residential customers in the city when such solid waste is properly placed for collection on the day of collection.

E.    No commercial collector or drop box transporter shall fail to collect solid waste accumulated by each customer, as many times as requested by the customer or once per week, whichever is more frequent.

F.    No residential collector collection or transporting solid waste within the city shall create noise levels in excess of sixty-five decibels. No commercial collector or box transporter collecting or transporting solid waste within the city shall create noise levels in excess of seventy decibels.

G.    No collector or drop box transporter shall fail to maintain bins, toters and boxes other than in good repair. (Ord. 827 §1(part), 2003)

Chapter 8.20
NUISANCES
Sections:

8.20.010    Nuisance defined.

8.20.020    Scope of provisions.

8.20.030    Noise.

8.20.040    Smoke and soot.

8.20.050    Dumping in streams.

8.20.060    Stagnant water.

8.20.070    Dismantling or repair of motor vehicles.

8.20.010 Nuisance defined.
Anything which is injurious to health, or is indecent, or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, or as to interfere with the comfortable or safe enjoyment of life or property of the community, or any portion thereof, or neighborhood therein, is a public nuisance. (Ord. 392 §1, 1963)

8.20.020 Scope of provisions.
Certain specified actions or things mentioned in this chapter are declared nuisances. The enumeration thereof shall not be deemed exclusive, but merely illustrative, it being the intent and purpose of this chapter to include as nuisances, all actions or things of the character described in Section 8.20.010 of this chapter. (Ord. 392 §2, 1963)

8.20.030 Noise.
A.    Unnecessary Noises. It is unlawful for any person to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the community, or any portion thereof, or neighborhood therein, by creating or causing to be created any unreasonably loud or disturbing unnecessary noises in the city.

B.    Persistent Noises. It is unlawful for any person in the city to cause, suffer, permit or allow the repeated or persistent emission of any noise or sound produced by any such person, or by any animal or fowl, or any mechanical means, within his possession, ownership or control, which by reason of its raucous nature disturbs the peace and quiet of any person or persons in the city.

C.    Whenever the existence of any such nuisance comes to the attention of the chief of police, it shall be his duty to notify in writing the occupant of the premises upon which such nuisance exists, specifying the measures necessary to abate such nuisance and unless the same is abated within forty-eight hours thereafter, the chief of police shall summarily abate such nuisance.

D.    The provisions of this section shall not apply to the playing of music by a band or the blowing of a bugle, or the announcing of any show, entertainment, or event upon the public streets for which permission has been duly granted; or to any regularly licensed peddler calling his wares in an ordinary tone of voice, or ringing a bell or blowing a horn or moderate size in front of the residence of any customer; or to any public celebration or public function on a public holiday or other public occasion generally celebrated. (Ord. 392 §§3--5, 1963)

8.20.040 Smoke and soot.
It is unlawful for any person to cause, suffer or allow dense smoke to be discharged from any building, place, premises, stationary or locomotive engine or motor vehicle within the city, or to cause, suffer or allow soot, ashes or cinders to be discharged from any such facility to such an extent that such soot, ashes or cinders are blown upon adjacent property. (Ord. 392 §6, 1963)

8.20.050 Dumping in streams.
It is unlawful for any person to dump any junk, refuse, garbage, dirt or any other material in any stream, creek, watercourse or streambed, or within the banks of the same, or in the waters of Clear Lake, in the city, without written permission to do so from the director of public works. (Ord. 392 §7, 1963)

8.20.060 Stagnant water.
A.    It is unlawful for any person to maintain any cesspool, waterholes, unsealed water tanks, or other structure or condition upon any premises owned, leased or used by him within the city, having a tendency to breed, promote, invite or maintain mosquitoes and the same is declared to be a public nuisance.

B.    It is the duty of the chief of police to investigate all premises and to notify any such person maintaining such nuisance to abate the same within ten days and on failure of compliance to summarily abate the same. (Ord. 392 §8, 1963)

8.20.070 Dismantling or repair of motor vehicles.
A.    It is unlawful for any person to repair or dismantle in the open in any residential district of the city, any automobile, boat, or other vehicle or conveyance without having first obtained a permit to do so.

B.    Application for a permit shall be made to the police department on forms provided for such purpose. Applicant shall furnish all of the following information:

1.    Name and address of applicant;

2.    Address at which proposed work is to be done; 3. Written consent of owner of premises if other than applicant;

4.    Description of conveyance to be dismantled or repaired and a statement of work to be done;

5.    Estimated time necessary to complete the work; and

6.    Such other information as may be required by the department.

C.    All applications shall be referred to the fire chief for review prior to the granting of any permit. Where such work can be done without creating a police problem or a fire hazard, a permit shall be granted for the doing of the work described in the application.

D.    The permit so granted shall specify the time period in which the work shall be accomplished, which time period shall not be more than fifteen days. Work shall be completed within the time limit specified, or any extension granted for reasonable cause shown.

E.    Upon completion of the work authorized, applicant shall clear the work site of all debris, oil, grease, gasoline, paints, lacquer, or other combustible material, and leave it in such a condition that no hazard to persons or property shall remain.

F.    Applicants for dismantling or repair permits shall be required, as a condition to the granting of the permit, to authorize the police department to remove and store at owner’s expense, and conveyance and/or parts thereof where dismantling or repair is not completed within the time granted therefor.

G.    The term “repair,” as used in this chapter, shall not include minor adjustments or the replacement of parts where such adjustments or replacement may reasonably be expected to be accomplished within a seventy-two-hour period. No permit shall be required for such minor adjustments or replacement. (Ord. 392 §9, 1963)

Chapter 8.22
ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES
Sections:

8.22.010    Purpose and scope.

8.22.020    Definitions.

8.22.030    Service of notice to abate nuisance.

8.22.040    Second notice to abate nuisance.

8.22.050    Hearing.

8.22.060    Order of the council.

8.22.070    Costs and accounting.

8.22.080    Notice of assessment.

8.22.090    Hearing on account and proposed assessment.

8.22.100    Recordation of lien.

8.22.110    Penalty.

8.22.120    Summary abatement of immediate dangers.

8.22.010 Purpose and scope.
Any nuisance, as defined in this chapter, existing on any parcel of land in the city of Lakeport, may be abated as provided herein. The procedure for said abatement shall not be exclusive, but shall be cumulative and in addition to any other abatement procedures as provided by the laws of the state of California or the city of Lakeport Municipal Code. (Ord. 802 (part), 1999)

8.22.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phases shall have the following meanings:

“Affected or responsible person” means any agent, lessee, or other person occupying or having charge or control of any premises, except the owner.

“Beneficial owner” means any mortgagee of record; a beneficiary under a recorded deed of trust; the owner or holder of any lease of record; provided, however, that the United States, the state of California, and the city of Lakeport shall not be deemed to be beneficial owners by virtue of any lien for unpaid taxes.

“City staff” means any officer or department head of the city of Lakeport charged with the duty of enforcing regulations of the city of Lakeport or laws of the state of California.

“Council” means the city council of the city of Lakeport.

“Junk” means any material or object, used or new, which is not presently useable, or objects or materials so worn, deteriorated, or obsolete as to make them unusable in their existing condition, or objects or materials not capable of being used in their present location on the property, or which cannot be legally used in their present condition. “Junk” may include any objects or materials which are also defined as “trash.”

“Nuisance” means anything which is injurious to health, including, but not limited to, the illegal sale of controlled substances, or is indecent or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin, or any public park, square, street, or highway, is a nuisance.

A “nuisance” shall also mean:

1.    Any public nuisance known under common law or equity; or

2.    Any attractive nuisance which may prove dangerous or detrimental to any person; or

3.    Any condition that is dangerous to human life, unsafe, or detrimental to the public health or safety, including the accumulation of trash or junk and the existence of dangerous buildings as defined under the Uniform Building Code for the abatement of dangerous buildings.

“Occupier” means the person occupying or otherwise in real or apparent charge and control of the premises affected.

“Owner” means the owner of record of the land or premises affected.

“Trash” means all waste items whether described as rubbish, trash, waste, or refuse, used or new, including but not limited to paper, tin cans, bottles, glass, containers, rags, ashes, scrap metals, bones, cloth, rubber pieces, rope, asphalt, concrete, plaster, tile, bricks, crates, cartons, barrels, boxes, tree limbs, leaves, dead plants and trees, trimmings from plants and trees, grass clippings, tools, fixtures, utensils, lumber, pipe and pipe fittings, machinery or parts thereof, appliances, furniture, motor vehicle parts or tires, or any waste material from the premises, including those building materials for or produced from remodeling or construction, and material or objects which may become a breeding place for flies, mosquitoes, or vermin, or which give off unpleasant odors. (Ord. 802 (part), 1999)

8.22.030 Service of notice to abate nuisance.
A.    Determination of Nuisance. City staff, upon discovery of, or upon notice or complaint of a nuisance, shall investigate the alleged nuisance, and make a determination of the existence of a nuisance as defined herein.

Upon the determination by staff that a nuisance exists, staff shall prepare a notice of nuisance, and shall cause copies of said notice of nuisance to be served as provided herein.

Any notice required to be given by the provisions of this section shall be deemed to have been given when:

1.    A copy of said notice is either served personally or has been deposited in the mail, postage prepaid, certified, return receipt requested, to every owner, occupier, and beneficial owner of the premises or land affected, addressed to such persons at his last known place of address.

2.    A copy of the notice is prominently and conspicuously affixed to the premises affected by the proceedings herein.

The failure of city staff to make or attempt to make such service on any person required herein to be served shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder as to any other person duly served. If no address can be found by city staff, then any notice shall be so mailed to such person to the address of the premises affected by the proceedings taken hereunder; and

B.    The notice of nuisance shall contain the following:

1.    A street address, legal description, or other description sufficient to identify the premises affected.

2.    A description of the condition causing the nuisance. Where city staff has determined that the condition causing the nuisance can be corrected or abated by repair or action thereof, the notice shall state the repairs or action which will be required, and a date by which time such repair or actions shall be completed.

3.    Where city staff has determined that the condition causing the nuisance is imminently dangerous to human health, life, or limb, or is unsafe, or is detrimental to the public health or safety, staff may order that the building or structure affected be vacated, pending the correction or abatement of the conditions causing the nuisance; order the abatement of said nuisance within thirty days, and thereafter diligently prosecute and complete said abatement.

4.    A statement that if the required abatement is not commenced within the time limit specified, staff will recommend to the council an order that the city complete abatement of said nuisance. The costs of such abatement shall become a charge against the premises, and shall be made a special assessment against the premises. Said special assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as is provided for the collection of ordinary county taxes, and shall be subject to the same penalties, interest, and to the same procedures of foreclosure and sale in the case of delinquency as is provided for ordinary county taxes.

At the time said notice of nuisance is served as provided herein, city staff shall cause a copy of said notice of nuisance to be recorded in the office of the city clerk and the Lake County recorder. (Ord. 802 (part), 1999)

8.22.040 Second notice to abate nuisance.
A.    Notice to Abate Nuisance. (Second Notice). If upon the expiration of the period specified in the notice of nuisance, action to abate the nuisance has not been commenced, or, if it has been commenced, it has not been pursued with the due diligence nor completed within a reasonable time, city staff shall cause a second notice to abate nuisance to be prepared, and shall serve such notice as provided herein.

B.    The second notice to abate nuisance shall contain the following:

1.    A heading, “Second Notice to Abate Nuisance,” in large bold lettering.

2.    A notice to appear before the council at a stated time and place, which said time and place shall not be less than twenty-one days after service of said notice, to show cause why such condition should not be condemned as a nuisance, and why such nuisance should not be abated by the city. (Ord. 802 (part), 1999)

8.22.050 Hearing.
At the time and place specified in the second notice to abate nuisance, the council shall proceed to hear the testimony of city staff, the testimony of the owner or his representatives, and the testimony of other competent persons concerning the conditions constituting such nuisance, the estimated cost of abatement, and other matters which the council may deem pertinent. Any person affected may be present at such hearing, may be represented by counsel, may present testimony, and may cross-examine city staff, and other witnesses. The hearing may be continued by the council from time to time. (Ord. 802 (part), 1999)

8.22.060 Order of the council.
A.    Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the council may terminate the abatement proceedings, or it may order the owner or other affected or responsible person to abate the nuisance, prescribing the requirements of such abatement and prescribing a reasonable time, not less than thirty days, for the completion of such abatement.

B.    Such order may further provide that, in the event such abatement is not commenced, pursued, or completed within the terms set by the council, city staff shall be empowered and authorized to abate said nuisance.

C.    The order of the council shall be served as provided in Section 8.22.030, and the time limits set by the council shall not commence until said order is served as provided therein.

D.    Upon the expiration of the time limits set by the council as set forth above, city staff shall acquire jurisdiction to abate said nuisance. (Ord. 802 (part), 1999)

8.22.070 Costs and accounting.
A.    The council may create a revolving fund or funds from which may be paid the costs of abating nuisances and enforcing the provisions of this chapter, and into which shall be paid the receipts from the collection of costs as hereinafter set forth.

B.    City staff shall keep an itemized account of the costs of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, and of the proceeds of the sale of any materials connected therewith.

C.    The materials contained in any nuisance abated by city staff may be sold in the same manner as surplus city property is sold, and the proceeds from such sale shall be paid into the revolving fund. (Ord. 802 (part), 1999)

8.22.080 Notice of assessment.
A.    Upon the completion of the abatement, city staff shall cause a notice to be prepared, specifying the work done, an itemized account of the costs and receipts of performing the work, an address, legal description or other description sufficient to identify the premises, the amount of the assessment proposed to be levied against the premises, and the time and place when and where city staff will submit the account to the council for confirmation.

B.    The time and place specified shall not be less than twenty-one days after the service of the notice as provided herein. The notice shall contain a statement that the council will hear and consider objections and protests to said account and proposed assessment. (Ord. 802 (part), 1999)

8.22.090 Hearing on account and proposed assessment.
At the time and place fixed in the notice, the council shall hear and consider the account and proposed assessment, together with objections and protests thereto. At the conclusion of the hearing, the council may make such modifications and revisions of the proposed account and assessment as it deems just, and may order the account and proposed assessment confirmed or denied, in whole or in part, or as modified and revised. The determination of the council as to all matters contained therein shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 802 (part), 1999)

8.22.100 Recordation of lien.
A.    Upon the confirmation by the council, city staff shall cause to be prepared and recorded, in the office of the Lake County recorder, a notice of lien. Said notice shall contain the following:

1.    An address, legal description, or other description sufficient to identify the premises.

2.    A description of the proceeding under which the special assessment was made, including the order of the council confirming the assessment.

3.    The amount of the assessment.

4.    A claim of lien upon the described premises.

B.    Upon the recordation of such notice of lien, the amount claimed shall constitute a lien upon the described premises. Such lien shall be upon a parity with the liens of state and county taxes.

C.    The notice of lien, after recordation, shall be delivered to the county auditor who shall enter the amount of the lien on the assessment roll as special assessments. Thereafter, the amount set forth shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary county taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and interest, and to the same procedures for foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency, as is provided for ordinary county taxes, and all laws applicable to the levy, collection, and enforcement of county taxes are hereby made applicable to such assessment. (Ord. 802 (part), 1999)

8.22.110 Penalty.
A.    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, which may be prosecuted as an alternative to other remedies contained herein, and which is punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand five hundred dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

B.    Any person who removes any notice or order posted as required in this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 802 (part), 1999)

8.22.120 Summary abatement of immediate dangers.
Whenever any condition on or use of property causes or constitutes, or reasonably appears to cause or constitute, an imminent or immediate danger to the health or safety of the public, or a significant portion thereof, any enforcement officer or his or her authorized representative shall have the authority to summarily and without notice abate the same. The expenses of such abatement shall become a lien on the property and be collectible as provided herein. (Ord. 802 (part), 1999)

Chapter 8.24
STREAMBED OBSTRUCTIONS
Sections:

8.24.010    Nuisance declared.

8.24.020    Definitions.

8.24.030    Inspections.

8.24.040    Notice to owner--Posting.

8.24.050    Notice to owner--Content.

8.24.060    Notice to owner--Appeal.

8.24.070    Abatement by city--Authority.

8.24.080    Abatement by city--Recordkeeping.

8.24.090    Abatement by city--Appeal of assessment.

8.24.100    Abatement by city--Confirmation of assessment.

8.24.010 Nuisance declared.
The council finds that the presence of vegetation, structures, debris or other materials which obstruct or tend to interfere with the natural stream flow are conditions that are dangerous and injurious in that said obstructions may alter the natural water flow and result in flooding of surrounding property and thereby constitute a public nuisance. (Ord. 633 §2, 1984)

8.24.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: “Streambed obstruction” means any vegetation, structure, debris or other thing which exists, or which has fallen or is likely to fall during a subsequent flood or wind storm at a location within or along a streambed where said obstruction could cause interference with or diversion of the streamflow or could become waterborne during periods of heavy runoff. (Ord. 633 §1, 1984)

8.24.030 Inspections.
A.    The director of public works shall inspect all trees, structures and other things within and adjacent to all streams, channels and watercourses within the city to determine whether or not any such thing constitutes a streambed obstruction, as defined in this chapter. Whenever he finds any such streambed obstruction, he shall give notice for the removal of such obstruction as provided herein.

B.    The director of public works is authorized to make such inspections and take such action as may be required to enforce this chapter. (Ord. 633 §§3, 4, 1984)

8.24.040 Notice to owner--Posting.
The director of public works shall notify the owner and resident of the real property involved of the existence of a streambed obstruction upon his property by the following methods:

A.    Posting notice adjacent to the main driveway entrance to the property; and

B.    Sending notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person listed on the assessor’s latest equalized roll as to the owner thereof. (Ord. 633 §5, 1984)

8.24.050 Notice to owner--Content.
The notice shall be entitled “Notice to Clear Streambed Obstruction” and shall be dated and mailed to the owner or owners of the subject property as shown in the last equalized assessment roll. The notice shall direct the removal of the stated public nuisance, including vegetation, structures, debris, or any other material, and shall state that if work is not commenced within twenty days from the date of notice, the director of public works shall cause the removal of the public nuisance and the cost of removal will be assessed upon the property and become a lien upon the property until paid. The notice shall refer to this chapter for particulars. (Ord. 633 §6, 1984)

8.24.060 Notice to owner--Appeal.
Any property owner or his authorized agent aggrieved by the action of the director of public works in giving said “Notice to Clear Streambed Obstruction” may appeal to the city council in. writing within ten days of receipt of the notice. (Ord. 633 §7, 1984)

8.24.070 Abatement by city--Authority.
Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of an owner or his authorized agent so notified to remove and dispose of the public nuisance within fifteen days from the date of notice, or ten days from the date of determination of an appeal by the city council as provided herein, the director of public works shall remove or cause to be removed, said public nuisance, in a manner he deems most suitable, including the use of private contractors, and shall apply the charge of said removal to the subject property owner. Said charges shall be determined by the director of public works and shall be the actual costs of abating the nuisance together with reason able overhead and incidental expenses of the removal of the nuisance. (Ord. 633 §8, 1984)

8.24.080 Abatement by city--Recordkeeping.
The director of public works shall cause to be kept a permanent record showing the description of each property, parcel and lot for which a notice has been given in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and the amount of the actual costs, including overhead and incidental expenses for the removal of the nuisances. (Ord. 633 §9, 1984)

8.24.090 Abatement by city--Appeal of assessment.
Following the first day of June of each year and at least ten days prior to the date set for the confirmation of assessments, the director of public works shall notify the owner or agents of all property, parcels or lots cleaned during the previous fiscal year of the time and place wherein the proposed assessments are to be confirmed. Any owner of property liable to be assessed for the work may make protest in writing with the city clerk against the proposed improvement at any time not later than the hour set for the hearing. Such protest must contain a description of the property in which each signer thereof is interested, sufficient to identify said property and, if the signers are not shown on the last equalized assessment roll as owners of said property, must be accompanied by written evidence that such signers are owners of said property. (Ord. 633 §10, 1984)

8.24.100 Abatement by city--Confirmation of assessment.
At the time and place fixed for the confirmation of proposed assessments, the city council shall hear and pass upon all protests and its determination thereupon shall be final. Following the hearing of all protests, the city council shall confirm the proposed assessments and such assessments shall become a lien upon the described real property. The director of public works shall thereafter deliver to the county assessor a listing of the confirmed assessments and the amount of the assessments shall be collected at the time and in the manner of ordinary property taxes. (Ord. 633 §11, 1984)

Chapter 8.28
WEEDS AND RUBBISH
Sections:

8.28.010    Nuisance--Designated.

8.28.020    Nuisance--Declared.

8.28.030    Abatement--Notice to property owners.

8.28.040    Abatement--Hearing.

8.28.050    Abatement by city--Procedure.

8.28.060    Abatement by city--Account keeping.

8.28.070    Abatement by city--Assessment.

8.28.080    Violation--Penalty.

8.28.010 Nuisance--Designated.
All weeds growing upon the streets or sidewalks or upon private property within the city which bear seeds of a wingy or downy nature, or attain such a large growth as to become a fire menace when dry, or which are otherwise noxious or dangerous, and all rubbish, refuse and dirt upon streets, parkways, sidewalks or private property within the city, may be declared to be a public nuisance by the city council and may be abated as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 372 §1, 1960)

8.28.020 Nuisance--Declared.
A.    Whenever such weeds are growing upon any street or sidewalk or private property, or whenever rubbish, refuse, or dirt is upon any street, parkway, sidewalk or private property, the city council, may, by resolution, declare the same to be a public nuisance. The resolution shall refer to the street by the name under which it is commonly known and describe the property upon which or in front of which, said nuisance exists, by giving the lot and block number of the same, according to the official map or the assessment map of such city used for describing property on tax bills, and no other description of the property shall be required.

B.    Any number of streets, sidewalks or parcels of private property may be included in any one and the same resolution. (Ord. 372 §2, 1960)

8.28.030 Abatement--Notice to property owners.
A.    After the passage of the resolution, the community development department shall cause to be mailed to each person entitled to notice under Government Code Section 39567.1, a notice captioned "Notice to Destroy Weeds and to Remove Rubbish, Refuse and Dirt," substantially in the following form:

NOTICE TO DESTROY WEEDS AND TO REMOVE

RUBBISH, REFUSE AND DIRT

Notice is hereby given that on the ____________ day of _______________, 20____, the City Council of Lakeport passed a resolution declaring that: if noxious or dangerous weeds are growing upon, or in front of, the parcel of property designated by this notice; if rubbish, refuse, and/or dirt are upon, or in front of, the parcel of property noted here (and more particularly described in Exhibit A of the above Resolution); such weeds, rubbish, refuse and/or dirt constitute a public nuisance which must be abated by the removal of the weeds, rubbish, refuse, and/or dirt. Otherwise, they will be removed by the municipal authorities to abate the nuisance, and the cost of removal will be assessed upon the parcels from or in front of which the weeds, rubbish, refuse, and/or dirt are removed; and, a lien for such cost will be placed upon the property until paid.

Reference is hereby made to the resolution for further particulars. A copy of said resolution is on file in the Office of the City Clerk, 225 Park street, Lakeport, CA. Any property owner having an objection to the proposed removal of the weeds, rubbish, and/or dirt, is hereby notified there will be a meeting of the city council of the City of Lakeport on the ______ day of ________________, 20___, at the hour of _______ p.m., when objections will be heard and given due consideration. The City encourages property owners to have a regular maintenance program which will prevent hazards to the public safety. In particular with regard to weeds, it is required that weed abatement must be performed at least once between May 1 and no later than June 1, 20___, in order to reduce the hazard from regrowth of weeds during the late fire season. Written notification must be returned to the City by _________, 20___, by property owners who intended to arrange for private abatement. (Return notification form provided on lower section of this notice.)

Dated this ________ day of ___________, 20_____.

B.    Said notices shall be mailed by the community development department at least ten days prior to the time of hearing of objections by the city council. (Ord. 917 §1(part), 2018: Ord. 734, 1992: Ord. 372 §3, 1960)

8.28.040 Abatement--Hearing.
At the time stated in the notices, the city council shall hear and consider all objections or protests, if any, to the proposed removal of weeds, rubbish, refuse and dirt and may continue the hearing from time to time. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the city council by motion or resolution shall allow or overrule any or all objections, whereupon the city council shall be deemed to have acquired jurisdiction to proceed and perform the work of removal and the decision of the city council on the matter shall be deemed final and conclusive. (Ord. 372 §4, 1960)

8.28.050 Abatement by city--Procedure.
A.    After final action has been taken by the city council on the disposition of any protests or objections, or in case no protests or objections have been received, the city council, by motion or resolution, shall order the community development director, or such other public officer as the city council may designate, to abate said nuisance by having the weeds, rubbish, refuse and dirt referred to removed, and his or her assistants or deputies are authorized to enter upon private property for that purpose.

B.    Any property owner shall have the right to have any such weeds and rubbish, refuse and dirt, removed at his own expense, providing the same is done prior to the arrival of the community development director, or such other public officer so designated or his or her representative to do the same.

C.    Removal of weeds, or other fire hazards may be done by control burning when the same may be done without danger to property or life and subject to the issuance of permits therefor, or under the control of the fire department of the city. (Ord. 917 §1(part), 2018; Ord. 372 §5, 1960)

8.28.060 Abatement by city--Account keeping.
The community development director or such other public official so designated shall keep an account of the cost of abating such nuisance in front of or on each separate lot or parcel of land where the work is done by his or her deputies, and shall render an itemized report in writing to the city council showing the cost of removing such weeds, rubbish, refuse and dirt on each separate lot, or in front thereof, or both; provided, that before said report is submitted to said legislative body a copy of the same shall be posted for at least three days prior thereto on or near the chamber door of the City Hall, together with a notice of the date when the report shall be submitted to the legislative body for confirmation. (Ord. 917 §1(part), 2018: Ord. 372 §6, 1960)

8.28.070 Abatement by city--Assessment.
A.    The city council shall thereupon confirm said costs, if the same is fair and reasonable.

B.    The city council shall cause a report to be made as of June 30th of each year to the county auditor, who shall enter the amounts of the respective assessments on the tax roll opposite the respective parcels of land, and the amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties, the same procedures upon foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency, as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of county taxes are made applicable to such special assessment taxes. The same shall be identified as a weed and rubbish abatement tax.

C.    The city council shall, and is granted the alternate means of collecting the assessments so determined, as provided by Section 39587 of the Government Code of the state, and such assessment, when determined as herein provided, or as provided by Chapter 13, Title 4, Division 3 of the Government Code, is determined to be a lien upon the real property in each instance, and upon election of the city council, to use such alternate procedure by inclusion of such determination in its report of costs, and the resolution may thereupon authorize the sale of the property or properties so affected by the lien, thus established by such city official as may be designated in the resolution in the manner provided for the satisfaction of liens on real property by law. (Ord. 421 §1, 1966; Ord. 372 §7, 1960)

8.28.080 Violation--Penalty.
Any person maintaining such nuisance, or suffering or permitting such nuisance to exist, after notice given of the existence of the same as provided in this chapter, and after determination thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 372 §8, 1960)

Chapter 8.30
ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION AND APPEAL PROCEDURES
Sections:

8.30.010    Issuance of administrative citation.

8.30.020    Administrative fines.

8.30.030    Time period within which to correct or remedy violations.

8.30.040    Contents of administrative citation.

8.30.050    Form of administrative citation.

8.30.060    Service of administrative citation.

8.30.070    Completion of service of administrative citation.

8.30.080    Appeal of administrative citation.

8.30.090    Form for filing of appeal.

8.30.100    Time in which to file appeal.

8.30.110    Fee for filing of appeal.

8.30.120    Incomplete filing.

8.30.130    Failure to file proper appeal.

8.30.140    Processing and conducting of appeal.

8.30.150    Stay pending appeal.

8.30.160    Time in which to pay fine--Demand for payment--Notice of decision and compliance order.

8.30.170    Contents of demand for payment.

8.30.180    Service of demand for payment.

8.30.190    Completion of service.

8.30.200    Proof of service.

8.30.210    Appeal of administrative fine.

8.30.220    Attorneys’ fees.

8.30.010 Issuance of administrative citation.
Whenever a code compliance officer or other authorized enforcement agent determines that an infraction or misdemeanor violation of the municipal code has occurred or that a violation exists which is deemed to constitute a public nuisance pursuant to the municipal code and/or applicable statute, rule, code, project condition agreement or other city regulation, the officer or agent may issue an administrative citation to any party responsible for the violation. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.30.020 Administrative fines.
Any party to whom an administrative citation is issued shall be responsible for payment of an administrative fine in the amount specifically set forth in the municipal code and/or applicable statute, rule, code or regulation violated or, if no amount provided, in the following amounts: (A) an administrative fine in an amount not to exceed one hundred dollars for the first violation; (B) an administrative fine in an amount not to exceed two hundred dollars for the second violation of the same provision within a twelve-month period commencing on the date of the first violation; and (C) an administrative fine in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars for the third and any subsequent violation of the same provision within a twelve-month period commencing on the date of the first violation. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.30.030 Time period within which to correct or remedy violations.
A.    Any party to whom an administrative citation has been issued for violations pertaining to building, plumbing, electrical, or other similar structural or zoning issues that do not create an immediate danger to health or safety, shall be provided not less than ten calendar days in which to correct or otherwise remedy the violation prior to the imposition of any administrative fine. For all other violations, the recipient of an administrative citation shall be provided not less than seven calendar days in which to correct or otherwise remedy the violation prior to the imposition of any administrative fine, unless a shorter period is determined necessary by the code compliance officer or other authorized enforcement agent.

B.    The code compliance officer or other authorized enforcement agent may extend the time in which to correct or otherwise remedy a violation upon a showing that the recipient of the administrative citation requires additional time to complete repairs or upon a showing that the recipient of the administrative citation is awaiting issuance of a permit, provided such person offers proof that he or she has commenced taking action to correct or otherwise remedy the violation and/or that a proper application for such permit has been made. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.30.040 Contents of administrative citation.
An administrative citation shall include all of the following information: (A) the name of the person(s) responsible for committing the violation(s); (B) the date of the violation(s); (C) the street address or a definite description of the location where the violation occurred; (D) the code section(s) violated; (E) a description of the violation; (F) an order prohibiting the continuation or repeated occurrence of the described violation(s); (G) the amount of the administrative fine for the violation(s); (H) a description of the fine payment process, including a description of the time within which and the place to which the fine shall be paid; (I) a description of the administrative citation appeal process, including the time within which an appeal must be filed; (J) a description of the process by which the city may collect any unpaid fines; (K) a description of the potential consequences should the violator continue or repeat the violation; and (L) the name and signature of the code compliance officer or other authorized agent who issued the administrative citation (the "citing officer"). (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.30.050 Form of administrative citation.
An administrative citation may be in letter form or any other form which adequately conveys the information set forth in Section 8.30.040. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.30.060 Service of administrative citation.
An administrative citation may be served in any of the following ways: (A) by personal delivery to the violator; (B) if the violator is being charged for violations occurring at a business operating within the city, and the violator is the owner or an employee of the business, the citation may be served by causing a copy of said citation to be sent by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested to the address shown on any permit or license issued by the city to said business; or (C) by causing a copy of said citation to be sent by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to an address otherwise known to the citing officer. The failure of any such person to receive a copy of the administrative citation shall not affect the validity of any proceedings or actions taken under this title. Service by certified mail in the manner herein provided shall be affixed to the copy of the administrative citation and retained by the citing officer. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.30.070 Completion of service of administrative citation.
Service of an administrative citation which is personally served shall be deemed completed at the time of such personal service. Service of an administrative citation which is served by mail is deemed completed on the date said citation is deposited in the mail. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.30.080 Appeal of administrative citation.
Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there was a violation or that he or she is the party responsible for committing the violation by filing a complete and proper appeal of the administrative citation with the citing officer pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.30.090 Form for filing of appeal.
All appeals from any administrative citation shall be in writing and shall contain the following information: (A) name(s) of each appellant, (B) a brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific items protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellant, (C) a brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief sought and the reasons why the administrative citation should be rescinded, modified or otherwise set aside, and (D) the signatures of all parties named as appellants and their mailing addresses. Any appeal filed that fails to provide all of the information required by this section shall be deemed incomplete. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.30.100 Time in which to file appeal.
A complete and proper appeal of an administrative citation as described in this chapter shall be filed with the citing officer within ten calendar days from the date that service of the administrative citation was completed pursuant to Section 8.30.070. Any appeal not timely filed shall be rejected. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.30.110 Fee for filing of appeal.
A filing fee as established by city council resolution or any amendments thereto for an appeal of an administrative citation must be paid to the city at or prior to the time of the filing of such appeal. Any appeal of the administrative citation filed without payment of the filing fee shall be deemed incomplete. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.30.120 Incomplete filing.
Not later than ten calendar days from the date the appeal is filed the citing officer or his or her designee shall determine whether the appeal is complete. If the appeal is determined to be incomplete, the citing officer or his or her designee shall immediately mail to the appellant a notice of incomplete filing which shall provide a written explanation of each reason why the appeal has been determined to be incomplete. If service of the notice of incomplete filing is completed within ten calendar days from the date the appeal is filed, the time period within which to file a completed appeal of an administrative citation shall be extended by an additional five calendar days. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.30.130 Failure to file proper appeal.
Failure to timely and properly file an appeal from an administrative citation shall constitute a waiver of all rights to an administrative appeal hearing and adjudication of the administrative citation or any portion thereof. The determination that the violation occurred and that the violator was responsible for the violation shall be deemed final on the date that service of the administrative citation is deemed completed pursuant to Section 8.30.070. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.30.140 Processing and conducting of appeal.
The appeal of any administrative citation shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and conducted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 8.31. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.30.150 Stay pending appeal.
Enforcement of any administrative citation (except for violations requiring immediate abatement due to immediate threats to public health and safety) shall be stayed during the pendency of the appeal. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.30.160 Time in which to pay fine--Demand for payment--Notice of decision and compliance order.
A.    After an administrative citation becomes final due to the failure to file a timely and proper appeal, the code compliance manager or other authorized agent shall prepare a demand for payment of all applicable administrative fines. The demand for payment shall require the person who was issued the administrative citation to pay all applicable administrative fines no later than thirty calendar days from the date the administrative citation was issued. The amount of the fine for which the recipient shall be responsible shall be as set forth in the administrative citation. Payment of the administrative fine shall be made to the finance department unless otherwise stated in the demand for payment.

B.    Where a timely and complete appeal of the administrative citation is filed pursuant to this chapter and the citation is upheld, the notice of decision and compliance order issued by the administrative hearing officer shall require appellant to pay all applicable administrative fines no later than twenty calendar days from the date the notice of decision and compliance order was issued. The amount of the fine for which the recipient shall be responsible shall be as set forth in the administrative citation. Payment of the administrative fine shall be made to the finance department unless otherwise stated in the demand for payment. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.30.170 Contents of demand for payment.
The demand for payment shall include all of the following, which shall be consistent with the information contained in the administrative citation: (A) the name of the person(s) responsible for payment of the administrative fines; (B) the date of issuance of the administrative citation and the street address or a definite description of the location where the violation occurred; (C) the amount of the administrative fine which shall be immediately due and payable; (D) the place where the fine must be paid; and (E) a description of the process by which the city may collect any unpaid fines. The demand for payment may be in letter form or any other form which conveys the information set forth in this section. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.30.180 Service of demand for payment.
The demand for payment shall be served upon the person(s) responsible for payment of the administrative fines either personally or by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, at their address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the county or as otherwise known to the citing officer or authorized agent. If an address of any such person does not appear on the last equalized assessment roll or is not otherwise known to the citing officer, then a copy of the demand for payment shall be addressed to such person(s) and mailed to the address of the subject premises. The failure of any such person to receive a copy of the demand for payment shall not affect the validity of any proceedings or actions taken under this chapter. Service by certified mail in the manner herein provided shall be affixed to the copy of the demand for payment and retained by the citing officer. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.30.190 Completion of service.
Service of the demand for payment which is personally served shall be deemed completed at the time of such personal service. Service of a demand for payment which is served by mail is deemed completed on the date said demand for payment is deposited in the mail. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.30.200 Proof of service.
Proof of service of the demand for payment shall be certified at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the persons effecting service, declaring the date and manner in which service was made. The declaration, together with any receipt card returned in acknowledgment of receipt by certified mail shall be affixed to a copy of demand for payment and retained by the citing officer. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.30.210 Appeal of administrative fine.
Any party contesting the imposition of the administrative fine(s) may seek judicial review of the imposition of the fine(s) by filing an appeal pursuant to California Government Code Section 53069.4, subdivision (b)(1), after said party has exhausted all available administrative remedies. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.30.220 Attorneys’ fees.
The prevailing party in any proceeding conducted pursuant to this chapter and associated with the abatement of a public nuisance or correction of any code violation or other issues as set forth herein shall be entitled to recover reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs incurred in any such proceeding. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

Chapter 8.31
ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION APPEAL HEARING PROCESS
Sections:

8.31.010    Applicability of administrative appeal hearing procedures.

8.31.020    Duties of administrative hearing officer.

8.31.030    Limitations on authority of administrative hearing officer.

8.31.040    Administrative hearing officer.

8.31.050    Scheduling the administrative appeal hearing.

8.31.060    Preparation and form of notice of administrative appeal hearing.

8.31.070    Time for and method of service of notice of administrative appeal hearing.

8.31.080    Proof of service of notice of administrative appeal hearing.

8.31.090    Report and recommendation.

8.31.100    Admissibility of evidence at administrative appeal hearing.

8.31.110    Rights of parties at administrative appeal hearing.

8.31.120    Failure to attend administrative appeal hearing.

8.31.130    Hearing officer’s determination on appeal.

8.31.140    Duty to prepare and serve notice of decision and compliance order.

8.31.150    Time in which to serve notice of decision and compliance order.

8.31.160    Form of notice of decision and compliance order.

8.31.170    Service of notice of decision and compliance order.

8.31.180    Effective date of notice of decision and compliance order.

8.31.185    Judicial review.

8.31.190    Failure to obey notice of decision and compliance order.

8.31.200    Attorneys’ fees.

8.31.210    Lien/collection--Recovery of penalties and costs.

8.31.010 Applicability of administrative appeal hearing procedures.
The procedures adopted in this chapter for the selection of administrative hearing officers shall not replace, substitute for, or in any way affect the administrative hearing board processes created by the California codes, uniform codes and national codes adopted by the city and the administrative hearings provided by such codes shall be treated separate and apart from the administrative appeal hearing procedures adopted herein. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.31.020 Duties of administrative hearing officer.
The administrative hearing officer ("hearing officer") shall conduct all administrative appeal hearings of any timely and properly filed appeal from an administrative citation pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter. The hearing officer shall review all evidence, documents, and written testimony and hear all oral testimony submitted by the parties and render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the citing officer. The hearing officer may decide to uphold the administrative citation, rescind the citation in part or in its entirety, and/or reduce the amount or waive payment of the administrative fine. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.31.030 Limitations on authority of administrative hearing officer.
The hearing officer’s authority to hear and consider appeals shall be limited to passing on only those appeals pertaining to matters within his or her subject matter jurisdiction. The hearing officer shall consider at the hearing on the appeal only those matters or issues which are specifically raised by the appellant in his or her appeal and which are relevant to the issues of the hearing. The hearing officer shall not have the authority to waive any requirements of the municipal code and/or any applicable statutes, rules, codes or regulations, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.31.040 Administrative hearing officer.
The city manager shall serve as hearing officer, or shall appoint a neutral person to serve as hearing officer. (Ord. 911 §1(part), 2016: Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.31.050 Scheduling the administrative appeal hearing.
An appeal hearing based on a request for hearing shall be set for a date not less than ten days nor more than sixty days from the date the city has determined that a timely and complete appeal of an administrative citation has been filed unless the enforcement officer determines that the matter is urgent or that good cause exists for an extension of time, in which case the hearing date may be shortened or extended, as warranted by the circumstances. (Ord. 911 §1(part), 2016: Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.31.060 Preparation and form of notice of administrative appeal hearing.
Once the date, time and place for the administrative appeal hearing is determined, the citing officer or his or her designee shall prepare a notice of administrative appeal hearing ("hearing notice"), which shall be in substantially the same form as follows:

You are hereby notified that a hearing will be held before the City Manager or his or her designee at _________________ on the ____ day of ____________, ________, at the hour of ______ to hear your appeal of the Administrative Citation served upon you. You may be present at the hearing. You may be, but need not be, represented by an attorney. You may present any relevant evidence at the hearing and you will be given a full opportunity to cross-examine all witnesses testifying against you.

(Ord. 911 §1(part), 2016: Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.31.070 Time for and method of service of notice of administrative appeal hearing.
The citing officer or his or her designee shall cause a copy of hearing notice to be provided to each appellant either by causing a copy of said notice to be delivered to each appellant personally or by causing a copy of said notice to be delivered by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, and addressed to each appellant at the address shown on the appeal. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.31.080 Proof of service of notice of administrative appeal hearing.
Proof of service of the hearing notice shall be certified at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the persons effecting service, declaring the date and manner in which service was made. The declaration shall be affixed to a copy of the hearing notice and retained by the citing officer or his or her designee. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.31.090 Report and recommendation.
The citing officer shall prepare an administrative hearing packet for the hearing officer to review prior to the hearing. The packet shall include a copy of the written appeal and any supporting documents, a copy of the administrative citation, a staff report if any, and any other evidence relevant to the violation(s). (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.31.100 Admissibility of evidence at administrative appeal hearing.
At the administrative appeal hearing, the hearing officer shall review all evidence, documents, and written testimony and hear all oral testimony offered either in support of appellant’s claim or in support of the administrative citation, provided such evidence and testimony is relevant to the issues of the hearing. The hearing officer has the authority to determine the relevance of any evidence to the issues of the hearing. The hearing officer also has the authority to exclude unduly repetitious and cumulative evidence, regardless of its relevancy. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.31.110 Rights of parties at administrative appeal hearing.
Each party appearing at the hearing shall have the following rights: (A) to call and examine witnesses; (B) to introduce documentary and physical evidence; (C) to cross-examine opposing witnesses; (D) to impeach any witness regardless of which party first called the witness to testify; (E) to rebut evidence; and (F) to be represented by anyone who is lawfully permitted to do so. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.31.120 Failure to attend administrative appeal hearing.
If the appellant fails to attend the scheduled administrative appeal hearing, the hearing will proceed without appellant and he or she will be deemed to have waived his or her rights to be orally heard at the appeal hearing. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.31.130 Hearing officer’s determination on appeal.
Following the appeal of an administrative citation, the hearing officer may decide to uphold the administrative citation, establish a modified schedule for compliance, overturn some or all of the findings of the citing officer and/or rescind the citation in part or in its entirety, and/or reduce the amount or waive payment of the administrative fine. In the event the hearing officer determines to rescind the administrative citation in its entirety, the recipient of the administrative citation shall not be required to pay the administrative fine imposed by said citation and the appeal fee shall be refunded. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.31.140 Duty to prepare and serve notice of decision and compliance order.
The hearing officer shall sign their decision and then provide same to city staff who will then prepare and serve a written notice of decision and compliance order ("decision and compliance order") upon each appellant and the citing officer following the administrative appeal hearing. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. The notice of decision shall include the following language:

The time within which judicial review of the penalty imposed by this order must be sought is governed by Government Code Section 53069.4. Judicial review must be sought not later than twenty (20) days after service of the order imposing or confirming such penalty.

(Ord. 911 §1(part), 2016: Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.31.150 Time in which to serve notice of decision and compliance order.
The hearing officer shall serve the written notice of decision and compliance order to each appellant within twenty calendar days from the date the hearing is deemed closed. The hearing officer shall also provide or cause to be provided a copy of the decision and compliance order to the citing officer. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.31.160 Form of notice of decision and compliance order.
The decision and compliance order for an administrative citation shall state whether the administrative citation has been either upheld, in full or in part, or rescinded, in full or in part. In addition, the decision and compliance order shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered, findings of fact, a determination of the issues presented, the effective date of the decision, and a compliance order, if applicable, which shall specifically describe the actions which shall be required to be taken to remedy the code violations indicated in the decision and compliance order and shall require the actions to be completed within a specified time period and by a specified deadline. In addition, the decision and compliance order shall contain a compliance order, if applicable, which shall require the administrative citation recipient to pay all applicable administrative fines no later than twenty calendar days from the date of issuance of the notice of decision and compliance order. The amount of the fine for which the recipient shall be responsible shall be as set forth in the administrative citation. Payment of the administrative fine shall be ordered to be made to the issuing department or division unless otherwise directed by the city. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.31.170 Service of notice of decision and compliance order.
The hearing officer shall cause a copy of the notice of decision and compliance order to be provided to each appellant either by causing a copy of the decision and compliance order to be delivered to each appellant personally or by causing a copy of said decision and compliance order to be delivered to each appellant by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, and addressed to appellant at the address shown on the appeal. A copy of the decision and compliance order shall also be provided to the citing officer. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.31.180 Effective date of notice of decision and compliance order.
The effective date of the hearing officer’s notice of decision and compliance order shall be as stated therein or, if none provided, the date of the decision and compliance order. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.31.185 Judicial review.
An appellant may seek judicial review of a hearing officer’s decision by filing a petition for review with the superior court, pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4, within twenty days after the effective date of the hearing officer’s notice of decision and compliance order. (Ord. 911 §2, 2016)

8.31.190 Failure to obey notice of decision and compliance order.
A.    Failure to obey a notice of decision and compliance order shall be deemed a separate infraction/violation for purposes of this section. A fourth violation and subsequent violations of this section within a twelve-month period shall be deemed a misdemeanor.

B.    If, after the notice of decision and compliance order becomes final, the person(s) to whom the decision and compliance order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order, the code compliance manager or other authorized agent may: (1) cause such person to be prosecuted for an infraction violation for the offense of contempt of the hearing officer’s decision and compliance order and/or (2) institute any appropriate administrative or legal action or proceeding necessary to gain compliance.

C.    For each day that the person(s) to whom the decision and compliance order is directed fails, neglects or refuses to obey such order, a new offense is committed. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.31.200 Attorneys’ fees.
The prevailing party in any proceeding conducted pursuant to this chapter and associated with the abatement of a public nuisance or correction of any code violation or other issues as set forth herein shall be entitled to recovery of attorneys’ fees incurred in any such proceeding. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

8.31.210 Lien/collection--Recovery of penalties and costs.
A.    Administrative penalties and abatement costs shall be a debt to the city and subject to all remedies for debt collection as allowed by law.

B.    When a violation involves privately owned real property and the abatement costs and penalties are unpaid within the prescribed time set forth in the applicable order, the amount of such costs and penalties may be recorded as a lien upon and against the real property or collected as special assessments without further hearing.

C.    In addition to any other means of enforcement, the city attorney is authorized to bring a civil action against the responsible party for collection of administrative penalties and abatement costs in any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 888 §1(part), 2013)

Chapter 8.32
FIRE PREVENTION SYSTEMS
Sections:

8.32.010    Definitions.

8.32.020    Purpose of provisions.

8.32.030    Occupancy requirements.

8.32.040    Water supply for new subdivisions.

8.32.050    Water supply and fire flow requirements-- Required when.

8.32.060    Automatic sprinkler systems and alarms-- Requirements.

8.32.070    Automatic sprinkler systems--Right to appeal requirements.

8.32.080    Automatic sprinkler systems--Decision on appeal.

8.32.090    Fire alarm systems--Defined--Required.

8.32.100    Piping for residential sprinkler systems.

8.32.110    Smoke detection systems.

8.32.120    Fire hydrants.

8.32.010 Definitions.
A.    Wherever the word “chief of fire prevention” is used in the Uniform Fire Code, it shall be held to mean the fire chief.

B.    Wherever the term “corporation counsel” is used in the Uniform Fire Code, it shall be held to mean the attorney for the city.

C.    Wherever the word “jurisdiction” is used in the Uniform Fire Code, it shall be held to mean the city fire department.

D.    “Uniform Fire Code” refers to the most recent version of the Uniform Fire Code adopted by the city.

E.    The definitions contained in the Uniform Fire Code shall apply to this section until specifically amended in this section. (Ord. 662 §§1, 3, 1986)

8.32.020 Purpose of provisions.
A.    The purpose of this chapter is to provide regulations establishing minimum standards for water supply and automatic fire extinguishing systems where such standards are not specifically covered by the Uniform Fire Code. Where specific standards are provided by the Uniform Fire Code and provide a greater degree of fire protection than the provisions of this section, those standards shall apply.

B.    In those cases where the Uniform Fire Code does not provide specific standards, the terms of this section shall apply.

C.    The intent of this section is to apply those fire protection standards which will provide the residents and property owners of the city the greatest degree of fire protection which is reasonable under the circumstances. (Ord. 662 §2, 1986)

8.32.030 Occupancy requirements.
Occupancy of any structure regulated by this chapter shall not take place until required fire flows are available at the structure and required sprinklers and alarms are installed and fully operable. (Ord. 662 §12, 1986)

8.32.040 Water supply for new subdivisions.
A.    Water supply (fire flows) for R-1 and R-2 zones as defined by Title 17 of this code shall be adequate to provide a minimum of two thousand gallons per minute of free flow from two adjacent hydrants flowing simultaneously with twenty pounds per square inch residual pressure.

B.    Water supply for all other zones shall be adequate to provide the required fire flows needed to protect any structures constructed within the zone. Required fire flows shall be determined by I.S.O. publication, “Guide for Determination of Required Fire Flow,” December, 1974. See Exhibit A, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter, on file in the office of the city clerk.

C.    Minimum fire flows in any fire zone shall not be less than that flow required for R-1 and R-2 zones.

D.    One-site Water Supply. Where adequate fire flows are not available from city water lines, an on-site water supply shall consist of reservoirs, pressure tanks, elevated tanks, or other systems capable of supplying the required fire flow. On-site water supply systems shall be approved by the fire chief prior to issuance of a building permit.

E.    Water supply in R-1 and R-2 zones shall be provided at the time of the development of the property. Development shall be at the time of the construction of improvements or the construction of buildings, whichever occurs first. (Ord. 662 §4, 1986)

8.32.050 Water supply and fire flow requirements--Required when.
A.    Water supply and fire flow requirements shall be met for all new construction and for all modifications, alterations or reconstruction of multifamily residential and commercial structures which result in an increase of twenty-five percent or more of the floor area or building volume. The percentage increase in the modifications and/or alterations shall be as determined by the building official.

B.    Water supply, fire flow and alarm requirements shall be met when the existing occupancy of a building changes from a low or moderate hazard to a severe or high hazard. The determination of the change and degree of hazard of occupancy shall be determined by the fire chief.

C.    All persons, businesses, partnerships, corporations, etc., which intend to occupy a structure, wherein the intended occupancy may be considered to be severe or high hazard as defined in the National Fire Protection Handbook, 16th Edition, Section 7, shall notify the fire chief of such intended occupancy.

D.    Plans and specifications for required fire protection facilities shall be approved prior to the issuance of a building and/or encroachment permit. (Ord. 662 §5, 1986)

8.32.060 Automatic sprinkler systems and alarms--Requirements.
A.    Every new building and every altered commercial building, as defined below, within the city limits that requires a fire flow in excess of eighteen hundred gallons per minute (based on I.S.O. publication, Guide for Determination of Required Fire Flow, December, 1974) shall have an automatic sprinkler and alarm system installed.

B.    As specified in the fire codes, all buildings which in the opinion of the fire chief are severe or high-hazard occupancies, shall have an automatic sprinkler system, regardless of size of occupancy. The fire chief shall determine the classification of hazard of contents, as per N.F.P.A. Volume Nine, Section 101.

C.    Portions of buildings separated by one or more area separation walls shall be considered as separate buildings for the purpose of determining the automatic sprinkler system and alarm system requirements, provided that the area separation walls are in compliance with Section 505 and other applicable sections of the 1982 Uniform Building Code.

D.    All commercial structures using open web truss type floor and/or roof joist construction, must provide a minimum two-hour fire protection between partition walls and have sprinkler protection between the roof and ceiling and between floor and the ceiling below.

E.    This section shall apply to all new construction and to all commercial modifications, alterations or reconstruction which results in an increase of twenty-five percent or more of the floor area and/or building volume. (Ord. 662 §6, 1986)

8.32.070 Automatic sprinkler systems--Right to appeal requirements.
Owners of buildings with a square footage of less than ten thousand square feet shall have the right to appeal to the city council within ten days of the fire chief or building official’s notification to them of automatic sprinkler system requirements, to be relieved from requirement that the proposed building contain an automatic sprinkler system. In determining whether the appellant may be released from the requirement, the city council may consider, among other things, the following:

A.    Type of materials used in construction of the building;

B.    Location of the building;

C.    The proposed use of the building;

D.    Number of stories of the building;

E.    Design and layout of the building;

F.    The proximity of the building to other fire suppression facilities;

G.    Building setback from other property;

H.    Such other reasons that may be brought to the attention of the city council. (Ord. 662 §11, 1986)

8.32.080 Automatic sprinkler systems--Decision on appeal.
At the conclusion of the appeals hearing, the city council shall prepare findings which indicate the factual basis for its decision based on considerations in Section 8.32.070 of this chapter. (Ord. 662 §8, 1986)

8.32.090 Fire alarm systems--Defined--Required.
A.    “Fire alarm system” means all devices, controls and circuits, together with the energy necessary to sound alarms electrically, supervise the system there required, and activate the alarm bells, trouble bells or trouble signals.

B.    Every new multifamily complex, apartment house, condominium complex, motel, hotel and other places of lodging shall have installed and approved automatically operated fire alarm systems designed to warn the occupants simultaneously. The fire chief may also require the installation of a manually operated fire alarm system. (Ord. 662 §8, 1986)

8.32.100 Piping for residential sprinkler systems.
A.    PVC or CPVC piping (only approved brands as per N.F.P.A. 13) shall be used for residential sprinkler systems.

B.    Every new residential one-family and two-family dwellings and mobilehomes less than two or more floors or less than thirty-six feet in height and/or not more than five thousand square feet on any single-story floor area may install an engineered automatic fire sprinkler system using PVC or CPVC piping as specified in N.F.P.A. 13D and California State Fire Marshal-suggested standards for the design, installation and maintenance of automatic fire sprinkler systems for one-family and two-family dwellings.

C.    Use of PVC or CPVC piping for a multiresidential automatic sprinkler systems shall include in the design of this system automatic sprinklers within all attic areas if any portion of the attic measures more than twenty-four inches from ceiling to roof sheathing.

D.    Use of PVC or CPVC piping for multiresidential automatic sprinkler systems shall include UL-approved rapid or quick acting sprinklers. (Ord. 662 §7, 1986)

8.32.110 Smoke detection systems.
All new multifamily complexes and single-family dwellings shall be provided with an automatic smoke detection system. (Ord. 662 §9, 1986)

8.32.120 Fire hydrants.
A.    The maximum distance between fire hydrants shall be five hundred feet in R-1 and R-2 zones. In all other zones, the maximum spacing shall be three hundred feet.

B.    Fire hydrants in all zones shall be spaced so that primary property improvements can be reached with a two hundred fifty feet maximum hose lay.

C.    Fire hydrants shall be located at the edge of public rights-of-way at a location approved by the city engineer, the fire chief, and/or the director of public works.

D.    Type of Fire Hydrants. The size and type of fire hydrants shall be as recommended by the fire chief and/or the director of public works. (Ord. 662 §10, 1986)

Chapter 8.35
NUISANCE VEHICLES1
Sections:

8.35.010    Findings.

8.35.020    Definitions.

8.35.030    Exceptions.

8.35.040    Chapter not exclusive regulation.

8.35.050    Enforcement authority.

8.35.060    Agreement with removal agent.

8.35.070    Administrative cost--Determination and recovery.

8.35.080    Abatement or removal authority.

8.35.090    Notice of intention to abate and remove a vehicle.

8.35.100    Form of notice.

8.35.110    Abatement--Hearing--Held when.

8.35.120    Abatement--Hearing--Procedures.

8.35.130    Appeal.

8.35.140    Removal of vehicle.

8.35.150    Department of Motor Vehicles notification.

8.35.160    Removal and administrative costs, payment and assessment.

8.35.170    Penalty.

8.35.180    Enforcement.

8.35.010 Findings.
In accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state of California under Sections 22660 and 22669 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof, as public nuisances, the city council makes the following findings and declarations:

The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof, on private or public property not including highways is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects, and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private or public property, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be removed or abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 769 (part), 1995)

8.35.020 Definitions.
The following words and phrases as used in this chapter are defined as follows:

“Driveway” means a visibly designated area which encroaches upon a public or private right-of-way and is intended for vehicle parking and ingress and egress from private or public property.

“Private property” means all real property in the city which is not publicly owned.

“Public property” means property owned or under the control of a public entity or agency and devoted to public use; including public street right-of-way.

“Public street right-of-way” means a road, street, lane, place or travelled way that is publicly maintained or open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.

“Vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, street, alley or road, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.

“Nuisance vehicle” means any unlicensed or unregistered, abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle located on public or private property which creates a condition tending to reduce property values, promote blight and deterioration, invite plundering, create fire hazards, creates an enticement for children or other individuals to loiter in and around exposing them to potential health and safety hazards, creates a harborage for rodents, insects or vectors; and is potentially dangerous to the public’s health, safety and welfare. Abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles which have been issued non-operational certificates from the State Department of Motor Vehicles are considered to be nuisance vehicles because they cannot be legally operated upon a public street or highway.

“Operative vehicle” means a licensed vehicle which is currently registered and in condition to be legally operated upon a public street or highway within the state of California. (Ord. 769 (part), 1995)

8.35.030 Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to:

A.    A vehicle which is completely enclosed within a building;

B.    A vehicle, or part thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard. More than one inoperative vehicle shall be determined to be a business requiring proper zoning clearance for vehicle dismantling yards, junkyards or major automotive repair services.

The foregoing exceptions shall not authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than those contained in the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 769 (part), 1995)

8.35.040 Chapter not exclusive regulation.
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereinafter enacted by the city, the state or any other legal entity or agency having. jurisdiction. (Ord. 769 (part), 1995)

8.35.050 Enforcement authority.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the community development director (CDD). In the enforcement of this chapter, the CDD or its agents may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle, or part thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle, or part thereof, declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. When necessary, the CDD shall obtain an inspection warrant to enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle, or part thereof, to obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle, or part thereof, and to remove or cause removal of a vehicle or part thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 769 (part), 1995)

8.35.060 Agreement with removal agent.
When the city council has made an agreement with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a nuisance vehicle, or part thereof, pursuant to this chapter under direction of the CDD. (Ord. 769 (part), 1995)

8.35.070 Administrative cost--Determination and recovery.
The city council shall from time to time determine and fix by resolution an amount to be: assessed as administrative costs under this chapter. Such administrative costs may be recovered by the city from either the owner of the land on which a nuisance vehicle, or part thereof, rests or the last registered and/or legal owner of the vehicle. (Ord. 769 (part), 1995)

8.35.080 Abatement or removal authority.
Upon discovering the existence of an nuisance vehicle, or part thereof, on private or public property within the city, the CDD shall have the authority to cause the removal or abatement thereof in accordance with the authority granted by Section 22669 of the California Vehicle Code or the procedures prescribed herein. (Ord. 769 (part), 1995)

8.35.090 Notice of intention to abate and remove a vehicle.
A ten calendar day notice of intention to abate and remove a vehicle, or part thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by certified mail to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and to the last registered and legal owners of record, unless the vehicle is in such condition that the identification numbers are not available to determine ownership; unless the notice is not required pursuant to the following:

Where the property owner and the registered and legal owners of the vehicle have signed releases authorizing removal and have waived further interest in the vehicle, or part thereof. (Ord. 769 (part), 1995)

8.35.100 Form of notice.
The notices of intention which are to be given to a property owner, and to the registered and legal owners of a vehicle, under the provisions of this section shall be in substantially the following form:

NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE

A NUISANCE VEHICLE

TO: (name and address of owner of the land)

As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned, pursuant to City of Lakeport Ordinance No. 769 (95), has determined that there exists upon said land a nuisance vehicle, or part thereof, registered to (name of registered owner), license number _______________, which constitutes a public nuisance under the provisions of said Ordinance No. 769 (95).

You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle, or part thereof, within ten (10) calendar days from the date of mailing of this notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by the City and the costs thereof, including administrative costs, will be assessed to you as the owner of the land on which said vehicle, or part thereof, is located as authorized by Section 38773.5 of the Government Code.

As owner of the land on which said vehicle, or part thereof, is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within ten (10) calendar days after the mailing of this notice, request a public hearing before the Abatement Board. If such request for hearing is not received by the City Community Development Department Director (CDD) within the ten (10) calendar day period, the CDD shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle, or part thereof, as a public nuisance without a hearing.

Notice Mailed: _________ Signature: ______________

NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE

A NUISANCE VEHICLE

TO: (name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record of vehicle - notice to be given to both, if different)

As last registered and/or legal owner of record of (description of vehicle including make, model, license, and VIN when available), you are hereby notified that the undersigned, pursuant to the provisions of the City of Lakeport Ordinance No. 769 (95), has determined that said vehicle, or part thereof, exists as a nuisance vehicle, or part thereof, and constitutes a public nuisance under the provisions of Ordinance No. 769 (95).

You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle, or part thereof, within ten (10) calendar days from the date of mailing of this notice.

As last registered and/or legal owner of record of said vehicle, or part thereof, you are hereby notified that you may, within ten (10) calendar days after the mailing of this notice, request a public hearing before the Abatement Board. If such request for hearing is not received by the City Community Development Department Director (CDD) within the ten (10) calendar day period, the CDD shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle, or part thereof, as a public nuisance without a hearing.

Notice Mailed: _________ Signature: ______________

(Ord. 769 (part), 1995)

8.35.110 Abatement--Hearing--Held when.
A public hearing shall be held by the city abatement board on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle, or part thereof, as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle when:

A.    The CDD receives a written request from the owner of the vehicle at the time of signing a release pursuant to Section 8.35.090; or

B.    The CDD receives a written request from the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land within ten calendar days after the mailing of notices of intention to abate and remove.

Notice of hearing shall be mailed by certified mail at least ten calendar days before the hearing to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and to the last registered and legal owners of record unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine such ownership. If no request for hearing is received within the ten calendar days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the city shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle, or part thereof, as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. (Ord. 769 (part), 1995)

8.35.120 Abatement--Hearing--Procedures.
All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the city abatement board, established by the city council, which shall hear all facts and testimony it deems pertinent. Such facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle, or part thereof, and the circumstances concerning its location on the private property or public property. The abatement board shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with reasons for such denial.

The abatement board may impose such conditions and take such other action as it deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. It may delay the time for removal of the vehicle, or part thereof, if in its opinion the circumstances justify it.

At the conclusion of the public hearing, the abatement board may find that a vehicle, or part thereof, has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on private or public property, and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as provided in this chapter, and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against:

A.    The owner of the land as authorized by Section 38773.5 of the Government Code; or

B.    The owner of the vehicle, or part thereof, pursuant to the provisions of Sections 22523 and 22525 of the Vehicle Code. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle.

If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle, or part thereof, was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that the owner has not subsequently acquiesced to its presence, the abatement board shall not assess the cost of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from the owner of the land.

If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land but does not appear, or if any interested party requests a hearing or makes a written presentation to the abatement board but does not appear, he or she shall be notified in writing of the decision. (Ord. 769 (part), 1995)

8.35.130 Appeal.
Any interested party may appeal the decision of the abatement board by paying the appropriate fee(s) and filing a written notice of appeal with the CDD within five calendar days after its decision. Such appeal shall be heard by the city council, which may affirm, amend or reverse the order of the abatement board or take other action deemed appropriate.

The city clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing on such appeal to the appellant and those persons specified in Section 8.35.090.

In conducting the hearing, the city council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. (Ord. 769 (part), 1995)

8.35.140 Removal of vehicle.
After the expiration of the notice of intention to abate period, or after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle to be a public nuisance, or after mailing of the notice of decision by the vehicle abatement board, or after the city council has made a decision on an appeal, the vehicle, or part thereof, may be towed and removed by the city. After the vehicle has been removed, it shall not be reconstructed or made operable unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates, pursuant to the California Vehicle Code, in which case it may be reconstructed or made operable. (Ord. 769 (part), 1995)

8.35.150 Department of Motor Vehicles notification.
Within five calendar days after the date of removal of the vehicle, or part thereof, notice shall be given to the State Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle, or part thereof, removed. At the same time, there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including the registration card, certificates of ownership or license plates. (Ord. 769 (part), 1995)

8.35.160 Removal and administrative costs, payment and assessment.
Upon towing/removal of the nuisance vehicle by the city, the administrative and removal costs may be levied (invoiced) against the owner of the vehicle or the land on which it rested. If the administrative and removal costs which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to Section 8.35.120 are not paid within thirty calendar days of the date of the invoice, such costs may be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code and may be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. The assessment shall have the same priority as other county taxes. (Ord. 769 (part), 1995)

8.35.170 Penalty.
It is unlawful to park or store a nuisance vehicle on any portion of private or public property unless the vehicle is operative and is parked on a driveway. Nuisance vehicles are subject to removal pursuant to Section 22523 of the Vehicle Code and this chapter.

Every day a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 769 (part), 1995)

8.35.180 Enforcement.
For the purpose of enforcing this chapter, the CDD or city police department shall have the authority to issue citations. Such citations may be issued after proper notice and failure to achieve compliance. (Ord. 769 (part), 1995)

1
    Prior history: Ords. 750 and 760.


Chapter 8.36
MAINTENANCE OF WATER, SEWER AND STORM DRAINAGE UTILITIES THAT ARE LOCATED ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
Sections:

8.36.010    Definitions.

8.36.020    Purpose.

8.36.030    Scope.

8.36.040    General provisions.

8.36.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meaning specified in this section:

A.    “Maintenance” means operation, testing, repair, cleaning, removal, reconstruction, replacement and/or other actions performed for the purpose of keeping utilities in good repair.

B.    “Private property” means property not located in the public right-of-way and/or property not owned by the city or the city of Lakeport municipal sewer district (CLMSD). (Ord. 764 (part), 1994)

8.36.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the responsibility of private property owners with respect to the maintenance of sewer, water and storm drainage facilities that: (1) are located on privately owned property and (2) that are not part of the utility systems maintained by the city or CLMSD. (Ord. 764 (part), 1994)

8.36.030 Scope.
Provisions of this chapter shall apply to all improved and unimproved parcels within the city and CLMSD. (Ord. 764 (part), 1994)

8.36.040 General provisions.
A.    Water, sewer and storm drainage utilities and appurtenances: (1) that are located in the public right-of-way; and (2) that are a part of the CITY/CLMSD systems, shall be maintained by the city and/or by CLMSD.

B.    Water, sewer and storm drainage utilities and appurtenances that are not located in the public right-of-way shall not be maintained by the city, or by CLMSD, unless those utilities and appurtenances are:

1.    Located in public utility easements of sufficient width to permit maintenance;

2.    Located so as to be a sufficient distance from objects that could obstruct maintenance activities;

3.    Specifically identified as being a part of the municipally maintained system;

4.    Constructed to city standards; and

5.    Constructed by, or at the specific request of, the city or CLMSD.

C.    Those water, sewer and storm drainage utilities and appurtenances located on private property, whether in easements or not, that exist for the benefit of private property shall be maintained by the property owner.

D.    Those water, sewer and storm drainage utilities and appurtenances located on private property that shall be maintained by property owners shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

1.    Water: water pipelines, valves, backflow devices, fire hydrants, strainers, sprinklers, pumps and boxes.

2.    Sewer: sewer pipelines, manholes, cleanouts, backwater valves, pumping facilities and monitoring facilities.

3.    Storm drainage: conveyance facilities, stream channels, storm drain pipelines, retention basins, manholes, inlets, sediment traps, grease traps, head walls and energy dissipaters.

E.    The standards for the maintenance of water, sewer and storm drainage facilities located on private property shall be as specified in other chapters and sections of this code and/or in the applicable sections of other codes and standards adopted by the city and/or CLMSD. The standards include, but shall not be limited to, those specified in Chapters 13.04 (water system), 13.08 (cross connection control), 13.20 (sewer system), 8.37 (building sewer maintenance requirements), 8.24 (streambed obstructions) and 8.32 (fire prevention systems).

F.    The permits, procedures and methods used for the maintenance of water, sewer and/or storm drainage facilities located on private property shall be in compliance with the applicable city building, plumbing, mechanical, environmental, etc., codes that are in effect at the time such maintenance is performed. Questions regarding need for permits and methods for maintenance shall be directed to the community development department.

G.    Prior to beginning work, any maintenance to be performed by property owners on water, sewer and storm drainage facilities located on private property which has a cost of one thousand dollars or more, or which would normally require a permit, shall obligate the property owner to inquire to the community development department as to the need to obtain a permit.

H.    Any permits required by other agencies for the maintenance of water, sewer and/or storm drainage facilities located on private property shall be obtained by the property owner prior to beginning work. (Ord. 764 (part), 1994)

Chapter 8.37
BUILDING SEWER MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS
Sections:

8.37.010    Definitions.

8.37.020    Purpose.

8.37.030    Scope.

8.37.040    General provisions.

8.37.050    Standard.

8.37.060    Inspections and testing.

8.37.070    Notice to property owners.

8.37.080    Violation--Penalty.

8.37.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meaning specified in this section.

A.    “Building sewer” means the pipeline conveying sewage from the plumbing fixtures in the structure to a point where the private property ends and the public right-of-way beings. The building sewer is located on private property and is maintained by the property owner.

B.    “Sewer lateral” means the pipeline conveying sewage from the building sewer to the sewer main pipeline. The sewer lateral is located in the public right-of-way and is maintained by the city of Lakeport municipal sewer district (CLMSD).

C.    “Building sewer leakage test” means the procedure approved by the CLMSD board of directors to determine the amount of leakage in the building sewer.

D.    “RUE” means residential unit equivalent and it is the average amount of sewage generated by a detached single-family dwelling in the city. The volume of the sewage flow generated by an RUE is approximately two hundred gallons per day which is equal to approximately eight hundred cubic feet per month. The RUE flow rate does not include the extraneous leakage that may occur in the piping between the property line and the plumbing fixtures inside (and outside) the structure. (Ord. 764 (part), 1994)

8.37.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards for the allowable amount of leakage from building sewers and to identify a procedure for accomplishing the repair of those building sewers that have been determined to leak excessively. (Ord. 764 (part), 1994)

8.37.030 Scope.
Provisions of this chapter apply to all building sewers within the CLMSD service area. (Ord. 764 (part), 1994)

8.37.040 General provisions.
A.    Property owners within the CLMSD service area shall grant access to CLMSD staff for the purposes of inspection and testing of building sewers.

B.    All repairs made to building sewers shall be made in accordance with the most recent requirements of the Uniform Plumbing Code and all other applicable sanitary code requirements and specifications.

C.    Building sewers shall be initially tested at no cost to property owners. Any follow-up testing needed because a building sewer fails to meet the standard established by the chapter shall be at the expense of the property owner.

D.    Property owners that have building sewers on their property which fail the building sewer leakage test shall repair the leaks and have all retesting completed within three hundred sixty-five days of written notice to do so by CLMSD.

E.    Property owners that have repaired building sewers following notification to do so by CLMSD shall notify CLMSD in writing of the completion of such repairs.

F.    Building sewers that have been repaired shall not be approved as acceptable to CLMSD until the repaired building sewer has passed the building sewer leakage retesting and, payment for such retesting has been made to CLMSD by the property owner.

G.    The owners of properties with failed building sewers that have not been repaired within the time specified shall be subject to the penalty provisions of this chapter.

H.    Sewer laterals and building sewers shall be tested from time to time by CLMSD staff at no expense to property owners.

I.    CLMSD and/or the city shall have no liability for any smoke damage, flooding or overflows that occurs during testing and inspection because of faulty piping, leaks, missing cleanout plugs, illegal connections, etc. (Ord. 776 (part), 1996; Ord. 764 (part), 1994)

8.37.050 Standard.
A.    Hydrostatic Testing. Building sewers shall not leak at more than a rate of one hundred gallons per day for each RUE that the building sewer is serving.

B.    Smoke Testing. Building sewers shall not leak such as to allow visible smoke to occur. (Ord. 776 (part), 1996: Ord. 764 (part), 1994)

8.37.060 Inspections and testing.
A.    Building sewers shall be hydrostatically tested by temporarily plugging the building sewer at the property line and filling it with water up to a level equal to that of the lowest floor of the structure where the plumbing fixtures are served by gravity; in areas subject to flooding, the water level used for testing laterals may be up to the level of the one hundred-year flood as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps.

B.    Building sewers may be smoke tested individually or collectively by forcing smoke into the building sewer from the sewer lateral or from the sewer main. (Ord. 776 (Part), 1996: Ord. 764 (part), 1994)

8.37.070 Notice to property owners.
A.    The property owner shall be notified a minimum of twenty-four hours before any building sewer leakage tests are to occur on his property.

B.    The owners of the properties having building sewers which fail to meet the leakage standard shall be notified by first class mail of such failed tests. A copy of the test report shall be provided to the owner along with the date by which the building sewer is to be repaired. (Ord. 764 (part), 1994)

8.37.080 Violation--Penalty.
Any property owner failing to repair failed building sewers after being properly notified by CLMSD shall be guilty of an infraction for each and every day beyond the specified date that the required repairs have not been made. Upon conviction of failure to repair a building sewer, the property owner shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars per day for each building sewer not repaired and shall be liable for any administrative expenses incurred by the city and/or CLMSD in getting the repairs completed by the property owner. (Ord. 764 (part), 1994)

Chapter 8.40
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
Sections:

ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS

8.40.010    Title.

8.40.020    Purpose and intent.

8.40.030    Definitions.

8.40.040    Applicability.

8.40.050    Regulatory consistency.

8.40.060    Compliance disclaimer.

8.40.070    Administration.

8.40.080    Disclaimer of liability.

ARTICLE II. PROHIBITED DISCHARGES

8.40.090    General prohibition.

8.40.100    Exception to discharge prohibition.

8.40.110    Prohibited stormwater discharges.

8.40.120    Prohibition of illicit connections.

8.40.130    Waste disposal prohibitions.

8.40.140    Discharges in violation of industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit.

ARTICLE III. REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS

8.40.150    Requirement to prevent, control and reduce stormwater pollutants.

8.40.160    Requirement to eliminate illegal discharges.

8.40.170    Requirement to eliminate or secure approval for illicit connections.

8.40.180    Requirement to remediate.

8.40.190    Construction sites with building permits.

8.40.200    Post-construction requirements for new development and significant redevelopment.

8.40.210    Notification of spills.

ARTICLE IV. INSPECTION AND MONITORING

8.40.220    Authority to inspect.

8.40.230    Authority to sample, establish sampling devices and test.

8.40.240    Fees.

ARTICLE V. ENFORCEMENT

8.40.250    Warning notice.

8.40.260    Notice of violation.

8.40.270    Cease and desist orders.

8.40.280    Delivery of notice.

8.40.290    Appeal.

8.40.300    Abatement by city.

8.40.310    Charging cost of abatement/liens.

8.40.320    Urgency abatement.

8.40.330    Criminal liability.

8.40.340    Judicial remedies.

8.40.350    Violations deemed a public nuisance.

8.40.360    Severability.

ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS

8.40.010 Title.
A.    This chapter shall be known and be cited as the “Stormwater Management Ordinance” of the city of Lakeport. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

8.40.020 Purpose and intent.
A.    The purpose of this chapter is to insure the health, safety and general welfare of the city of Lakeport’s citizens, and to protect and enhance the water quality of water courses and water bodies within the incorporated area of the city of Lakeport in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), by reducing pollutants in stormwater discharges to the maximum extent practicable and by prohibiting non-stormwater discharges. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

8.40.030 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings as defined in this chapter:

“Authorized non-stormwater discharges” means categories of discharges that are not composed entirely of stormwater but are not found to pose a threat to water quality as defined in the stormwater management plan.

“Best management practices (BMPs)” means schedules of activities, prohibition of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce to the maximum extent practicable the direct and indirect discharge of pollutant to the city storm drainage system and to natural surface waters. BMPs shall also be defined to include, but not limited to, structural controls, source controls, treatment controls, training requirements, operating and maintenance procedures, practices to control site runoff, erosion and sediment control reduction practices, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal or drainage from raw materials storage.

“Beneficial uses” means existing or potential uses of receiving waters as defined in the state of California water quality control plan.

“Clean Water Act” means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 125 et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto.

“City” means the city of Lakeport.

“City storm drainage system” means those publicly owned facilities within the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System designated incorporated area of the city which are owned, operated, maintained or controlled by the city by which stormwater may be collected and/or conveyed to natural surface waters, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, city roads, catch basins, water quality basins, detention basins, constructed wetlands, drainage channels, aqueducts, curbs, gutters, ditches, sumps, pumping stations, storm drain inlets, storm drains and other drainage structures which are not part of a publicly owned treatment works.

“Construction activity” means activities subject to the NPDES construction general permits or successor permit issued by the state of California or any instrument of the city that established pollutant control provisions for construction activities. These include construction projects typically resulting in land disturbance of one acre or more. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating and demolition.

“Council” means the city council of the city of Lakeport.

“Director” means the community development director or such other department head designated by the council to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

“Discharge” means any addition or introduction of any pollutant, stormwater, or any other substance whatsoever into the city stormwater drainage system or natural surface waters.

“Discharger” means any person who discharges, or causes to discharge, either directly or indirectly stormwater or any other material into the city storm drainage system or natural surface waters.

“Illegal discharge” means any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted in Article II of this chapter.

“Illicit connection” means one of the following:

1.    Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system, including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, processed wastewater, backwash water, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether such drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by a government agency; or

2.    Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the city.

“Implementing agency” means the department designated by the council to enforce the provisions of this chapter with respect to a particular site, person, facility or industry category.

“Industrial activity” means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26(b)(14).

“Municipal stormwater permit” means NPDES Permit No. CAS000004 including any amendments thereto or successor permit, issued by the Regional Water Board to the city.

“National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES)” means a permit issued by either the Regional Water Board or the State Water Quality Control Board pursuant to Chapter 5.5 (commencing with Section 14000&file=13370-13389" target="_top">13370) of Division 7 of the Water Code to control discharges from point sources to natural surface waters.

“Natural surface waters” means any rivers, creeks, unnamed tributaries, natural ponds or lakes, wetlands, or navigable waters and shall include any waters of the state and of the United States contained within the boundaries of the state. Natural surface waters does not mean any wet or dry detention basin, constructed wetland or stormwater treatment facility.

“Non-stormwater discharge” means any discharge to the city storm drainage system, or to natural surface waters that is not composed entirely of stormwater.

“Person” means any natural person as well as any corporation, partnership, public agency, trust, estate, cooperative association, joint venture, business entity or other similar entity, or the agent, employee or representative of any of the above.

“Pollutant” means anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to, solid waste, sewage, garbage, medical waste, wrecked or discarded equipment, radioactive material, dredged soil, rock and sand, industrial waste, feces, volatile organic carbon, surfactants, oil and grease, petroleum, hydrocarbon, organic solvents, metals, phenols, pesticides, nutrients, suspended or settable solids, materials causing an increase in biochemical or chemical oxygen or total organic carbon, substances which alter pH, and those pollutants defined in Section 501(6) of the Federal Clean Water Act.

“Pollution” means human made or human induced alteration of the quality of waters by waste or pollutants to a degree which unreasonably affects, or has potential to unreasonably affect, either the waters for beneficial uses or the facilities which serve these beneficial uses.

“Premises” means any building, lot, parcel or land, or portion thereof and any appurtenant structures or facilities, whether improved or unimproved.

“Publicly owned treatment works” means facility owned, operated or maintained by a public entity.

“Receiving water limitations” means those restrictions defined and listed in the state general permit or municipal stormwater permit or any successor document.

“Receiving waters” means surface bodies of water, as defined by the municipal stormwater permit, including, but not limited to, lakes, creeks, rivers, and other waters of the state or the United States which serve as discharge points for the city storm drainage system.

“Regional water board” means the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Central Valley Region and/or California Regional Water Quality Control Board, North Coast Region.

“The national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES)” means General Permit No. CAS000004 Waste Discharge Requirements (WDRs) for discharges of stormwater runoff associated with construction activity, and any successor documents.

“Stormwater” means surface runoff and drainage resulting from storm events and snowmelt.

“Stormwater management plan” means the city’s documented strategy of how the discharge of pollutants to stormwater will be reduced to the maximum extent practicable through the implementation of BMPs designed to protect water quality and requirements of the municipal stormwater permit.

“Water quality control plan” means a basin plan required by the California Water Code (Section 13240) that consists of a designation or establishment of beneficial uses to be protected in waters within a specific area

(i.e., basin), water quality objectives to protect those uses, and a program of implementation needed for achieving the objectives.

“Waters of the United States” means surface watercourses and water bodies as defined at 40 CFR 122.2, including all natural waterways and definite channels and depressions in the earth that may carry water, even though such waterways may only carry water during rains and storms and may not carry stormwater at and during all times and seasons. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

8.40.040 Applicability.
A.    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all water entering the city storm drainage system or natural surface waters generated or deposited on any developed or undeveloped lands in the incorporated area of the city of Lakeport.

B.    This chapter shall apply to facilities and premises subject to and in compliance with the municipal stormwater permit, state construction general permit, city grading ordinance, city building permit, and/or any other instrument of the city that establishes pollutant control provisions for construction activities. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

8.40.050 Regulatory consistency.
A.    The provisions of this chapter shall take precedence over and are controlling with respect to any conflicting or inconsistent provisions of the Lakeport Municipal Code. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

8.40.060 Compliance disclaimer.
A.    Compliance by any person with the provisions of this chapter shall not preclude the need to comply with other local, state or federal statutory or regulatory requirements relating to any one or combination of the following: (1) the control of pollutant discharges, (2) the protection of stormwater quality, or (3) the protection and/or restoration of beneficial uses. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

8.40.070 Administration.
A.    The director shall be responsible for the administration, implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

8.40.080 Disclaimer of liability.
A.    The standards set forth in this chapter are minimum standards and this chapter does not imply that compliance will ensure that there will be no unauthorized discharge of pollutants into natural surface waters. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

ARTICLE II. PROHIBITED DISCHARGES

8.40.090 General prohibition.
A.    It is unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made any non-stormwater discharge into the city storm drainage system or directly to natural surface waters, except as allowed by the municipal stormwater permit. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

8.40.100 Exception to discharge prohibition.
A.    The director may prepare and update the list of authorized non-stormwater discharges and circumstances under which these discharges may be allowed in the city stormwater system pursuant to the municipal stormwater permit. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

8.40.110 Prohibited stormwater discharges.
A.    It is unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater or material that causes or contributes to causing the city to violate water quality standards, the city’s obligations under the municipal stormwater permit, or any state-issued discharge permit. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

8.40.120 Prohibition of illicit connections.
A.    The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

8.40.130 Waste disposal prohibitions.
A.    No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, left, or maintained, in or upon any public or private property, driveway, parking area, street, alley, sidewalk, component of any storm drain system, or waters of the United States any refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

8.40.140 Discharges in violation of industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit.
A.    Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall demonstrate that he/she has obtained coverage under, and is complying with the required permits. Proof of coverage and compliance with such permit shall be required in a form acceptable to the director to or as a condition of a subdivision map, site plan, building permit, or development or improvement plan, upon inspection of the facility, during any enforcement proceeding or action, or for any other reasonable cause. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

ARTICLE III. REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS

8.40.150 Requirement to prevent, control and reduce stormwater pollutants.
A.    Authorization to Adopt and Impose BMPs. The city shall adopt by resolution requirements identifying BMPs for any activity, operation, or facility, which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the state or of the United States. Where BMPs requirements are promulgated by the city or any federal, state of California, or regional agency for any activity, operation, or facility which would otherwise cause the discharge of pollutants to the storm drain system or waters of the state or of the United States, every person undertaking such activity or operation, or owning or operating such facility shall comply with such requirements.

B.    New Development and Redevelopment. The city shall adopt by resolution requirements identifying appropriate BMPs to control the volume, rate, flow-duration and potential pollutant load of stormwater runoff from new development and redevelopment projects that disturb one acre or more, including projects less than one acre that are part of a larger common plan of development or sale, as may be appropriate to minimize the generation, transport and discharge of pollutants or that may be needed to comply with any successor permit or amendment to the municipal stormwater permit. The city shall incorporate such requirements in any land use entitlement and construction or building-related permit to be issued relative to such development or redevelopment. The owner and developer shall comply with the terms, provisions, and conditions of such land use entitlements and building permits as required by the city.

C.    Responsibility to Implement BMPs. Notwithstanding the presence or absence of requirements promulgated pursuant to subsections A and B of this section, any person engaged in activities or operations, or owning facilities or property which will or may result in pollutants entering stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the state or of the United States shall implement BMPs to the extent they are technologically achievable and/or required by any applicable permit or regulatory requirement to prevent and reduce such pollutants. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the city storm drain system or watercourses. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes shall be provided and maintained at the owner or operator’s expense. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

8.40.160 Requirement to eliminate illegal discharges.
A.    Notwithstanding the requirements of Section 8.40.220 of this chapter, the director shall require by written notice that a person responsible for an illegal discharge, immediately, or by a specific date, discontinue the discharge and, if necessary, take measures to eliminate the source of the discharge to prevent the occurrence of future illegal discharges. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

8.40.170 Requirement to eliminate or secure approval for illicit connections.
A.    The director shall require by written notice that a person responsible for an illicit connection to the storm drainage system comply with the requirements of this chapter to eliminate or secure approval for the connection by a specific date, regardless of whether or not the connection or discharges to it had been established or approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

B.    If subsequent to eliminating a connection found to be in violation of this chapter, the responsible person can demonstrate that an illegal discharge will no longer occur, such person may request city approval to reconnect. The reconnection or reinstallation of the connection shall be at the responsible person’s expense. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

8.40.180 Requirement to remediate.
A.    Whenever the director finds that a discharge of pollutants is taking place or has occurred which will result in or has resulted in pollution of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the United States, the director may require by written notice to the owner of the property and/or the responsible person that the pollution be remediated and the affected property restored within a specified time pursuant to the provisions of Sections 8.40.250 and 8.40.260 of this chapter. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

8.40.190 Construction sites with building permits.
A.    Any person owning or operating a construction site for which a building permit has been issued shall implement BMPs to control the discharge of pollutants to the maximum extent practicable, and to eliminate nonstormwater discharges that are not authorized as set forth in Article II of this chapter or are not in compliance with an NPDES permit. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

8.40.200 Post-construction requirements for new development and significant redevelopment.
A.    The council shall adopt, by resolution, rules and regulations that establish performance requirements and requirements for BMPs to prevent or minimize the long term, post-construction discharge of stormwater pollutants and water quality impacts from new development or significant redevelopment projects that disturb one or more acres, including projects less than one acre that are part of a larger common plan of development or sale, that discharge into the city storm drainage system.

B.    Provisions shall be made for the continued post-construction maintenance of any structural or treatment control BMPs by a means acceptable to the director. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

8.40.210 Notification of spills.
A.    As soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency responses for a facility operation, has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting in or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the United States, such person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of a release of hazardous materials such person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence by way of central dispatch.

B.    For any discharge subject to the reporting requirements of the Water Code Sections 13271 and 13272 or successor sections, notification in compliance therewith shall constitute sufficient notification for purposes of this section.

C.    In the case of discharges not subject to the reporting requirements of the Water Code Sections 13271 and 13272 or successor sections, the responsible person shall notify the director or implementing agency within twenty-four hours by phone or fax of the discovery of the discharge. A written report on the actions taken shall be required within five days of the initial notice. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

ARTICLE IV. INSPECTION AND MONITORING

8.40.220 Authority to inspect.
A.    Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this chapter or whenever the director has cause to believe that there exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this chapter, the director may enter such premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same and to inspect and copy records related to stormwater compliance. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter and inspect has been made, the director is empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction to obtain such entry. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

8.40.230 Authority to sample, establish sampling devices and test.
A.    During any inspection as provided in this chapter, the director may take any samples and perform any testing deemed necessary to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or to record site activities. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

8.40.240 Fees.
A.    The council may by ordinance establish fees for the recovery of regulatory costs, including routine inspections and other regulatory functions associated with this chapter. Failure to pay required fees shall be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

ARTICLE V. ENFORCEMENT

8.40.250 Warning notice.
A.    When the director finds any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, or any order issued hereunder, the director may serve upon that person a written warning notice, specifying the particular violation believed to have occurred and requesting the discharger to immediately investigate the matter and to seek a resolution of the matter whereby any offending violation will cease. Investigation and/or resolution of the matter in response to the warning notice in no way relieves the alleged violator of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the warning notice. Nothing in this subsection shall limit the authority of the director to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a warning notice. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

8.40.260 Notice of violation.
A.    The director, upon discovery of any violation of this chapter, may take enforcement action as to the violation(s) in accordance with this chapter or other city ordinance provisions.

B.    The director may issue to the owner, manager, operator or occupant of any premises, or to any person responsible for an illicit connection, prohibited discharge, maintenance of a threatened prohibited discharge, failure to implement BMPs in accordance with Section 8.40.150(C) of this chapter, or any other violation of this chapter, a notice of violation.

C.    The notice of violation shall identify the provision of this chapter that has been violated and shall state that continued noncompliance may result in additional enforcement action being taken against the business, facility, or any responsible person.

D.    The notice of violation shall specify a date by which the discharger must be in compliance with this chapter. The director may under his/her own discretion extend the date to achieve compliance if good cause exists for such an extension.

E.    The notice of violation shall state that the city may recover any costs incurred by the city as a result of the violation.

F.    If a notice of violation is issued, a single notice of violation shall be issued for all violations noted during a single inspection or site visit.

G.    The person who receives a notice of violation pursuant to this chapter shall submit to the director, upon request, written certification that the necessary corrective action(s) have been taken prior to the specified compliance date. As appropriate for the type of correction action taken, the notice of violation may require proof that substantiates the certification, including, but not limited to, receipts or photographs. The effective date of the certification shall be the date that it is postmarked.

H.    The notice of violation shall state that the recipient has a right to appeal the matter as set forth in Section 8.40.290 of this chapter. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

8.40.270 Cease and desist orders.
A.    The Director may Issue a Cease and Desist Order. A cease and desist order shall be delivered in accordance with Section 8.40.280 of this chapter. A cease and desist order may direct the owner or occupant of any premises, or any other person responsible for any violation of this chapter, to take any of the following action:

1.    Immediately discontinue any prohibited discharge to the city storm drainage system;

2.    Immediately discontinue any other violation of this chapter;

3.    Clean up the area affected by the violation.

B.    The director may direct by a cease and desist order that any person immediately cease any activity which may lead to a violation of receiving water limitations. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

8.40.280 Delivery of notice.
A.    Any notice of violation, cease or desist order or other enforcement order issued pursuant to the requirements of this chapter shall be subject to the following requirements:

1.    Delivery shall be deemed complete upon either personal delivery to the recipient or by deposit in the U.S. mail, postage prepaid, certified, return receipt requested.

2.    Where the recipient of the notice or order is the owner of the property, the address for notice or order shall be the address from the most recently issued equalized assessment roll for the property.

3.    In the event that delivery by certified mail, return receipt requested, cannot be effected or the recipient cannot be personally served, the notice or order shall be deemed delivered after posting on the premises for a period of ten business days. (Ord. 853 §l(part), 2006)

8.40.290 Appeal.
A.    Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 8.40.300 of this chapter, any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the director to the council. The notice of appeal must be received by the city clerk within ten days of the delivery of the notice of violation.

B.    An appeal shall be accompanied by a written statement setting forth the grounds upon which the appellant asserts there was an error by the director.

C.    The Council Shall Hear the Appeal. At the time and place set for the appeal, the council shall proceed to hear the testimony of the director, his/her assistants or deputies, the testimony of the appellant or his/her representatives, and the testimony of other competent persons concerning the conditions constituting the violation, and other matters which the council may deem pertinent. Any person affected may be present at such hearing, may be represented by counsel, may present testimony, and may cross-examine the director, and other witnesses. The hearing may be continued from time to time. The council shall render a written decision thereon, which decision shall be final. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

8.40.300 Abatement by city.
A.    If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal under Section 8.40.290 of this chapter, within ten days of the decision of the council upholding the decision of the director, the city or a contractor designated by the director shall enter upon the subject private property and is authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It is unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the city or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

8.40.310 Charging cost of abatement/liens.
A.    Within thirty days after the abatement of the nuisance by city, the director shall notify the property owner of the property of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs in the manner provided in Section 8.40.280 of this chapter. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment with the city clerk within fifteen days. The city clerk shall set the matter for public hearing by the council. At the time and place of the appeal, the council shall hear and consider the account and proposed assessment, together with objections and protests thereto. At the conclusion of the hearing, the council may make such modifications and revisions of the proposed assessment confirmed or denied, in whole or in part or as modified and revised. The determination of the council as to all matters contained therein shall be in writing, final and conclusive.

B.    If no appeal is filed or if the amount due is not paid within ten days of the decision of the council, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.

C.    If no appeal is filed or if an appeal is filed and confirmed by the council, the director shall cause to be prepared and recorded in the office of the county recorder of the county of Lake, a notice of lien. The notice shall contain the following:

1.    An address, legal description or other description sufficient to identify the premises;

2.    A description of the proceeding under which the special assessment was made, including the order of the council confirming the assessment;

3.    The amount of the assessment;

4.    A claim of lien upon the described premises.

D.    Upon the recordation of such notice of lien, the amount claimed shall constitute a lien upon the described premises. Such lien shall be in parity with the liens of state and county taxes.

E.    The notice of lien, after recordation, shall be delivered to the county auditor who shall enter the amount of the lien on the assessment roll as a special assessment. Thereafter the amount set forth shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary county taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and interest and to the same procedures for foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency, as is provided for ordinary county taxes, and all laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of county taxes are made applicable to such assessment. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

8.40.320 Urgency abatement.
A.    The director is authorized to require immediate abatement of any violation of this chapter that constitutes an immediate threat to the health, safety or wellbeing of the public. If any such violation is not abated immediately as directed by the director, the city is authorized to enter onto private property and to take any and all measures required to remediate the violation. Any expense related to such remediation undertaken by the city shall be fully reimbursed by the property owner and/or responsible party. Any relief obtained under this section shall not prevent city from seeking other and further relief authorized under this chapter. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

8.40.330 Criminal liability.
A.    A violation of any provision of this chapter, any order issued pursuant to the chapter or any wastewater permit condition imposed pursuant to this chapter is punishable as an infraction by a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars; or as misdemeanor by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each separate day or any portion thereof on which any violation occurs shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense punishable as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

8.40.340 Judicial remedies.
A.    Civil Remedies. If any person violates any provision of this chapter, any order issued pursuant to this chapter or any wastewater discharge permit condition imposed pursuant to this chapter, the county may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief, in any appropriate court. In such an action, the city may seek all appropriate judicial relief including, but not limited to, injunctive relief and damages in the minimum of one thousand dollars per violation per day.

B.    Continuing Violations. Each day on which a violation occurs or continues to occur shall be a separate and distinct offense.

C.    Nothing set forth in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the city from seeking civil or criminal judicial relief in connection with the enforcement of this chapter or pursuant to any other state or federal statutory or common law right to such relief.

D.    Remedies Cumulative. The remedies provided in this chapter shall be cumulative and not exclusive. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

8.40.350 Violations deemed a public nuisance.
A.    In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored by the city at the violator’s expense, and/or civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken by city. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

8.40.360 Severability.
A.    The provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions, clauses, sentences or paragraphs of this chapter. (Ord. 853 §1(part), 2006)

Chapter 8.441
SMOKING PROHIBITED IN PARKS AND CERTAIN PUBLIC PLACES
Sections:

8.44.010    Definitions.

8.44.020    Prohibitions.

8.44.030    Disposal of smoking waste.

8.44.040    Enforcement and penalties.

8.44.050    Threats.

8.44.060    Signs.

8.44.010 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter or any other applicable law regulating smoking, shall have the following meanings:

A.    "Smoke" or "smoking" means the carrying or holding of a lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe, or any other lighted smoking product or equipment used to burn any tobacco products, weeds, plant, or any other combustible substance. Smoking includes emitting or exhaling the fumes of any cigarette, cigar, pipe, or any other lighted smoking product or equipment used to burn any tobacco products, weeds, plant, or any other combustible substance.

B.    "Tobacco product" means any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, or any preparation of tobacco.

C.    "Park" means those facilities owned or controlled by the city of Lakeport as designated in the city's general plan or by action of the city council. "Park" shall include playgrounds, picnic and seating areas, grass and landscaped areas, structures and buildings, piers and docks, sidewalks and ramps, and all other areas commonly used for park and recreation activities. Future park facilities of the city designated in the general plan or by action of the city council as a park, playground, or recreational facility shall also be included in the definition of "park" without further amendment of this section.

D.    "Business" means any sole proprietorship, joint venture, corporation, or other business entity formed for profit-making purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold as well as professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, or other professional services are delivered. (Ord. 859 §2(part), 2006)

8.44.020 Prohibitions.
No person shall smoke or be in possession of a burning tobacco product, including but not limited to cigarettes and cigars, within the boundaries of any city park, playground, or recreation center, except for that area designated for smoking, which is the sidewalk area directly west of the front of the Library Park restrooms on Park Street. (Ord. 859 §2(part), 2006)

8.44.030 Disposal of smoking waste.
No person shall dispose of any lighted or unlighted cigarette, cigar, or tobacco, or any part of a cigarette or cigar in any place where smoking is prohibited under this chapter, except in a designated waste disposal container. (Ord. 859 §2(part), 2006)

8.44.040 Enforcement and penalties.
A.    Enforcement of this chapter shall be implemented by the city manager or his/her designee.

B.    A violation of this chapter is an infraction.

C.    Punishment under this section shall not preclude punishment pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 13002, Penal Code Section 374.4, or any other law proscribing the act of littering. Nothing in this section shall preclude any person from seeking any other remedies, penalties, or procedures provided by law. (Ord. 859 §2(part), 2006)

8.44.050 Threats.
No person shall intimidate, threaten any reprisal, or effect any reprisal for the purpose of retaliating against another person who seeks to obtain compliance with this section. (Ord. 859 §2(part), 2006)

8.44.060 Signs.
A.    Signs which designate smoking or no smoking areas established in accordance with this chapter shall be clearly, sufficiently, and conspicuously posted in places covered by this chapter.

B.    Signage shall contain all capital lettering not less than one inch in height, on a contrasting background. Signs of similar size containing the international "no smoking" symbol consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it may be used in addition to or in lieu of any signs required herein. (Ord. 859 §2(part), 2006)

1
    Code reviser’s note: Ord. 859 adds these provisions as Chapter 8.40. This chapter has been editorially renumbered to prevent duplication of numbering.


Title 9
PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
Chapters:

9.04    Offenses Against Public Peace and Decency

9.05    Possession or Consumption of Alcohol by Persons under the Age of Twenty-One Years

9.08    Offenses Against Property

9.09    Graffiti Abatement Procedure

9.12    Curfew

9.14    Regulations Governing the Identification of Purchasers and Storage of Products Containing Pseudoephedrine

9.16    Drug Paraphernalia

9.20    Weapons

9.25    Motorcycles/Off-Highway Vehicles

Chapter 9.04
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND DECENCY
Sections:

9.04.010    Public consumption of alcoholic beverages.

9.04.020    Disorderly conduct.

9.04.030    Restrictions on use of public restrooms.

9.04.010 Public consumption of alcoholic beverages.
A.    No person shall drink any malt, spirituous or vinous liquor containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, or possess any open container of such beverages:

1.    Upon any street, highway, sidewalk, alley, park, playground, public parking lot, or in any place open to the patronage of the public, which premises are not licensed for the consumption of such liquor on the premises;

2.    Upon any public school ground, bleacher or stadium.

B.    This chapter shall not be applicable to Library Park and Westside Community Park, when utilized by an individual or group after obtaining a written permit for the consumption of alcoholic beverages from the police department, except that the consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages shall never be permitted in the children’s play area in that portion of Library Park located to the south of the concrete walkway to the rear of the old Carnegie Library building.

C.    The possession of glass containers is prohibited in Library Park and all other park properties owned by the city.

D.    Any person violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 852 §1, 2006: Ord. 670 §1, 1987: Ord. 567 §1, 1978: Ord. 456 §2, 1970)

9.04.020 Disorderly conduct.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language, or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to a breach of the public peace and enjoyment of park and recreation areas. (Ord. 456 §3(part), 1970)

9.04.030 Restrictions on use of public restrooms.
A.    It is unlawful for any person to fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition.

B.    Male persons shall not resort to any restroom or washroom facilities set apart for women, and female persons shall not resort to restrooms and washroom facilities set apart for men; provided, that this shall not apply to children accompanied by an adult person; further, no person shall loiter in or about such facilities nor shall any person use such facilities for purposes other than those intended. (Ord. 456 §6, 1970)

Chapter 9.05
POSSESSION OR CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL BY PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF TWENTY-ONE YEARS
Sections:

9.05.010    Definitions.

9.05.020    Purpose.

9.05.030    Supervision by parent or guardian of alcoholic beverage possession or consumption by persons under the age of twenty-one.

9.05.040    Violation--Penalty.

9.05.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall be defined as follows:

"Alcoholic beverage" as defined in Section 23004 of the California Business and Professions Code, as amended from time to time, shall apply to this chapter. Section 23004 defines "alcohol beverage" to include alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and that contains one-half of one percent or more alcohol by volume and that is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances. (Ord. 870 §1(part), 2007)

9.05.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to discourage the consumption of alcoholic beverages by underage persons. (Ord. 870 §1(part), 2007)

9.05.030 Supervision by parent or guardian of alcoholic beverage possession or consumption by persons under the age of twenty-one.
A.    No person under the age of twenty-one years shall possess or consume any alcoholic beverage at any place not open to the public, unless that person is being supervised by the person’s parent or legal guardian.

B.    No person shall suffer, permit, allow, or host a social gathering at the person’s place of residence where one or more persons under the age of twenty-one are present and alcoholic beverages are in the possession of or being consumed by any person under the age of twenty-one years and there is no supervision by the parent or legal guardian of each of the participants under the age of twenty-one. (Ord. 870 §1(part), 2007)

9.05.040 Violation--Penalty.
Any person violating this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 870 §1(part), 2007)

Chapter 9.08
OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Sections:

9.08.010    Findings and purpose.

9.08.020    Definitions.

9.08.030    Commercial activities prohibited.

9.08.040    Animals.

9.08.050    Bicycles in parklands.

9.08.051    Skateboards in parklands.

9.08.060    Camping prohibited.

9.08.061    Hours of use--Parklands.

9.08.070    Diving prohibited.

9.08.080    Obstruction of street and sidewalks.

9.08.090    Fireworks.

9.08.100    Damage to vegetation prohibited.

9.08.110    Public consumption of alcoholic beverages.

9.08.120    Disorderly conduct.

9.08.130    Vandalism and littering prohibited.

9.08.131    Fueling prohibited.

9.08.132    Storage on city parkland.

9.08.133    Repair or maintenance.

9.08.134    Launching at Third Street Ramp.

9.08.135    Display of commercial items.

9.08.136    Blocking public access.

9.08.137    Access to beaches.

9.08.140    Enforcement authority.

9.08.150    Violation--Penalty.

9.08.010 Findings and purpose.
In adopting the ordinance codified in this chapter, the city council makes the following findings:

A.    There has been a significant increase in the nature and intensity of commercial activities and public demand for the use of parklands in the city of Lakeport; and

B.    This situation has created the need to adopt regulations to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens using city waterfront and parklands; and

C.    In adopting the ordinance codified in this chapter, the city council intends that the health, safety and welfare of those who use, enjoy, and own property near the waterfront and parklands as well as those using city parklands are not adversely affected by certain activities conducted on said parklands. (Ord. 712 (part), 1991)

9.08.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter the words set out in this section shall have the following meanings:

“Commercial activity” means any service, trade, business or occupation carried on, for which any monetary or other valuable consideration is received, or for the purpose of profit.

“Lakefront park lands” and “parklands” as used in this chapter means all real property and improvements, owned or leased by the city of Lakeport and devoted to recreational use by the general public.

“Waterfront” means all waters within the corporate limits of the city of Lakeport whether or not the lands lying under the water are privately or publicly owned. (Ord. 712 (part), 1991)

9.08.030 Commercial activities prohibited.
All commercial sales, display, advertising, and/or solicitation or other similar activities are prohibited in all city parklands unless such activity has received prior city council approval. (Ord. 712 (part), 1991)

9.08.040 Animals.
Domestic animals shall be allowed in city parklands only when they are detained on a leash or electric collar securely held by the animal’s owner or guardian and under control at all times. Unleashed animals running at large shall not be allowed and are subject to enforcement action. Any person who is allowing their animal to walk on a leash in the parklands shall be responsible to pick up and dispose of any fecal matter produced by the animal. (Ord. 863 §2, 2007: Ord. 712 (part), 1991)

9.08.050 Bicycles in parklands.
It is unlawful for any person to ride a motor-driven vehicle, bicycle, motorcycle, roller skates/roller blades, or other conveyance in any public park within the city limits of the city excluding parking lots, boat ramps, roadways and designated bikeways. (Ord. 722 (part), 1991; Ord. 712 (part), 1991)

9.08.051 Skateboards in parklands.
It is unlawful for any person to ride a skateboard within the area depicted on the map attached as Exhibit “A” to the ordinance codified in this chapter and found on file in the office of the city clerk, which is further described as all that area included within the following boundaries:

A.    Southern Boundary. The centerline of First Street from a point on the southerly extension of the face of curb on the east side Of Park Street to a point in Clear Lake at elevation zero Rumsey;

B.    Western Boundary. Proceeding from south to north, the western boundary shall be the face of the eastern curb on Park Street as extended from the centerline of First Street to the southern right-of-way line of Third Street, then northerly across Third Street to the southwestern corner of the City Park parking lot adjacent to 50 Third Street (APN 025-383-22). Then northerly along the western boundary of all land owned by the city of Lakeport between Third Street and Fourth Street to the northeastern corner of 25 Fourth Street (APN 025-383-05), then northwesterly across Fourth Street to the southeastern corner of 60 Fourth Street (APN 25-382-06), then northerly along the western boundary of all lands owned by the city of Lakeport between Fourth Street and Fifth Street to the northeastern corner of APN 025-382-21 (which is a portion of 440 N. Main Street), then west-northwesterly across Fifth street to the southeastern corner of 50 Fifth Street (APN 025-381-03). Then northerly along the western boundary of all contiguous lands owned by the city of Lakeport lying north of, and adjacent to, Fifth Street;

C.    Northern Boundary. From the northerly ending point on the western boundary north of Fifth Street as described above, easterly along the northern boundary of land owned by the city of Lakeport to a point in Clear Lake at elevation zero Rumsey;

D.    Eastern Boundary. From an extension of the northern boundary of land owned by the city of Lakeport located at zero Rumsey southerly to a point located on the eastern extension of the First Street centerline located at elevation zero Rumsey. (Ord. 722 (part), 1991)

9.08.060 Camping prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person or persons to camp at or to occupy overnight between the hours of midnight and six a.m. any public parklands with the exception for special events approved in advance by the city council. (Ord. 712 (part), 1991)

9.08.061 Hours of use--Parklands.
It is unlawful for any person to enter, traverse or be present in parklands during the hours of midnight to five a.m., with the exception of special events approved in advance by the city council. (Ord. 920 §1, 2019: Ord. 752, 1993)

9.08.070 Diving prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to dive, jump or propel oneself from the pier, tower, ramp or other structure appurtenant to any city parklands. (Ord. 712 (part), 1991)

9.08.080 Obstruction of street and sidewalks.
It is unlawful for any person to intentionally stand, sit or lie in or upon any street, boat ramp, sidewalk, stairway or crosswalk so as to prevent free passage of persons or vehicles passing over, along or across any street, sidewalk, stairway or crosswalk, including all pathways and sidewalks located in city parklands. (Ord. 712 (part), 1991)

9.08.090 Fireworks.
The sale, use, possession, and/or discharge of any type of fireworks or similar device is prohibited in all city parklands. (Ord. 712 (part), 1991)

9.08.100 Damage to vegetation prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in any activity or conduct injurious to, or to injure in any manner any trees, shrubs, plants, flowers or other property in any parklands or located on city owned property within the Lakeport city limits. (Ord. 779 (part), 1996: Ord. 712 (part), 1991)

9.08.110 Public consumption of alcoholic beverages.
A.    It is unlawful for any person or organization to sell, serve or cause to be served, consume, or possess open containers of alcoholic beverages of any kind whatsoever upon any public street, park or public property within the city limits, at any time for any purpose, except as specifically provided for in this section.

B.    The sale, serving, consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages is permitted on city property located at Fifth Street and leased by the Lakeport Yacht Club, in Library Park or at other city locations after prior approval by the Lakeport city council; except that consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages is prohibited in the children’s play area in that portion of Library Park located to the south of the concrete walkway at the rear of the old Carnegie Library building.

C.    The possession of glass containers is prohibited in all city parks.

D.    Notwithstanding Sections 647(f) of the California Penal Code, and 11550 of the California Health and Safety Code, it is unlawful for a person under the age of twenty-one years who has a blood-alcohol concentration of 0.01 percent or greater, as measured by a preliminary alcohol screening test, other chemical test, or based on the observation, testing, and evaluation of a peace officer, or has any amount of a controlled substance in his or her blood, as based on the observation, testing, and evaluation of a peace officer, to occupy any city parkland as defined by Lakeport Municipal Code Section 9.08.020. However, this section shall not be a bar to prosecution of any other provision of law.

E.    A person shall be found in violation of subsection D if the person was, at the time said person was found in any city parkland, under the age of twenty-one years, and the trier of fact finds that the person had consumed an alcoholic beverage, and had a blood-alcohol concentration of 0.01 percent or greater, or ingested any controlled substance and was occupying any city parkland.

F.    1. Any person under the age of twenty-one years who occupies any city parkland is deemed to have given his or her consent to a preliminary alcohol screening test, other chemical test, or testing and evaluation by a peace officer, for the purpose of determining the presence of alcohol or any other controlled substance, if lawfully detained for an alleged violation of subsection D.

2.    The testing and evaluation shall be incidental to a lawful detention and administered at the direction of a peace officer having reasonable cause to believe the person was occupying the city parklands in violation of subsection D.

3.    The person shall be told that his or her failure to submit to, or the failure to complete, a preliminary alcohol screening test, or other testing and evaluation by a peace officer when requested, will result in his or her immediate expulsion from any and all city parklands, for a period of time until the person agrees to submit to testing and is found not to be in violation of subsection D.

G.    1. Any person found to be in violation of subsection D shall leave any and all city parklands immediately upon the request of a peace officer, for a period of time until the person has no measurable or determinable amount of alcohol or controlled substance in his or her blood.

2.    Any person who refuses to leave the city parklands after being requested to do so by a peace officer, or returns to city parklands after being requested to leave and still has a measurable or determinable amount of alcohol or controlled substance in his or her blood, is subject to arrest per authority of Lakeport Municipal Code Section 9.08.150, subsection (A)(3), or California Penal Code Section 148, subsection (a). (Ord. 786, 1997; Ord. 740, 1992; Ord. 712 (part), 1991)

9.08.120 Disorderly conduct.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language, or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to breach the public peace and enjoyment of city parklands. (Ord. 712 (part), 1991)

9.08.130 Vandalism and littering prohibited.
It is unlawful for any to write upon, cut or otherwise damage or deface any building structure or other improvement located on the city parklands or to deposit any type of debris or litter in the city parklands except into an approved trash container. (Ord. 712 (part), 1991)

9.08.131 Fueling prohibited.
No fueling of commercial vessels, vehicles, personal watercraft or other mechanical equipment shall be allowed on the lakefront parkland except after approval by the Lakeport city council as to both the location and the method of fueling. (Ord. 737 (part), 1992)

9.08.132 Storage on city parkland.
No vessels, vehicles, personal watercraft or other equipment shall be stored on lakefront parkland launch ramps for a continuous period of time exceeding twenty minutes in any twenty-four hour period. (Ord. 737 (part), 1992)

9.08.133 Repair or maintenance.
Except for specifically designated areas, no repair or maintenance of any vessels, vehicles, personal watercraft or other mechanical equipment shall be allowed on the lakefront parkland. (Ord. 737 (part), 1992)

9.08.134 Launching at third street ramp.
Any person using the Third Street launch ramp shall commence their launch from the city parking lot located northerly of the ramp and not back down any portion of Park Street or Third Street west of Park Street. (Ord. 737 (part), 1992)

9.08.135 Display of commercial items.
No commercial vessel, vehicle, personal watercraft or merchandise shall be displayed or stored on the lakefront parkland. (Ord. 737 (part), 1992)

9.08.136 Blocking public access.
No person shall unreasonably block or obstruct public access to any launching ramp, parking area or travelled way in the Lakefront Parklands. No parking shall be permitted except in designated parking spaces or as allowed by special council approval. (Ord. 779 (part), 1996: Ord. 737 (part), 1992)

9.08.137 Access to beaches.
The lakefront parkland beaches are to be reserved for the exclusive use of pedestrian traffic. No person shall park, moor or store any vessel, personal watercraft or equipment upon any beach area except in the case of an emergency. (Ord. 737 (part), 1992)

9.08.140 Enforcement authority.
It is made the duty of the chief of police to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to arrest any person violating them. (Ord. 712 (part), 1991)

9.08.150 Violation--Penalty.
A.    A violation of Sections 9.08.030 through 9.08.080 shall be an infraction punishable by:

1.    A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation;

2.    A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year;

3.    A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year.

B.    A violation of Sections 9.08.090 through Sections 9.08.130 shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 712 (part), 1991)

Chapter 9.09
GRAFFITI ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
Sections:

9.09.010    Purpose and intent.

9.09.020    Definitions.

9.09.030    Graffiti prohibited.

9.09.040    Notice.

9.09.050    Service of notice.

9.09.060    Appeal.

9.09.070    Removal by city.

9.09.080    Private property consent forms.

9.09.090    Public property.

9.09.100    Record of cost for abatement.

9.09.110    Report--Hearing and proceedings.

9.09.120    Assessment of costs against property.

9.09.130    Violation--Penalty.

9.09.140    Limitation of filing judicial action.

9.09.010 Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to provide a procedure for removal of graffiti from walls and structures on both publicly and privately owned property in order to reduce blight and deterioration within the city and to protect the public safety.

The city finds and determines that graffiti is obnoxious and a public nuisance, and must be abated to avoid the detrimental impact of such graffiti on the city and its residents, and to prevent the further spread of graffiti. (Ord. 748 §1(part), 1993)

9.09.020 Definitions.
Whenever the following terms are used herein, they shall have the meaning established by this section:

A.    “Graffiti” means the unauthorized spraying of paint or marking of ink, chalk, dye or other similar substances on public and private buildings, structures and places.

B.    “Graffiti abatement procedure” means an abatement procedure which identifies graffiti, issues notice to the landowner to abate the graffiti, and abates same in the absence of response.

C.    “Private contractor” means any person or entity with whom the city shall have contracted to remove graffiti. (Ord. 748 §1(part), 1993)

9.09.030 Graffiti prohibited.
No person shall place graffiti or other writing upon any publicly or privately owned permanent structure located on publicly or privately owned real property with the city.

No person owning or otherwise in control of any real property within the city shall permit or allow any graffiti to be placed upon or remain on any permanent structure located on such property. (Ord. 748 §1(part), 1993)

9.09.040 Notice.
Whenever the chief of police determines that graffiti exists on any structure in the city, a notice shall be issued to abate such nuisance. The property owner shall have ten days after the date of the notice to remove the graffiti, or the property will be subject to abatement by the city. (Ord. 748 §1(part), 1993)

9.09.050 Service of notice.
The notice to abate graffiti pursuant to Section 9.09.040 shall cause a written notice to be served upon the owner(s) of the affected premises, as such owner’s name and address appears on the last equalized property tax assessment rolls of the county of Lake. If there is no known address for the owner, the notice shall be sent in care of the property address. The notice may also be served in any one of the following manners:

1.    By personal service on the owner, occupant or person in charge or control of the property;

2.    By registered or certified mail addressed to the owner at the last known address of said owner. If this address is unknown, the notice will be sent to the property address.

The notice shall be substantially in the following form:

NOTICE OF INTENT TO REMOVE GRAFFITI

Date:

NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that you are required by law at your expense to remove or paint over the graffiti located on the property commonly known as ______________, Lakeport, California, within ten (10) days after the date of this notice: or, if you fail to do so, City employees or private contractors employed by the City will enter upon your property and abate the public nuisance by removal or painting over the the graffiti. The cost of the abatement by the City employees or its private contractors will be assessed upon your property and such costs will constitute a lien upon the land until paid.

All persons having any objection to, or interest in said matters are hereby notified to submit any objections or comments to the Chief of Police or his/her designated representative within ten (10) days from the date of this notice. At the conclusion of this (10) day period the City may proceed with the abatement of the graffiti inscribed on your property at your expense without further notice.

(Ord. 748 §1(part), 1993)

9.09.060 Appeal.
Within ten days from the mailing or personal service of the notice, the owner or person occupying or controlling such premises or lot affected may appeal to the city council of the city. At a regular meeting or regular adjourned meeting of the city council not more than twenty days thereafter, the council shall proceed to hear and pass upon such appeal. The decision of the council thereupon shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 748 §1(part), 1993)

9.09.070 Removal by city.
Upon failure of persons to comply with the notice by the designated date, then the city engineer is authorized and directed to cause the graffiti to be abated by city forces or private contract, and the city or its private contractor is expressly authorized to enter upon the premises for such purposes. (Ord. 748 §1(part), 1993)

9.09.080 Private property consent forms.
Property owners in the city may consent in advance to city entry onto private property for graffiti removal purposes. The city will make forms for such consent available. (Ord. 748 §1(part), 1993)

9.09.090 Public property.
Where a structure is owned by a public entity other than the city, the removal of the graffiti may be authorized only after securing the consent of an authorized representative of the public entity having jurisdiction over the structure. (Ord. 748 §1(part), 1993)

9.09.100 Record of cost for abatement.
The city engineer shall keep an account of costs (including overhead and incidental expenses) of abating such nuisance on each separate parcel of land where the work is done and shall render an itemized report in writing to the city council showing the cost of abatement; provided, that before the report is submitted to the council, a copy shall be served in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.09.050, together with a notice of time when the report shall be heard by the council for confirmation.

A.    The city council shall set the matter for hearing to determine the correctness and reasonableness of such costs.

B.    The term “incidental expenses” includes, but is not limited to, the actual expenses and costs of the city in the preparation of notices, specifications and contracts and in inspecting the work, and the costs of printing and mailing required hereunder. (Ord. 748 §1(part), 1993)

9.09.110 Report--Hearing and proceedings.
At the time and place fixed for receiving and considering the report, the city council shall hear and pass upon the report of such costs of abatement, together with any objections or protests. Thereupon, the city council may make such revision, correction or modification in the report as it may deem just, after which by motion, the report as submitted or as revised, corrected or modified shall be confirmed. The decision of the city council on all protests and objections which may be made shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 748 §1(part), 1993)

9.09.120 Assessment of costs against property.
The total cost for abating such nuisance, shall constitute a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel of land to which it relates, and upon recordation in the office of the Lake County recorder of a notice of lien, as so made and confirmed, shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of such assessment.

A.    After such confirmation and recordation, a copy shall be filed with the assessor and tax collector in order that said county officials may add the amounts of the respective assessments to the next regular tax bills levied against the respective lots and parcels of land, and thereafter said amounts shall be collected in the same manner as ordinary property taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary property taxes; or

B.    After such recordation, such lien may be foreclosed by judicial or other sale in any manner and means provided by law.

C.    Such notice of lien for recordation shall be in form substantially as follows:

NOTICE OF LIEN

(Claim of City of Lakeport)

Pursuant to the authority vested by the provisions of Section 9.09.070 of the Lakeport Municipal Code, the City Engineer of the City of Lakeport did, on or about the ______________ day of ___________, 19___, cause the painting over or removal of graffiti at the premises hereinafter described in order to abate a public nuisance on said real property; and the City Council of the City of Lakeport did on the ___________ day of _______________, 19___, assess the cost of such abatement upon the real property hereinafter described, and the same has not been paid nor any part thereof; and that said City of Lakeport does hereby claim a lien on such costs of abatement in the amount of said assessment (the sum of $___________); and the same shall be a lien upon said real property until the same has been paid in full and discharged of record.

The real property hereinbefore mentioned, and upon which a lien is claimed, is that certain parcel of land in the City of Lakeport, County of Lake, and particularly described as follows:

(Description)

DATED: This __________ day of _________, 19_____.

_______________________

JANEL M. CHAPMAN

City Clerk of the
City of Lakeport,
California

(Ord. 748 §1(part), 1993)

9.09.130 Violation--Penalty.
The owner, occupant or agent of any lot or premises within the city who shall permit or allow the existence of a public nuisance as defined in this chapter, upon any lot or premises owned, occupied or controlled by him, or who shall violate any of the provisions of the chapter, shall be guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation, a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same provision within one year, and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation of the same provision within one year. An infraction is not punishable by imprisonment. (Ord. 748 §1(part), 1993)

9.09.140 Limitation of filing judicial action.
Any owner, lessee, occupant or other interested person having any objections or feeling aggrieved at any proceeding taken on appeal by the city council in ordering the abatement of any public nuisance under the provisions of this chapter, must bring an action to contest such decision within thirty days after the date of such decision of the city council. Otherwise, all objections to such decision shall be deemed waived. (Ord. 748 §1(part), 1993)

Chapter 9.12
CURFEW
Sections:

9.12.010    Minor defined.

9.12.020    Hours of curfew.

9.12.030    Violation--Penalty.

9.12.010 Minor defined.
For purposes of this chapter, a “minor” is defined as any person under the age of eighteen years. (Ord. 518 §3, 1975)

9.12.020 Hours of curfew.
It is unlawful for any minor to be in or on any public street, road, park, square or any other public place, or place open to the public such as any cafe, restaurant, bowling alley, drive-in or any place of amusement between the hours of eleven p.m. and five a.m. of the following day; except when the minor is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or where the presence of the minor in the place or places is connected with or required by some legitimate business, trade, profession or occupation, by reason of employment, inclusive of time necessary for going to and returning from such place of business at which the minor is in attendance, or where the minor is going to or from a legitimate activity such as, but not limited to, attendance at a theater or school supervised function or other scheduled supervised activity and is not loitering or engaged in questionable activity. (Ord. 518 §1, 1975; Ord. 454 §2, 1970)

9.12.030 Violation--Penalty.
Any minor violating the terms of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and may be immediately apprehended and lawfully detained and dealt with under the provisions of the Juvenile Court Law. (Ord. 454 §4, 1970)

Chapter 9.14
REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE IDENTIFICATION OF PURCHASERS AND STORAGE OF PRODUCTS CONTAINING PSEUDOEPHEDRINE
Sections:

9.14.010    Purpose and findings.

9.14.020    Display and storage.

9.14.030    Identification and logging required.

9.14.040    Inspection of log.

9.14.050    Penalty.

9.14.060    Exceptions.

9.14.070    Severability.

9.14.010 Purpose and findings.
A.    Methamphetamine has become the predominant illegal drug in the city of Lakeport. Methamphetamine addiction has devastating consequences for the families and children of those addicted as well as the addicts themselves. Methamphetamine addiction is directly tied to increases in criminal activity and violence in the city of Lakeport. The city of Lakeport continues to see an increase in the production and use of methamphetamine by residents and by others who have chosen to prey on availability of space and limited law enforcement resources. The city of Lakeport has incurred significant costs associated with drug arrests, health costs related to intravenous drug use, treatment admissions and environmental cleanups related to methamphetamine use.

B.    Methamphetamine production is dependent on pseudoephedrine which is commonly purchased as cold and allergy medications and readily available at many retail outlets in the city of Lakeport. Current statutory provisions found at Health and Safety Code Section 111000 et seq., regulating the sale of over-the-counter products containing pseudoephedrine do not address the storage of the products or the identification of buyers of such products. The city council of the city of Lakeport finds that there are compelling reasons to exercise its police powers to address the storage of over-the-counter products containing pseudoephedrine and the identification of the buyers of such products and that the measures in this chapter are not preempted by state law. The city council of the city of Lakeport further finds that measures contained in this chapter are necessary to reduce the theft and availability of products containing pseudoephedrine and thereby reducing methamphetamine production and sales in the city of Lakeport. (Ord. 847 §1(part), 2005)

9.14.020 Display and storage.
No owner, manager or proprietor in charge of any business selling over-the-counter products which lists pseudoephedrine as an ingredient shall display such product where it is accessible by customers of the business. All products which list pseudoephedrine as an ingredient shall be kept behind the counter in a place that is not accessible to retail customers. (Ord. 847 §1(part), 2005)

9.14.030 Identification and logging required.
No owner, manager, proprietor or employee in charge of any business selling any over-the-counter products which lists pseudoephedrine as an ingredient shall sell such product unless the buyer of the product first produces a photo identification and provides the seller with a current address and telephone number. The seller shall enter into a written log the buyer’s name, address and telephone number, date and quantity purchased. (Ord. 847 §1(part), 2005)

9.14.040 Inspection of log.
The written log of buyers, maintained pursuant to Section 9.14.030 of this chapter, shall be provided to the Lake County drug task force or other local law enforcement authorities pursuant to a lawful search warrant or subpoena issued by judicial process. (Ord. 847 §1(part), 2005)

9.14.050 Penalty.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars for each offense or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 847 §1(part), 2005)

9.14.060 Exceptions.
No provision of this chapter shall be deemed, whether directly or indirectly, to authorize any use, possession or other act which is otherwise prohibited by any law of the state of California, or require any act which is prohibited by any law of the state of California. Nor shall any provision of this chapter be deemed, whether directly or indirectly, to prohibit any act or acts which are prohibited by any law of the state of California. (Ord. 847 §1(part), 2005)

9.14.070 Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this act are severable. (Ord. 847 §1(part), 2005)

Chapter 9.16
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
Sections:

9.16.010    Purpose of provisions.

9.16.020    Definitions.

9.16.030    Display of drug paraphernalia.

9.16.040    Distribution of drug paraphernalia.

9.16.050    Exceptions to provisions.

9.16.060    Violation--Penalty.

9.16.010 Purpose of provisions.
A.    The illegal use of controlled substances within the incorporated area of Lakeport creates serious social, medical and law enforcement problems. The illegal use of such substances by persons under eighteen years of age is causing serious physical and psychological damage to the youth of this community, an impairment of educational achievement and of the efficiency of the educational system, increases in non-drug-related crime, and a threat to the ability of the community to ensure future generations of responsible and productive adults; all to the detriment of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Lakeport.

B.    The proliferation of the display of drug paraphernalia in retail stores within the incorporated area, and the distribution of such paraphernalia intensifies and otherwise compounds the problem of illegal use of controlled substances within this community.

C.    A ban only upon the display and distribution of drug paraphernalia to persons under eighteen years of age would not be practical. The person who displays or distributes would have difficulty determining who could lawfully view or receive drug paraphernalia. Law enforcement agencies would be subjected to intolerable added enforcement burdens by adding age of a person who views or receives paraphernalia as an element of a prohibition upon display and distribution. A significant number of high school students are eighteen years of age or older. It would be lawful to distribute paraphernalia to some students attending the same school in which the distribution to other students would be prohibited. Permitted display and distribution to adults within the community would symbolize a public tolerance of illegal drug use, making it difficult to explain the rationale of programs directed against similar abuse by youth. The problem of illegal consumption of controlled substances by adults within this community is significant and substantial, necessitating a cessation of the encouragement to drug abuse which the display and distribution of drug paraphernalia creates.

D.    This chapter is a measure which is necessary in order to discourage the illegal use of controlled substances within the incorporated area of Lakeport. (Ord. 593 §1, 1980)

9.16.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be ascribed the following meanings:

A.    “Business” means a fixed location, whether indoors or outdoors, at which merchandise is offered for sale at retail.

B.    “Controlled substance” means those controlled substances set forth in Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 and 11058 of the California Health and Safety Code, identified as Schedules I through V, inclusive, as said sections now exist or may hereafter be amended.

C.    “Display” means to show to a patron or place in a manner so as to be available for viewing or inspection by a patron.

D.    “Distribute” means to transfer ownership or a possessory interest to another, whether for consideration or as a gratuity. “Distribute” includes both sales and gifts.

E.    “Drug paraphernalia” means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are intended for use by a person charged with a violation of this chapter, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repacking, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of any law of the state. “Drug paraphernalia” includes, but is not limited to, all of the following:

1.    Kits intended for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;

2.    Kits intended for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled substances;

3.    Isomerization devices intended for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance;

4.    Testing equipment intended for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances;

5.    Scales and balances intended for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances;

6.    Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, intended for use in cutting controlled substances;

7.    Separation gins and sifters intended for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana;

8.    Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices intended for use in compounding controlled substances;

9.    Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers intended for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances;

10.    Containers and other objects intended for use in storing or concealing controlled substances; and

11.    Objects intended for use of injecting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human body, such as:

a.    Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowls,

b.    Water pipes,

c.    Carburetion tubes and devices,

d.    Smoking and carburetion masks,

e.    “Roach clips,” meaning objects used to hold burning material such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand,

f.    Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials,

h.    Chamber pipes,

h.    Carburetor pipes,

i.    Air-driven pipes,

j.    Bongs.

In determining whether an object is “drug paraphernalia” a court or other authority may consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following:

1.    Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use;

2.    The proximity of the object to controlled substances;

3.    The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object;

4.    Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object to deliver to persons who he knows, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of the laws of the state relating to controlled substances;

5.    Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use;

6.    Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use;

7.    National and local advertising concerning its use;

8.    The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;

9.    Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object or objects to the total sales of the business enterprise;

10.    The existence or scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community; and

11.    Expert testimony concerning its use.

F.    “Patron” means a person who enters a business for the purpose of purchasing or viewing as a shopper, merchandise offered for sale at the business.

G.    “Person” means a natural person or any firm, partnership, association, corporation or cooperative association. (Ord. 593 §2, 1980)

9.16.030 Display of drug paraphernalia.
A.    Except as authorized by law, it is unlawful for any person to wilfully maintain or operate any business with knowledge that drug paraphernalia is displayed at such business.

B.    Except as authorized by law, it is unlawful for any person who is the owner of a business, an employee thereof or who works at such business as an agent of the owner, to wilfully display drug paraphernalia at such business. (Ord. 593 §3, 1980)

9.16.040 Distribution of drug paraphernalia.
Except as authorized by law, it is unlawful for any person to wilfully distribute to another person drug paraphernalia, knowing that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of any law of the state. (Ord. 593 §4, 1980)

9.16.050 Exceptions to provisions.
No provision of this chapter shall be deemed, whether directly or indirectly, to authorize any act which is otherwise prohibited by any law of the state or require any act which is otherwise prohibited by any law of the state; nor shall any provision of this chapter be deemed, whether directly or indirectly, to prohibit any act or acts which are prohibited by any law of the state. (Ord. 593 §5, 1980)

9.16.060 Violation--Penalty.
A.    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction, is punishable by:

1.    A fine not exceeding fifty dollars for a first violation;

2.    A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a second violation of this chapter within one year; and

3.    A fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars for each additional violation of this chapter within one year.

B.    A person who violates the provisions of Section 9.16.030 of this chapter shall be deemed to be guilty of a separate offense for each day, or portion thereof, during which the violation continues.

C.    A person who violates the provisions of Section 9.16.040 of this chapter shall be guilty of a separate offense for each item of drug paraphernalia which is distributed. (Ord. 593 §7, 1980)

Chapter 9.20
WEAPONS
Sections:

9.20.010    Possession of knives or hatchets restricted.

9.20.020    Possession of firearms prohibited-- Exemptions.

9.20.010 Possession of knives or hatchets restricted.
It is unlawful for any person to possess in the city park any hatchet, ax, machete, brush knife or other device, other than a legal pocket knife and/or cutlery necessary for preparation of food, capable of cutting, defacing or mutilating trees or shrubs. (Ord. 456 §7, 1970)

9.20.020 Possession of firearms prohibited--Exemptions.
A.    It is unlawful for any person to use firearms of any kind or other weapons within the boundaries of the city including: air rifles or pistols, gas rifles or pistols, BB guns, spring guns, pellet guns, bows and arrows, slingshots, or any instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges.

B.    A peace officer acting in the discharge of his duties is exempted from provisions of this section.

C.    Persons possessing valid concealed weapons permits issued by the state are exempted from provisions of this section. (Ord. 505 (part), 1974: Ord. 456 §8, 1970)

Chapter 9.25
MOTORCYCLES/OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLES
Sections:

9.25.010    Purpose.

9.25.020    Violations.

9.25.030    Exemptions.

9.25.040    Enforcement and penalties.

9.25.010 Purpose.
Individuals are presently engaged in the unregulated operation of motorcycles, motor-driven cycles, and similar off-highway vehicles on public and private property throughout the city of Lakeport. The driving, riding and use of motorcycles, motor-driven cycles, or off-highway motor vehicles on public and private property within the limits of the city is and can be the cause of noise, dust, erosion, sedimentation, degradation of water quality, destruction of view and the destruction of plants, landscaping and other personal and real property which adversely affects the comfort, enjoyment and privacy of occupants and residents of the city. (Ord. 879 §1(part), 2009)

9.25.020 Violation.
It is unlawful for any person to operate any motorcycle, motor-driven cycle, or similar off-highway vehicle on any real property in the city limits of Lakeport, public or private, other than public roads or property otherwise approved for recreational use of this type by ordinance or by exemption by this code. (Ord. 879 §1(part), 2009)

9.25.030 Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:

A.    Owners, tenants, their invitees, or lawful occupants of real property and members of their immediate family while operating such vehicles upon their property for necessary use in the course of a lawful occupation for profit or gain, or other similar nonrecreational purpose.

B.    An event sanctioned by the city of Lakeport. (Ord. 879 §1(part), 2009)

9.25.040 Enforcement and penalties.
A.    Enforcement of this chapter shall be implemented by the chief of police or his/her designee.

B.    A violation of this chapter is an infraction, which shall be subject to a fine of not more than one hundred dollars for the first offense nor more than five hundred dollars for each subsequent offense. (Ord. 879 §1(part), 2009)

Title 10
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapters:

10.04    General Provisions

10.08    Traffic Rules

10.12    Stopping, Standing and Parking

10.16    Speed Limits

10.20    Bicycles

10.28    Pedestrians

Chapter 10.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

10.04.010    Definitions.

10.04.020    Exemptions from provisions.

10.04.030    Citation procedure.

10.04.010 Definitions.
A.    The following words and phrases when used in this title shall for the purpose of this title have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section.

B.    Whenever any words or phrases used in this title are not defined in this section, but are now defined in the Vehicle Code of this state, such definitions are incorporated in this section and are deemed to apply to such words and phrases used in this title as though set forth in this section in full.

“Holidays” means legal holidays as established by the laws of the state.

“Loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.

Official Time Standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this title, they mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in this city.

“Park” means to stand or leave standing any vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading of passengers or materials.

“Parkway” means that portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk.

“Passenger loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.

“Pedestrian” means any person afoot.

“Person” means every natural person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation.

“Stop,” when required, means complete cessation of movement.

“Stop,” or “stand,” when prohibited, means any stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device.

“Through street,” as used in this title, is a street or portion thereof at the entrance to which vehicles or traffic from intersecting streets is required by this title to stop before entering or crossing the same, and when stop signs are erected as provided in this title.

“Traffic” means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances either singly or together while using any street for purpose of travel. (Ord. 795 §1, 1998; Ord. 356 Art. I, 1958)

10.04.020 Exemptions from provisions.
A.    The provisions of this title regulating the operations, parking and standing of vehicles, shall not apply to any vehicle of the police, or to fire department, any public ambulance, or any public utility vehicle, or private ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified in the Vehicle Code of the state in response to an emergency call.

B.    The exemption in subsection A of this section shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of his wilful disregard of the safety of others. (Ord. 356 Art. IX §§1, 2, 1958)

10.04.030 Citation procedure.
Whenever a person is arrested for any violation of this title and he is not immediately taken before a magistrate, the arresting officer shall prepare in triplicate a written notice to appear in court or before a person authorized to receive a deposit of bail, containing the name and address of the person, the license number of his vehicle, if any, the name and address, when available, of the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle, the offense charged and the time and place when and where he shall appear, as provided in Section 40500 of the Vehicle Code of the state, and the proceedings thereafter shall be governed by the provisions of said Section 40500. (Ord. 484 §3, 1975)

Chapter 10.08
TRAFFIC RULES
Sections:

10.08.010    U-turns.

10.08.020    One-way streets.

10.08.030    Through streets.

10.08.040    School bus zones.

10.08.050    Yielding right-of-way.

10.08.060    Construction and warning lights.

10.08.070    Bicycle, motorcycle and toy vehicle restrictions.

10.08.080    Driving through funeral processions.

10.08.090    Driving over new pavement.

10.08.010 U-turns.
A.    The operator of a vehicle shall not turn a vehicle in a half-circle so as to make a so-called U-turn, and proceed in the opposite direction at any of those intersections that are designated by a sign “No U-turn.”

B.    The city council shall cause appropriate “No U-turn” signs to be erected at each intersection where U-turns are prohibited near the curb on the side of approaching traffic and across the intersecting street from such approaching traffic, and the provisions of this section shall not be effective unless such signs are in place. (Ord. 356 Art. IV §§1, 2, 1958)

10.08.020 One-way streets.
A.    The city council may from time to time by resolution designate certain streets or alleys or portions thereof as one-way streets.

B.    Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates any one-way street or alley, the city council shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place.

C.    Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.

D.    When signs are erected on one-way streets or in any alley given notice thereof, no person shall drive any vehicle in a direction contrary thereto. (Ord. 356 Art. V §S1--3, 1958)

10.08.030 Through streets.
A.    The city council may from time to time, by resolution, designate certain streets or portions thereof, as through streets.

B.    Signs Required for Through Streets. Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates and describes any street or a portion thereof as a through street or any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, the city council shall erect and maintain, or cause to be erected and maintained, stop signs as follows:

1.    A stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersecting such through street, so designated, and at those entrances of other intersections where a stop is required. Every such sign shall be placed at or near the entrance to the highway, or intersection where a stop is required, and every such sign shall conform to the requirements of the Vehicle Code of the state of California.

2.    A stop sign may be required to be erected and maintained by the owner of property adjoining any through street when a determination is made by action of the city council that such sign is in the best interest of the public safety and welfare.

3.    When stop signs are erected, as provided in this section, at the entrance to any intersection, every driver of a vehicle shall stop at every such sign before entering the intersection, except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control signal. (Ord. 792, 1998; Ord. 356 Art. V §§4--6, 1958)

10.08.040 School bus zones.
A.    The city council may from time to time by resolution designate certain areas as school bus zones, and restrict parking at such time or times and to such limits as may be required to provide access for school buses.

B.    The city council shall cause appropriate signs to be erected at a distance of not more than one hundred fifty feet apart, and at each end of any school bus zone, plainly designating the time or times when parking is limited or any limitations thereof, and shall cause the curb between such signs to be painted yellow.

C.    When in any school bus zone the signs prescribed in this section are in place and the curb painted yellow, it is unlawful to park in or adjacent to such area in violation of the time or restriction set forth on such signs. (Ord. 356 Art. V §§7--9, 1958)

10.08.050 Yielding right-of-way.
A.    The city council may by resolution prescribe such approaches to intersections other than approaches to through streets or designated stops, as it may determine advisable as yield right-of-way approaches, but it shall not so designate such approaches on more than one of the intersecting streets.

B.    At all such approaches, the city shall cause to be erected appropriate yield right-of-way signs.

C.    When such signs are in place, it is unlawful to drive a vehicle through any such intersections on the approach, for which the sign is erected without yielding to any approaching traffic on the other intersecting street. (Ord. 688 §1, 1988: Ord. 356 Art. V §§10--12, 1958)

10.08.060 Construction and warning lights.
A.    The superintendent of streets shall place special warning signs or barricades around or adjacent to any work or construction on any city street, parkway or sidewalk, being performed by employees of the city, when traffic or workmen might otherwise be in danger, if no such signs were in place. All projects or work remaining incomplete shall be lighted at night and in such manner as to give warning to any obstruction or danger to the flow of traffic.

B.    All such signs or barricades shall have plainly printed thereon, in letters no less than three inches high, the word “danger,” “caution,” or “slow,” as the superintendent of streets deems advisable, and shall not be less than three feet in height, and shall be placed between any work of construction and any approaching traffic.

C.    At any time any employees of the city are working on the city streets, signs shall be placed at each approach to the place where such employees are working, with the words “Men Working” plainly printed thereon in addition to signs required in this section.

D.    When signs are in place as prescribed in this section, it is unlawful for any driver of a vehicle to fail to heed such signs or barricades, or to drive over, on, or onto any such signs or barricades. (Ord. 356 Art. VI, 1958)

10.08.070 Bicycle, motorcycle and toy vehicle restrictions.
A.    It is unlawful for any person to ride any bicycle, motorscooter, motorcycle or similar device upon any sidewalks, or in any park, or premises or public recreation area owned and maintained by the city for use of the public or residents of the city, for the purpose of picnicking, swimming or other recreation in the city.

B.    Other Riding Devices Prohibited in Certain Areas. It is unlawful for any person, excepting invalids, to ride or propel any bicycle, tricycle, coaster, scooter, skateboard or roller or in-line skates upon the sidewalks within that area bounded by the south side of Armstrong on the south, the north side of Sixth Street on the north, the west side of Forbes Street on the west, and the shore of Clear Lake on the east and along both sides of Main Street extending north to the south side of Clear Lake Avenue and south to the north line of Lakeport Boulevard. (Ord. 795 §3, 1998; Ord. 356 Art. VII §§2, 3, 1958)

10.08.080 Driving through funeral processions.
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between vehicles comprising a funeral procession while they are in motion and when the vehicles in such procession are conspicuously so designated. (Ord. 356 Art. VII §5, 1958)

10.08.090 Driving over new pavement.
No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted marking in any street when a barrier or sign is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when a sign is in place stating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. (Ord. 356 Art. VII §7, 1958)

Chapter 10.12
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Sections:

10.12.010    Applicability of provisions.

10.12.020    Compliance required generally.

10.12.030    Parallel parking.

10.12.040    Diagonal and perpendicular parking.

10.12.050    Prohibited parking areas.

10.12.060    Parking on hills.

10.12.070    Double parking.

10.12.080    Peddler and vendor parking restrictions.

10.12.090    Parking time limited in specific places.

10.12.100    Early morning parking limited in certain areas

10.12.110    Emergency no-parking zones.

10.12.120    Painted curbing--Interpretation.

10.12.130    Painted curbing--Limitation of yellow zones

10.12.140    Painted curbing--Limitation of white zones.

10.12.150    Handicapped parking.

10.12.160    Loading or unloading--Time limits.

10.12.170    Exemptions--Government agency vehicles.

10.12.180    Permit for overtime parking.

10.12.190    Removal of vehicles parking over allowable time limits.

10.12.200    Parking for purpose of vehicle sale or repair prohibited.

10.12.210    Boat trailer parking.

10.12.220    Signposting generally.

10.12.010 Applicability of provisions.
A.    The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times specified in this chapter, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device.

B.    The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the state Vehicle Code or the ordinances of this city prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. (Ord. 356 Art. II §1, 1958)

10.12.020 Compliance required generally.
A.    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway, crosswalk or alleyway except as provided in this chapter, or except by permission of the owner, in any private driveway.

B.    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of persons or materials or freight in any alley in the city. (Ord. 356 Art. II §2, Art. III §5, 1958)

10.12.030 Parallel parking.
A.    Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within eighteen inches of the lefthand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing as provided in this chapter.

B.    It is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on any street where painted lines are drawn on such street for parallel parking, unless said vehicle is placed in such manner that both wheels on the righthand side of the vehicle are not more than eighteen inches distant from the curb, and unless the vehicle is so parked that no portion thereof extends over and above any of the painted lines drawn on the street to designate the parking area; provided, however, that any vehicle may be backed up to the curb of any street when actually engaged in loading or unloading freight if the traffic is not blocked thereby; and further provided, that the lines drawn parallel to the curb to so designate parallel parking shall not be less than seven feet from the curb, and the lines drawn at right angles to designate and separate the parking area shall not be less than twenty-two feet or more than twenty-four feet apart.

C.    It is unlawful for any person to stop or park any vehicle upon any street where the vehicle is stopped or parked facing a direction opposite to that in which traffic normally moves upon that half of the street on which such vehicle is stopped or parked. (Ord. 875 §2, 2008; Ord. 356 Art. II §5, 1958)

10.12.040 Diagonal and perpendicular parking.
A.    It is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle diagonally or perpendicular to the curb or shoulder on any of the streets in the city except where marked for such diagonal or perpendicular parking with any portion of the vehicle, or its load, across or projecting across any painted or marked white lines upon the streets, or without the right front wheel of the vehicle being within six inches of the curb.

B.    The city council may from time to time by resolution designate certain areas for diagonal or perpendicular parking and shall cause white painted lines to be painted upon the street pavement designating such diagonal or perpendicular parking spaces. Such lines shall be spaced at intervals of no less than eight feet nor more than ten feet. (Ord. 496 §1, 1974)

10.12.050 Prohibited parking areas.
The city council may determine by resolution when standing or parking shall be prohibited upon either side of any street, or portion thereof, and shall erect appropriate signs or provide paintings or markings giving notice thereof as required in this chapter. (Ord. 356 Art. II §7, 1958)

10.12.060 Parking on hills.
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway, alley, street or roadway in the city when upon any grade exceeding three percent, without blocking the wheels by turning them against the curb or by other means. (Ord. 356 Art. II §8, 1958)

10.12.070 Double parking.
A.    Pursuant to the authority granted to the city council pursuant to Section 22502(c) of the California Vehicle Code, double parking on the south side of Fifth Street between Main Street and Forbes Street in the city is prohibited.

B.    The department of public works is directed to cause appropriate signs to be erected indicating the prohibited double-parking area in accordance with Section 10.12.220 of this chapter. (Ord. 650 §§1, 2, 1985)

10.12.080 Peddler and vendor parking restrictions.
A.    No person shall stand or park any vehicle, wagon or pushcart from which goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables or foodstuffs are sold, displayed, solicited or offered for sale or bartered or exchanged, or any lunchwagon or eating car or vehicle, on any portion of any street within the city, without a permit therefor, except that such vehicles, wagons or pushcarts may stand or park only at the request of a bona fide purchaser for a period of time not to exceed ten minutes at any one place.

B.    The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons delivering such articles upon order of, or by agreement with, a customer from a store or other fixed place of business or distribution.

C.    The city council may from time to time issue permits for the parking of vehicles, wagons or pushcarts for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise, as provided in this section, in such form as it may prescribe, upon application therefor designating the area or specified location where such applicant shall be permitted to park. (Ord. 356 Art. II §9, 1958)

10.12.090 Parking time limited in specific places.
The city council may, by resolution, determine where parking shall be limited to two consecutive hours, and shall cause to be erected appropriate signs giving notice thereof as hereinafter required. This restriction shall apply only during the hours between six a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays.

A.    Requirement to Vacate Parking Stall. Pursuant to the provisions of this section a vehicle operator is required, by the end of the two-hour parking limit, to vacate the parking stall entirely and move the vehicle to another parking stall.

B.    Removal of Timing Mark Placed on Vehicle Tire by Parking Enforcement Officer. Any vehicle operator who removes a mark placed on a vehicle tire for purposes of determining the time a vehicle has been parked shall be guilty of an infraction and subject to a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars. (Ord. 795 §2(part), 1998: Ord. 774, 1996: Ord. 578 §1, 1979: Ord. 356 Art. II §11, 1958)

10.12.100 Early morning parking limited in certain areas.
It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park the vehicle for a period of more than thirty minutes between the hours of one-thirty a.m. and six a.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays on any streets or portions of streets within that areas bounded by the south side of Armstrong on the south, the north side of Sixth Street on the north, the west side of Forbes Street on the west, and the shore of Clear Lake on the east and along both sides of Main Street extending north to the south side of Clear Lake Avenue and south to the north line of Lakeport Boulevard. (Ord. 795 §2(part), 1998: Ord. 356 Art. II §12, 1958)

10.12.110 Emergency no-parking zones.
A.    Whenever the chief of police determines that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result, the chief of police shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets, or any portion or part thereof. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and the chief of police shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter.

B.    Emergency traffic signs provided for in this section shall not be less than fifty feet apart and shall clearly indicate no parking or other traffic restriction intended. (Ord. 356 Art. II §§10, 14, 1958)

10.12.120 Painted curbing--Interpretation.
Local stopping, standing or parking in the city shall be regulated as indicated by different colored paint upon the curbs, and shall be effective unless otherwise herein designated between the hours of six a.m. and six p.m. during all business days, Sundays and holidays being excepted from the operation of subsections B and D of this section:

A.    Red paint marks on the curb indicate no stopping, standing or parking, whether the vehicle is attended or unattended, at any time including Sundays and holidays. Provided, however that the city council may from time to time designate certain areas by resolution for a particular use by emergency vehicles, vehicles of state, city or county, police, doctor or taxi or public transit bus, printing on the curb, over such red paint, the limited use thereof by appropriate white letters not less than three inches high, and when said curbs are so painted and imprinted, it shall be unlawful for any vehicle to stop, stand or park adjacent thereto, except the particular vehicles so permitted as indicated by said printing.

B.    Yellow paint marks upon the curb indicates stopping only for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or freight.

C.    White paint marks on the curb indicate stopping only for the purpose of loading or unloading of passengers and shall be effective at all times including Sundays and holidays.

D.    Green paint marks on the curb indicate a time limit for parking of twenty minutes in duration.

E.    White lines drawn diagonally to the curb on the street indicates diagonal parking.

F.    White lines on the street drawn parallel to the curb shall designate parallel parking, and intersecting lines at right angles to the curbs designate separate areas for such parking. (Ord. 783, 1996; Ord. 761, 1993; Ord. 370 §1, 1960; Ord. 356 Art. III §1, 1958)

10.12.130 Painted curbing--Limitation of yellow zones.
No vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked adjacent to a yellow zone, except commercial vehicles, and then only for the purpose of loading or unloading of passengers or freight and shall not be left standing, stopped or parked for longer than the time necessary for such loading, and in no event for more than twenty minutes. (Ord. 356 Art. III §2, 1958)

10.12.140 Painted curbing--Limitation of white zones.
No vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked adjacent to a white zone except for the purpose of unloading passengers, but unloading includes the loading or unloading of personal baggage, but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than three minutes. (Ord. 356 Art. III §3, 1958)

10.12.150 Handicapped parking.
A.    Persons using blue-curb parking spaces shall comply with the following:

1.    No person shall park or stand any vehicle in a disabled-persons parking zone (blue curb) unless said vehicle bears a special license or displays a special placard issued under the provisions of Section 9105 or Section 22511.5 of the California Vehicle Code. “Display” as used in this section shall mean to place the placard in a clearly visible area where it can be viewed by a person looking into the interior of the vehicle from the sidewalk or curb area when the vehicle is parked. The placard shall not be obstructed or blocked from the outside view in any manner. Any person failing to clearly display a special placard as required herein so as to be clearly visible to parking or law enforcement personnel shall be guilty of an infraction and subject to a fine not to exceed twenty dollars.

2.    Blue-curb parking spaces shall be operative twenty-four hours a day, Sundays and holidays included.

3.    Parking zones for the physically handicapped are subject to any temporary parking prohibitions established by the city council.

B.    On-street Parking.

1.    The city council shall designate by resolution, special blue-curb parking spaces for the purpose of providing on-street parking for exclusive use by physically handicapped persons.

2.    On-street blue-curb spaces shall be indicated by blue paint on the curb edge of the paved portion of the street. In addition, there shall be posted immediately adjacent to, and visible from each stall or space, a sign consisting of a profile view of a wheelchair with occupant in white on a blue background.

C.    Off-street Parking--Publicly Owned Facilities.

1.    The city council shall designate by resolution, parking stalls or spaces in publicly owned, leased or controlled off-street parking facilities for exclusive use by physically handicapped persons.

2.    Designation of off-street, publicly owned facilities shall be made by posting immediately adjacent to and visible from each stall or space, a sign consisting of a profile view of a wheelchair with occupant in white on a blue background.

D.    Off-street Parking--Privately Financed Facilities.

1.    The city council declares that there are privately owned and operated parking facilities which may reserve parking stalls for exclusive use by physically handicapped persons.

2.    Designation of off-street privately financed facilities shall be made by posting immediately adjacent to, and visible from each stall or space, a sign consisting of a profile view of a wheelchair with occupant in white on a blue background.

E.    Locations of blue curbs shall be designated by resolution. (Ord. 773, 1995; Ord. 598 §§1-3, 1981: Ord. 557 Arts. I--VI, 1978)

10.12.160 Loading or unloading--Time limits.
Within the total time limits specified in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading, but without permitting abuse of the privilege hereby granted. (Ord. 356 Art. III §4, 1958)

10.12.170 Exemptions--Government agency vehicles.
The provisions of this chapter regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of the city department or a public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work, or any vehicle owned by the United States while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of the United States mail. (Ord. 356 Art. IX §3, 1958)

10.12.180 Permit for overtime parking.
A.    The chief of police may upon application therefor issue a special permit to park any vehicle or other equipment in a parking area on a city street, for a period not to exceed three days unless renewed by application.

B.    The chief of police may upon application therefor issue a special parking permit to a property owner or tenant of a residence without access to on-site parking within the central business zoning district subject to the following requirements:

1.    Permit shall allow for parking within designated two- and four-hour parking zones not located in front of a business or commercial building.

2.    Permit shall be limited to one vehicle per verified residence.

3.    Permit shall be renewed annually. (Ord. 899 §1, 2015: Ord. 484 §2, 1975)

10.12.190 Removal of vehicles parking over allowable time limits.
A.    No person shall park any vehicle upon any street or alley in the city for more than a consecutive period of seventy-two hours.

B.    Any police officer of the city may remove any vehicle parked on a public street within the city for more than a consecutive period of seventy-two hours or for any of the causes set forth in Section 22651 of the Vehicle Code of the state; provided, however, that the procedure for such removal shall be in accordance with the requirements of such Section 22651. (Ord. 688 §3, 1988; Ord. 484 §1, 1973)

10.12.200 Parking for purpose of vehicle sale or repair prohibited.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway or city property for the principal purpose of displaying such vehicle for sale or for greasing or repairing such vehicle, except when such greasing or repairs are necessitated by an emergency. (Ord. 678 §1, 1988: Ord. 356 Art. II §4, 1958)

10.12.210 Boat trailer parking.
A.    The city council may from time to time by resolution designate certain areas where boat trailers only may be parked at certain times or where no boat trailers may be parked at certain times, and shall cause appropriate signs to be erected clearly indicating the limitation thereof, and the time or times when other parking is prohibited which such signs shall be not less than one hundred fifty feet apart.

B.    It is unlawful to park any other vehicle in an area where signs are erected and in place as provided in subsections (A) and (C) of this section except boat trailers when permitted.

C.    The city council may from time to time by resolution designate certain areas as restricted parking areas and shall cause appropriate signs to be erected clearly indicating the limitation thereof, the signs shall be not less than one hundred fifty feet apart. (Ord. 524 §§1--3, 1976)

10.12.220 Signposting generally.
The city council shall cause appropriate signs to be erected along either side of any street or any portion thereof where parking is prohibited indicating no parking, or where parking is limited indicating the limitation thereof, which signs shall not be more than two hundred feet apart and there shall be at least one sign at each end of such restricted area, and the provisions of this section shall not be effective unless such signs are in place; provided, however, that no parking or limited parking in specific areas may also be indicated by painting on the curbs of the streets as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 562 §1, 1978: Ord. 356 Art. II §13, 1958)

Chapter 10.16
SPEED LIMITS
Sections:

10.16.010    Twenty miles per hour.

10.16.020    Twenty-five miles per hour.

10.16.025    Twenty-five miles per hour recommended to be posted.

10.16.030    Thirty miles per hour.

10.16.040    Thirty-five miles per hour.

10.16.050    Forty miles per hour.

10.16.060    Forty-five miles per hour.

10.16.010 Twenty miles per hour.
A.    Lange Street from Loch Drive to Lakeshore Boulevard. (Ord. 912 §1(part), 2016: Ord. 892 §1(part), 2014: Ord. 882 §2(part), 2011)

10.16.020 Twenty-five miles per hour.
A.    All city streets unless posted otherwise. (Ord. 912 §1(part), 2016: Ord. 892 §1(part), 2014: Ord. 882 §2(part), 2011)

10.16.025 Twenty-five miles per hour recommended to be posted.
A.    Armstrong Street from Berry Street to Martin Street.

B.    Giselman Street from Lakeshore Boulevard to Lange Street.

C.    Hartley Street from Hillcrest to northern city limits.

D.    Mellor Drive from Eleventh Street to one hundred seventy feet north of Page Drive.

E.    Sixth Street from Spurr Street to Main Street.

F.    Sixteenth Street from Mellor Drive to High Street.

G.    Twentieth Street from Hartley Street to High Street. (Ord. 912 §1(part), 2016: Ord. 892 §1(part), 2014: Ord. 882 §2(part), 2011)

10.16.030 Thirty miles per hour.
A.    Bevins Street from Bevins Court to Martin Street.

B.    Forbes Street from Martin Street to Clear Lake Avenue.

C.    Hartley Street from Clear Lake Avenue to Hillcrest Drive.

D.    High Street from Clear Lake Avenue to Twentieth Street.

E.    Lakeport Boulevard from Parallel Drive to Main Street.

F.    Lakeshore Boulevard from High Street to Lange Street.

G.    North Main Street from First Street to Clear Lake Avenue.

H.    South Main Street from First Street to five hundred seventy-five feet south of Lakeport Boulevard.

I.    Martin Street from Smith Street to Bevins Street.

J.    Parallel Drive from Lakeport Boulevard to north of Craig Avenue.

K.    Eleventh Street from North Main Street to one thousand one hundred feet west of Mellor Drive.

L.    Twentieth Street from Will-O-View Street to Hartley Street. (Ord. 912 §1(part), 2016: Ord. 892 §1(part), 2014: Ord. 882 §2(part), 2011)

10.16.040 Thirty-five miles per hour.
A.    Bevins Street from Lakeport Boulevard to Bevins Court.

B.    Lakeshore Boulevard from Lange Street to northern city limits.

C.    South Main Street from five hundred seventy-five feet south of Lakeport Boulevard to southern city limits.

D.    Eleventh Street from one thousand one hundred feet west of Mellor Drive to western city limits.

E.    Parallel Drive from Lakeport Boulevard to the end of improvements north of Craig Avenue. (Ord. 912 §1(part), 2016: Ord. 892 §1(part), 2014: Ord. 882 §2(part), 2011)

10.16.050 Forty miles per hour.
A.    Martin Street from Smith Street to western city limits. (Ord. 912 §1(part), 2016: Ord. 892 §1(part), 2014: Ord. 882 §2(part), 2011)

10.16.060 Forty-five miles per hour.
A.    From State Route 175 north to Chester Lane, approximately one thousand seven hundred eighty feet. (Ord. 912 §1(part), 2016: Ord. 892 §1(part), 2014)

Chapter 10.20
BICYCLES
Sections:

10.20.010    Definitions.

10.20.020    General requirements.

10.20.030    License--Required.

10.20.040    License--Application.

10.20.050    License--Issuance conditions.

10.20.060    Attachment of license plate.

10.20.070    Inspection.

10.20.080    License--Renewal.

10.20.090    Transfer of ownership or change of address.

10.20.100    Rental agency requirements.

10.20.110    Bicycle dealer requirements.

10.20.120    Violation--Penalty.

10.20.010 Definitions.
“Bicycle,” for the purposes of this chapter, means any device upon which a person may ride, which is propelled by human power through a system of belts, chains or gears having either two or three wheels (one of which is at least twenty inches in diameter) or having a frame size of at least fourteen inches, or having four or more wheels. (Ord. 689 §1, 1988: Ord. 520 §1, 1975)

10.20.020 General requirements.
A.    It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this chapter.

B.    The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this chapter.

C.    These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any highway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles subject to those exceptions stated in this chapter. (Ord. 520 §2, 1975)

10.20.030 License--Required.
No person shall ride or propel a bicycle on any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles unless the bicycle has been licensed and a license plate is attached thereto as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 520 §3, 1975)

10.20.040 License--Application.
Application for a bicycle license and license plate shall be made upon a form provided by the city and shall be made to the chief of police. A license fee in the sum of one dollar will be paid to the city before each license or renewal thereof is granted. (Ord. 520 §4, 1975)

10.20.050 License--Issuance conditions.
A.    The chief of police upon receiving proper application therefor is authorized to issue a bicycle license in accordance with state law.

B.    The chief of police shall not issue a license for any bicycle when he knows or has reasonable ground to believe that the applicant is not the owner of or entitled to the possession of such bicycle.

C.    The chief of police shall keep a record of the number of each license, the date issued, the name and address of the person to whom issued, and the number on the frame of the bicycle for which issued, and a record of all bicycle license fees collected by him. (Ord. 520 §5, 1975)

10.20.060 Attachment of license plate.
A.    The chief of police upon issuing a bicycle license shall also issue a license plate bearing the license number assigned to the bicycle.

B.    No person shall remove a license plate from a bicycle during the period for which issued, except in the event the bicycle is dismantled and no longer operated upon any street in this city. (Ord. 520 §6, 1975)

10.20.070 Inspection.
The chief of police or an officer assigned such responsibility shall inspect each bicycle before licensing the same and shall refuse a license for any bicycle which he determines is in unsafe mechanical condition. (Ord. 520 §7, 1975)

10.20.080 License--Renewal.
Upon the expiration of any bicycle license the same may be renewed upon application and payment of the established fee. (Ord. 520 §8, 1975)

10.20.090 Transfer of ownership or change of address.
A.    Upon sale or other transfer of a licensed bicycle the licensee shall notify the city police department in writing within ten days of such action.

B.    The purchaser or new owner of the bicycle shall, within ten days of taking possession, apply for the transfer of license to his name.

C.    Whenever the owner of a licensed bicycle changes residence address, said owner shall within ten days notify the police department in writing of his old and new address. (Ord. 520 §9, 1975)

10.20.100 Rental agency requirements.
A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the bicycle is licensed and a license plate is attached thereto as provided herein and such bicycle is equipped with the lamps and other equipment required in this chapter. (Ord. 520 §10, 1975)

10.20.110 Bicycle dealer requirements.
Every person engaged in the business of buying or selling new or secondhand bicycles shall make a report to the chief of police of every bicycle purchased or sold by such dealer, giving the name and address of the person from whom purchased or to whom sold, a description of such bicycle by name or make, the frame number thereof, and the number of license plate, if any, found thereon. (Ord. 520 §11, 1975)

10.20.120 Violation--Penalty.
Conviction for a violation of this chapter is punishable by a fine of not more than five dollars or by impounding of the bicycle in question for not more than thirty days, or by both such fine and impounding. (Ord. 520 §22, 1975)

Chapter 10.28
PEDESTRIANS
Sections:

10.28.010    Establishment of marked crosswalks.

10.28.010 Establishment of marked crosswalks.
The city council may, by resolution, designate the locations of marked crosswalks. Such locations shall be determined on the basis of accepted practices for pedestrian or other crossings. (Ord. 795 §4, 1998: Ord. 356 Art. VIII §1, 1958)

Title 11
(RESERVED)
Title 12
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Chapters:

12.04    Construction of Right-of-Way Improvements

12.05    Uniform Road Improvement Standards

12.08    Excavations

12.12    Overhead Obstructions

12.16    Handbills and Other Advertising Matter

12.20    Building Numbering

12.23    Street Names

12.24    Mailboxes

12.28    Floats, Fishing and Boat Operation

Chapter 12.04
CONSTRUCTION OF RIGHT-OF-WAY IMPROVEMENTS
Sections:

12.04.010    Definitions.

12.04.020    Purpose.

12.04.030    Scope.

12.04.040    General provisions.

12.04.050    Implementing provisions.

12.04.055    Maximum required ROW improvements.

12.04.060    Procedure for deferrals of right-of-way improvements.

12.04.070    Appeals.

12.04.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall be defined as follows:

"Block" means any segment of a public street four hundred feet or less in length, or a portion of a street bounded by two intersecting streets at either cross streets or "T" intersections which may be four hundred feet or less apart.

"Implementing value" means the threshold of property improvements at which ROW improvements are required to be installed. This value is initially set at forty-five thousand dollars and will be indexed to the Building Cost Index, 20-City Average, as published by the McGraw-Hill Engineering News Record.

"Person" means any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind.

"Property improvements" means any new construction, phased construction, nonexempt repair, reconstruction, or improvement to a parcel which is subject to the requirements of a building permit.

"Property line" means the line of any parcel, as defined in this section, as established by any official map or plat or by any public agency or by a legally recorded deed or subdivision map.

"Right-of-way improvements" shall include curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street paveouts, drive approaches, handicapped ramps, water lines and appurtenances, sewer lines and appurtenances, storm drainage facilities, property dedications of right-of-way, street lights, pavement markings, signs, and street trees.

"Street" means any public street, highway, or public way or any street, highway, or way open to public use. (Ord. 867 §1(part), 2007: Ord. 822 §1(part), 2003: Ord. 749 §1, 1993; Ord. 715 (part), 1991)

12.04.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish requirements for right-of-way improvements for all parcels within the city of Lakeport on which property improvements are made. (Ord. 867 §1(part), 2007: Ord. 822 §1(part), 2003: Ord. 715 (part), 1991)

12.04.030 Scope.
Provisions of this chapter apply to all parcels within all zoning districts within the city of Lakeport. (Ord. 867 §1(part), 2007: Ord. 822 §1(part), 2003: Ord. 715 (part), 1991)

12.04.040 General provisions.
A.    Improved or Unimproved Parcels. When property improvements of any type are proposed which exceed the implementing value on an improved or unimproved parcel, right-of-way improvements defined in this chapter shall be provided. Existing right-of-way improvements which are damaged, in a state of disrepair or ruin, or in a poor condition due to neglect shall be reconstructed to comply with the current city standards. The value of property improvements or maintenance projects shall be determined by the community development department and shall be based on the construction costs adopted by the building department or based on a duly executed construction contract.

B.    Subdivided Parcels. When a parcel is subdivided, right-of-way improvements defined in this chapter shall be provided in accordance with the Lakeport subdivision ordinance.

C.    Planning Commission. In conjunction with an application for a land use application/entitlement, the city planning commission may require right-of-way improvements on all or a portion of the subject property's frontage based on a review of project impacts or on the rule of rough proportionality law. These right-of-way improvements shall be embodied as conditions of approval. The improvements required as a condition of approval shall not be considered for a deferral. Decisions of the planning commission are subject to the appeal process outlined in Chapter 17.31.

D.    Repairs Exempt from the Requirements of This Chapter. The improvement value for the following types of property improvements shall not be considered part of the property improvement implementing value:

1.    Repairs made to comply with existing state or local health department, sanitary or safety code specifications which are necessary solely to assure safe living conditions;

2.    Repairs made to restore a structure to its preexisting condition when damage has been caused by an accident or natural disaster such as a fire, earthquake, flood, slide, and/or an exceptionally strong wind;

3.    Like-kind property maintenance projects such as re-roofing, replacement or upgrade of existing heating or cooling equipment, sewer or water line repair or replacement, installation of appliances, electrical or plumbing items, existing foundation repair, items bringing structures into compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act, or similar maintenance or replacement work;

4.    Improvements to accommodate the accessibility needs of the occupant/owner;

5.    Improvements to elevate homes within a floodplain to the current standard.

The improvement value of all nonexempt property improvements made to a structure during the course of the exempt repairs shall be considered to contribute to the value of improvements. An improvement is defined as anything other than the like-kind replacement of the preexisting condition. In the event of a dispute regarding the designation of an improvement, the decision shall be made by the city building official and can further be appealed to the city manager. (Ord. 867 §1(part), 2007: Ord. 840 §1, 2005; Ord. 822 §1(part), 2003: Ord. 749 §2, 1993; Ord. 715 (part), 1991)

12.04.050 Implementing provisions.
A.    Value of Improvements. The value of phased property improvements shall be cumulative. In any five-consecutive-year period, when the prior total value of phased improvements added to the improvement value of the pending building permit exceeds the implementing value, full right-of-way improvements shall be required to be constructed. The obligation to install right-of-way improvements shall run with the parcel. Within a five-consecutive-year period prior to the application for a building permit, all successive property owners shall be obligated by the improvement value established by previous owners.

B.    Inflation Adjustment. The city council finds that the cost of constructing property improvements is subject to inflation and other cost increases and that the implementing value should be adjusted each year to reflect such increases. On January 1st of each year, the implementing value shall be adjusted to reflect the change in the building cost index for the previous twelve-month period for which such data is available. The initial adjustment shall be based on the difference between the building cost index at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter and the value of the index at the end of calendar year. The building cost index to be used shall be the 20-City Average Building Cost Index as published in the McGraw-Hill Engineering News Record.

C.    Location of Property Lines and Establishment of Grades. The location of property lines and the establishment of grades needed for the installation and construction of right-of-way improvements shall be established by a registered civil engineer or professional land surveyor licensed by the state of California, and shall be the responsibility of the property owner or the person developing the subject property. Property line locations and elevations shall be approved by the city prior to the start of construction of right-of-way improvements.

D.    Inspection of Right-of-Way Improvements. The director of public works, or such other official as the city council may designate, shall have the power to appoint qualified persons to inspect construction of the work specified in this chapter.

E.    California Streets and Highways Code. Right-of-way improvements shall be installed and constructed pursuant to the provisions set forth in the Streets and Highways Code.

F.    Standards. Right-of-way improvements shall be constructed to standards established from time to time by the city of Lakeport by city resolution of the city council.

G.    Bond or Other Guarantee of Installation. The building inspector shall deny final inspection and occupancy, and shall refuse to allow final public utility connections to any such building or dwelling, unless said right-of-way improvements exist, are constructed, or unless a financial security agreement or bond to guarantee the construction is deposited with the city. The amount of the financial security shall be as determined by the director of public works. (Ord. 867 §1(part), 2007: Ord. 822 §1(part), 2003: Ord. 715 (part), 1991)

12.04.055 Maximum required ROW improvements.
A.    The city council recognizes that the requirement to provide right-of-way improvements for lots with more than one hundred thirty feet of street frontage may pose a hardship to a property owner wishing to construct or maintain a single-family residence.

B.    Property owners with parcels having more than one hundred thirty feet of street frontage who are required to provide right-of-way improvements by this chapter shall only be responsible for installing one hundred thirty feet of right-of-way improvements under the following conditions:

1.    The property remains under the same ownership.

2.    There is no change in use or intensification in use of the property as demonstrated by an application to the city.

If the property changes ownership, the building valuation totals will start anew. Improvements constructed by the previous owner and receiving a final approval by the building department prior to the change in ownership shall not be included in the cumulative improvement value. The new owner will not receive credit for any prior right-of-way improvements installed and will be responsible for the installation of one hundred thirty feet of right-of-way improvements if the cumulative improvement value exceeds the implementing value. (Ord. 867 §1(part), 2007)

12.04.060 Procedure for deferrals of right-of-way improvements.
Some or all of the right-of-way improvements required pursuant to this chapter may be deferred by action of the city manager in accordance with the following:

A.    Deferral or modification of the requirements to construct right-of-way improvements because of unique or unusual conditions may be considered by the city manager. Applicants for deferral or modification of right-of-way improvements pursuant to this section shall submit a formal request, pay applicable fees, and submit a written explanation and a detailed plan which specifies the unique or unusual conditions associated with the proposed construction of right-of-way improvements. The city manager shall consider the request, make a decision, and adopt the appropriate findings.

B.    Deferral of right-of-way improvements may also be granted by the city manager if the following conditions are found to exist:

1.    The parcel is being developed for use as a single-family residence or in conjunction with a single-family residence in an R-1 zone; and

2.    The parcel does not front an arterial or collector street; and

3.    More than fifty percent of the adjacent or fifty percent of the opposite street frontages within a block, or within a distance as measured two hundred feet in each direction from the center of the parcel (whichever is the greater distance), on either side of the street, do not have sidewalk, curb and/or gutter installed, or do not have deferral agreements in place to install same. In computing the percentage of curb, gutter, and/or sidewalk, the frontage of the property being considered shall be credited with having said right-of-way improvements installed; and

4.    The city engineer determines that deferral will not be contrary to the public welfare by reason of traffic control, pedestrian safety, drainage control, street design, street maintenance, or like matters; or

5.    The city manager determines that (a) the requirement for construction of right-of-way improvements would impose an unusual hardship on the applicant, and (b) the city manager determines that a deferral will not be contrary to the public welfare by reasons of traffic control, pedestrian safety, drainage control, street design, street maintenance, or like matters.

C.    Property owner(s) wishing to defer the installation of right-of-way improvements shall submit the request for deferral form to the city clerk with the appropriate fee.

D.    Property owner(s) who are granted a deferral by the city shall be required to execute an agreement which specifies a maximum ten-year period subject to city extension; this agreement shall run with the land and be recorded at the Lake County recorder’s office. The agreement and a bond, cash deposit, or other form of security, as required by the city manager and approved by the city attorney, shall be required and shall be provided by the property owner(s) prior to the issuance of a building permit. (Ord. 867 §1(part), 2007: Ord. 855 §1, 2006: Ord. 822 §1(part), 2003: Ord. 715 (part), 1991)

12.04.070 Appeals.
A.    The determination to construct right-of-way improvements by the city manager shall be subject to review by the city council.

B.    A person dissatisfied with the determination of the city manager may appeal therefrom by filing a written notice to the city council within ten days after notice of the exercise of the determination. Thereafter, the council shall set such appeal for hearing before it and hear the appeal at the next regular council meeting.

C.    The decision of the city council shall be final and binding upon all parties. (Ord. 867 §1(part), 2007: Ord. 822 §1(part), 2003: Ord. 715 (part), 1991)

Chapter 12.05
UNIFORM ROAD IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
Sections:

12.05.010    Adopted.

12.05.020    Property line location--Record of survey.

12.05.030    Engineered improvement plans required.

12.05.040    Design requirements.

12.05.050    Installation responsibility.

12.05.060    Conditions of permit issuance--Access easement or right-of-way land dedication requirements.

12.05.010 Adopted.
Uniform road improvement development standards are adopted by the city of Lakeport applicable only within the Clearlake Terraces Subdivisions in north Lakeport as set forth in Exhibit “A” attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and found on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 708 (part), 1990)

12.05.020 Property line location--Record of survey.
Upon the application for a building permit for improvements to any parcel, and upon a determination by the city of Lakeport building department of the need to define specific property lines in response to questions of building setback or disputes as to the location of property lines or right-of-way, a record of survey may be required to be provided by the property owner to determine location of said property lines. The record of survey shall not be required solely for the purpose of defining or locating adjacent property lines. (Ord. 708 (part), 1990)

12.05.030 Engineered improvement plans required.
In conjunction with the issuance of a building permit(s) that would require the installation of right-of-way improvements pursuant to the municipal code, engineered improvement plans for right-of-way improvements shall be provided by the individual property owner seeking issuance of the building permit. Said improvement plans shall be submitted to and approved by the city engineering department prior to the issuance of the building permit. Said improvement plans shall not be required for adjacent properties. (Ord. 708 (part), 1990)

12.05.040 Design requirements.
The design of street frontage roadway improvements shall provide for:

A.    A minimum thirty-foot street width from face of curb to face of curb.

B.    A minimum twenty-foot radius on the curb return at the intersections of streets. (Ord. 708 (part), 1990)

12.05.050 Installation responsibility.
Installation of street frontage improvements shall be the responsibility of the developer/owner of the parcel for which the issuance of a building permit is being requested. (Ord. 708 (part), 1990)

12.05.060 Conditions of permit issuance--Access easement or right-of-way land dedication requirements.
Where it is determined by the city engineering department, after review of survey information or engineered roadway improvement plans, that there is a need for a public improvement on an individual lot, those property owners requesting the issuance of a building permit shall offer a public access easement or dedication of land for right-of-way purposes for those portions of the individual lots to be used for public improvements or street frontage as defined by Section 12.05.040 of this code. Said dedication of public access easement or land for right-of-way shall be a condition of the issuance of a building permit, with no city compensation offered therefor. (Ord. 708 (part), 1990)

Chapter 12.08
EXCAVATIONS
Sections:

12.08.010    Generally.

12.08.020    Permit--Required.

12.08.030    Permit--Application--Fee.

12.08.040    Permit--Issuance.

12.08.050    Permit--Limitations.

12.08.060    Excavation prohibited on new improvements.

12.08.070    Special deposit--Required when.

12.08.080    Special deposit--Refund.

12.08.090    Special deposit--Exemption.

12.08.100    General deposit or bond--Required.

12.08.110    General deposit--Refund.

12.08.120    Bond--Cancellation.

12.08.130    Refilling--Supervision and inspection.

12.08.140    Refilling--Guarantee.

12.08.150    Timely completion required.

12.08.160    Extension of time limits.

12.08.170    Completion by city.

12.08.180    Public safety measures.

12.08.190    Fencing off excavated materials on sidewalks.

12.08.200    Off-street storage of materials and equipment.

12.08.210    Maintenance of trafficways, fire hydrants and gutters.

12.08.220    Liability and property damage insurance.

12.08.230    Emergency excavations.

12.08.240    Exceptions.

12.08.010 Generally.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to lay down pipes or conduits in the public streets or other public places of the city, to excavate, open or tear up any street or other public place therein, except under the direction of the city engineer of the city in accordance with the regulations adopted by the city council. (Ord. 522 §1, 1976)

12.08.020 Permit--Required.
A.    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make or cause to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any public street or other public place for the installation, repair or removal of any pipe, conduit, duct or tunnel, or for any other purpose, without first obtaining from the city engineer a written permit to make such excavation showing the location and dimensions of such proposed excavation, together with any other information or details, directions or regulations which the city engineer may insert in the permit.

B.    No person, firm or corporation shall be issued any permit under this chapter unless a written application is filed therefor and the fee paid for such excavation, and unless the special or general deposit or the faithful performance bond has been filed according to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 522 §2(A), 1976)

12.08.030 Permit--Application--Fee.
A.    Any person desiring a permit under this chapter shall file a written application therefor with the city engineer which shall contain the following:

1.    The name and address of the applicant;

2.    The exact location of the proposed excavation, including a sketch or plat thereof;

3.    The dimensions of the excavation, including the width, depth and length thereof;

4.    The purpose of the excavation;

5.    The date when the work of excavation is to commence;

6.    The date when the work of excavation is to be completed;

7.    The agreement by the applicant to conform with all of the provisions of this chapter, to the effect they constitute a lawful exercise of the police power of the city, on forms provided by city.

B.    Each application filed for a permit under this chapter shall be accompanied by an inspection fee in the sum of fifteen dollars per one hundred linear feet or fraction thereof which shall not be subject to refund for any reason whatever. The inspection fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of the encroachment permit. (Ord. 522 §2(B), (C), 1976)

12.08.040 Permit--Issuance.
A.    Upon the filing of an application for a permit under this chapter, the payment of the fees and the payment for filing of the deposit or bond for the faithful performance of the excavation and refilling, the city engineer shall issue a written permit to make the excavation requested in the application; provided, that the applicant is authorized by law, or an existing valid franchise to use the street for the purpose shown in the application.

B.    Unsigned permits may be furnished to a public utility serving the city to accompany applications made under this chapter and if satisfactorily completed covering specific applications, the city engineer may sign and issue the same. (Ord. 522 §2(D), 1976)

12.08.050 Permit--Limitations.
A.    Every permit for an excavation in or under the surface of any public street or other public place as required in this chapter shall be issued subject to the right of the city or any person entitled thereto to use that part of such street, alley or other public place which may be lawfully used, which does not comprise any part of the area required for such excavation.

B.    Excavations shall be confined to the work described in the permits issued therefor as described in this section. Each permittee shall notify the city engineer when excavation under the permit will be commenced, and such notice shall be given at least eight working hours before such time of commencement, it being understood that the working hours are between nine a.m. and five p.m. from Monday to and including Friday of each week. (Ord. 522 §2(E), 1976)

12.08.060 Excavation prohibited on new improvements.
A.    Whenever the city council enacts any resolution providing for the paving or repaving of any street, the city engineer or superintendent of public works shall promptly mail a written notice thereof to each person owning any sewer, main, conduit or other utility in or under said street. Such notice shall notify such persons that no excavation permits shall be issued for openings, cuts or excavations in the street for a period of five years after the date of enactment of the resolution. During the five-year period, no excavation permit shall be issued to open, cut or excavate in the street unless, in the judgment of the city engineer or superintendent of public works, an emergency exists which makes it absolutely essential that the excavation permit be issued.

B.    Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this section is deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding five hundred dollars or be imprisoned in the county jail for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty days, or be both so fined and imprisoned. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 608 §1, 1982)

12.08.070 Special deposit--Required when.
Unless a general deposit or faithful performance bond is deposited or filed as required by Section 12.08.100 of this chapter, each application for a permit to excavate as required by this chapter shall be accompanied by a special deposit in the amount fixed by the city engineer, to guarantee the faithful performance by the applicant of the completion of all excavation and refilling work required under this chapter, and by the permit when issued, and the payment of all inspection fees charged therefor. No permit shall be granted until the deposit is made. (Ord. 522 §3(A), 1976)

12.08.080 Special deposit--Refund.
A.    The special deposit required in Section 12.08.070 of this chapter may only be refunded upon written application made therefor not less than twelve months after the completion of the excavation work, and the refilling of the same, and not later than twenty-four months after such completion of work, and upon the written certification by the city engineer that the work was done and completed satisfactorily, and in the manner required by this chapter.

B.    Upon the failure to claim such refund or deposit within the period, the same shall be forfeited to the city. In the event the work is not completed to the satisfaction of the city engineer, and in accordance with this chapter, the city shall have the right to complete such work and charge the cost thereof against the deposit, and hold the person depositing the same liable for any deficiency between the cost of the work and deposit. (Ord. 522 §3(B), 1976)

12.08.090 Special deposit--Exemption.
A.    The provisions of Section 12.08.070 of this chapter shall not apply to any public agency or public utility having lawful authority to occupy the city streets or other public places which is authorized by law to establish or maintain any works or facilities in, under or over any public street or other public place.

B.    The city engineer may require of any such applicant a bond in a sum not to exceed five thousand dollars. If such applicant has in fact prior to such application failed to comply with the provisions of this section or with the provisions of a previous permit.

C.    No special deposit or faithful performance bond shall be required of any individual owner-builder. (Ord. 629 §2, 1984; Ord. 522 §3(D), 1976)

12.08.100 General deposit or bond--Required.
In lieu of the special deposit required under Section 12.08.070 of this chapter, any applicant for the permit required by this chapter may make and maintain with the city a general deposit in the sum of one thousand dollars, or may file with the city clerk a corporate faithful performance or license bond, approved by the legal counsel of the city, covering all work performed by such applicant for a period of one year, and by so doing shall not be required to accompany applications with the special deposits; provided, however, that if the total area of excavation work covered by any single application shall cover an area of excavation work which would require a special deposit under Section 12.08.070, in a total sum in excess of one thousand dollars, then such applicant depositing the general deposit or filing the faithful performance or license bond shall be required to increase the deposit or bond in an amount sufficient to bring the total thereof up to the total amount of the special deposit, which would otherwise be required at such time. (Ord. 522 §3(C), 1976)

12.08.110 General deposit--Refund.
The general deposit required in Section 12.08.100 of this chapter shall only be refunded upon written application made therefor not less than twelve months after the completion of all excavation work and the refilling of the same, and not later than twenty-four, months after completion of the work and upon the written certification of the city engineer that such work was done and completed satisfactorily and in the manner required by this chapter. Upon failure to claim the refund within the period, the same shall be forfeited to the city. (Ord. 522 §3(E), 1976)

12.08.120 Bond--Cancellation.
A.    Any bond deposited as described in Section 12.08.100 of this chapter shall be noncancelable, unless or until the city is given written notice of cancellation thirty days in advance thereof.

B.    Upon filing a notice of cancellation of bond under this chapter the surety shall not be liable on account of any excavations commenced more than thirty days after filing such cancellation notice. Upon filing a cancellation notice of bond, the permit for which the same was issued shall become null and void on and after the effective date of cancellation, unless prior to the date the permittee shall have caused another bond, approved by the legal counsel of the city, to be filed in the place of the cancelled bond. (Ord. 522 §3(F), 1976)

12.08.130 Refilling--Supervision and inspection.
A.    All excavations made under this chapter shall be refilled only under the supervision of the city engineer, who shall cause such refilling to be inspected during the course thereof. The city engineer shall be notified by the owner of the permit under this chapter when such refilling work is to commence.

B.    All refilling of excavations shall be done and completed and inspected under the supervision of the city engineer and shall be done in the following manner:

1.    No excavation shall be made on any street for a distance ahead of backfill, which in the opinion of the city engineer creates a traffic hazard. The length of opening shall be limited to two blocks, not to exceed six hundred feet from pavement breaking to pavement replacement.

2.    The material used for backfilling shall be sand or other materials approved by the city engineer. All backfill shall be deposited in layers not to exceed six inches in thickness, each layer being thoroughly compacted by such method or manner as is designed and approved by the city engineer.

3.    Care shall be taken to carry the backfill materials up evenly on both sides of the pipe so as to keep an even pressure around the pipe.

4.    Wherever existing pavements have been cut, in order to construct excavations made pursuant to the permit issued under this chapter, the backfill shall be thoroughly compacted, and the pavement shall be restored to the condition in which it was before the excavation was made.

5.    Excess materials which have been excavated from trenches, and which cannot be utilized for backfill, or spread adjacent to the work shall be removed from the location by the permittee.

6.    Pipes or conduits broken, bent or otherwise injured by excavation shall be replaced by the permittee at his expense, the same to be inspected and completed to the satisfaction of the city engineer. (Ord. 522 §4(A), 1976)

12.08.140 Refillinq--Guarantee.
The person by whom any excavation shall be made in any public street or other public place shall be deemed and held to guarantee the work of refilling and repair thereof, for a period of one year after the refilling of such excavation, against all defects in workmanship and materials, whenever, within such period of one year, any public street or other public place so guaranteed becomes in need of repairs by reason of any defect in workmanship or material used in the work or refilling or repair, the city engineer, shall serve on the person, firm or corporation by whom the excavation was made, a written notice stating the repairs necessary and requiring such repairs to be commenced within three days after the service of such notice, and prosecuted diligently until completed. Such notice shall be served in the same manner as provided in Section 12.08.170 of this chapter and if the same is not complied with as required by the city engineer, he shall complete or cause the work to be completed, and charge the cost thereof to the holder of the permit required by this chapter and the deposit made therefor as required by Section 12.08.070 of this chapter. (Ord. 522 §4(3), 1976)

12.08.150 Timely completion required.
A.    After any excavation is commenced, the work of making and refilling the same shall be prosecuted with due diligence, and so as not to obstruct the public street or other public place or travel thereon, more than is actually necessary therefor. If the work is not so prosecuted, or the work of refilling does not, in the judgment of the city engineer comply with the terms of this chapter. The city engineer shall notify the person named in the permit required by Section 12.08.020, in writing, that the work is not being prosecuted with due diligence, or that the refilling of such excavation has not been properly done, and shall require such person, within three days, after the service of such notice, to proceed with diligent prosecution of such work or properly complete the same, as the case may be.

B.    If the notice is not complied with, the city engineer may do or cause such work as may be necessary to refill such excavation, and to restore the public street or other public place, or part thereof excavated, to as good a condition as the same was in before the excavation was made. (Ord. 522 §5(A), 1976)

12.08.160 Extension of time limits.
Upon application in writing by the holder of any permit issued under Section 12.08.020 of this chapter, the city engineer may, by permit in writing, extend the time for completion of excavation and backfill upon proof of extreme hardship. (Ord. 522 §5(B), 1976)

12.08.170 Completion by city.
A.    Upon the failure to complete to the satisfaction of the city engineer the excavation and refilling required under the permit issued in accordance with Section 12.08.040 of this chapter, or to pay the inspection fees therefor mentioned in Section 12.08.030, within two weeks after the excavation has been commenced, or prior to the expiration of any extension granted therefor, the city shall have the right to complete the work or cause it to be completed, and deduct the cost thereof, including inspection fees, from, and charge the same against, any deposit made under the permit.

B.    If a faithful performance or license bond has been filed for the permit, and the excavation and refilling work has not been completed, and the inspection fees paid within a period of two weeks after the excavation has been commenced, or prior to the expiration of any extension granted therefor, the city shall notify the surety on such bond to complete the work and if it is not completed and the inspection fees therefor paid within two weeks thereafter, the city shall have the right to complete the work or cause it to be completed, and charge and collect the cost thereof, including inspection fees, from the permittee or the surety on the bond. (Ord. 522 §5(C), 1976)

12.08.180 Public safety measures.
It is the duty of every person, firm or corporation making any excavation in any public street or other public place to provide flagmen as determined necessary by the city engineer, and to place and maintain barriers at each end of such places as may be necessary along the excavation to prevent accident, to place and maintain lights at each end of the excavation, and at distances of not more than fifty feet along the line thereof, from sunset each day to sunrise of the next day, until such excavation is entirely refilled. (Ord. 522 §5(D), 1976)

12.08.190 Fencing off excavated materials on sidewalks.
If the public street is not wide enough to hold excavated materials without using a part of the adjacent sidewalk, a board fence and sidewalk upon or along such sidewalk shall be erected and maintained so long as materials remain along the sidewalk. (Ord. 522 §5(E), 1976)

12.08.200 Off-street storage of materials and equipment.
A.    All off-street storage areas for materials and equipment used or needed for work or job projects covered by the provisions of this chapter shall be approved by the city council for location and dates of use.

B.    The applicant must obtain the approval in writing of the owner of the property sought to be used for storage, and submit it to the city council in addition to the application for approval of the storage site. (Ord. 538 §1, 1977)

12.08.210 Maintenance of trafficways, fire hydrants and gutters.
A.    It shall be the duty of every person, firm or corporation making any excavation in any public street or other public place to maintain safe crossings for vehicle traffic at all street intersections, and safe crossings for pedestrians at intervals of not more than three hundred feet.

B.    If any excavation is made across any public street or other public place, at least one safe crossing shall be maintained at all times for vehicles and pedestrians.

C.    Free access must be provided to all fire hydrants and water gates.

D.    All gutters shall be maintained free and unobstructed for the full depth of the adjacent curb, and for at least one foot in width from the face of such curb at the gutter line. Wherever a gutter crosses an intersecting public street, an adequate waterway shall be provided and at all times maintained. (Ord. 522 §5(F), 1976)

12.08.220 Liability and property damage insurance.
A.    No person, firm or corporation shall be entitled to permits under this chapter unless and until he or it has filed and maintained on file with the city engineer, a certificate showing and certifying that such person, firm or corporation carries public liability and property damage insurance, issued by an insurance carrier determined reliable by the city engineer, insuring the applicant and the city against the loss by reason of injuries to or death of persons, or damages to property, caused by the applicant, its agent or employees in performing any work under the permit.

B.    The certificates of insurance required hereunder shall include a rider containing the agreement of the insurance carrier to give to the city written notice of cancellation of such insurance at least ten days in advance. (Ord. 522 §5(G), 1976)

12.08.230 Emergency excavations.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent any person, firm or corporation maintaining any pipe or conduit in any public street or other public place by virtue of any law, ordinance or permit, from making such excavation as may be necessary for. the preservation of life or property when such necessity arises; provided, however, that the person making such excavation shall obtain a permit therefor within twenty-four hours thereafter, exclusive of intervening Saturdays, Sundays or legal holidays; and provided further, that all refilling shall be done in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 522 §6, 1976)

12.08.240 Exceptions.
None of the provisions of this chapter shall apply to any work done or to be done along, in or upon any public street or other public place pursuant to any law of the state providing for the improvement thereof, or any work done or to be done along, in or upon any public street or other public place pursuant to any action for the improvement of such street of other public place authorized by the city council; provided, however, that the provisions contained in Sections 12.08.130 and 12.08.140 shall apply to all such work and to all excavations to be made along, in or upon any public street or public place. (Ord. 522 §7, 1976)

Chapter 12.12
OVERHEAD OBSTRUCTIONS
Sections:

12.12.010    Banners--Permit required.

12.12.020    Trees over sidewalks and streets.

12.12.010 Banners--Permit required.
A.    Banners will be permitted to be displayed above public streets, provided that a permit for installation of same has been obtained from the director of public works.

B.    Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of six months, or a fine of five hundred dollars. (Ord. 504 §1, 1974; Ord. 478 §3(part), 1972)

12.12.020 Trees over sidewalks and streets.
A.    No branch of any tree extending over any sidewalk or street in the city shall be less than eight feet in the clear above such sidewalk.

B.    It is the duty of any owner or claimant of any tree with branches extending over any sidewalk or street in the city to remove the branches of any such tree to a height of not less than eight feet above the sidewalk or street thereunder.

C.    If any owner or claimant of any tree extending over the sidewalk or street in the city fails, refuses or neglects to remove, and keep removed, the branches thereof to a height of not less than eight feet from the sidewalk or street thereunder, it shall be the duty of the superintendent of streets or the chief of police to notify the owner or claimant of any tree maintained in violation of this section to remove forthwith and without delay all overhanging branches thereof to a height of not less than eight feet, as provided in this section.

D.    Unless within ten days from the date of notification by the superintendent of streets or the chief of police of the city, the owner or claimant of any tree with overhanging branches maintained in violation of this chapter removes such branches to a height of not less than eight feet in the clear, the superintendent of streets shall remove or cause them to be removed without further notice or demand. (Ord. 216 §§1--4, 1927)

Chapter 12.16
HANDBILLS AND OTHER ADVERTISING MATTER
Sections:

12.16.010    Residential property--Unauthorized distribution of materials prohibited.

12.16.020    Public ways--Distribution restricted.

12.16.030    Violation--Penalty.

12.16.010 Residential property--Unauthorized distribution of materials prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, or any agent or employee of any person, firm or corporation to throw into, leave upon, or scatter onto any residential property in the city, without the written consent of the owner thereof, or his agent, or the occupant of the private property, any newspaper, handbill, pamphlet, circular, dodger or any advertising sheet or material devised or intended to promote any commercial or moneymaking activity. (Ord. 478 §i, 1972)

12.16.020 Public ways--Distribution restricted.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, or any agent or employee of any person, firm or corporation to drop, scatter or place on or upon any public street or any sidewalk, or to place in or on any vehicle parked in or upon any public way without the consent of the owner thereof, any newspaper, handbill, pamphlet, circular, dodger or any other advertising sheet or matter devised or intended to promote in whole or in part any commercial or moneymaking activity; provided, that this section shall not be construed as preventing the giving away or sale of any newspaper or written graphic material to any person willing to acquire same, or the display of newspapers or written or graphic materials to promote commercial or moneymaking activity on racks which prevent their being blown about by the wind. (Ord. 478 §2, 1972)

12.16.030 Violation--Penalty.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of six months, or a fine of five hundred dollars. (Ord. 478 §3(part), 1972)

Chapter 12.20
BUILDING NUMBERING
Sections:

12.20.010    Plan adopted.

12.20.020    Method of numbering.

12.20.030    Uniformity of size, design and color.

12.20.040    Application forms.

12.20.050    Installation and maintenance required.

12.20.060    Supply of numbers.

12.20.070    Enforcement of provisions.

12.20.080    Violation--Penalty.

12.20.010 Plan adopted.
There is adopted a plan for the orderly numbering of houses, buildings, separate entrances, offices, etc., in the city, in accordance with the proposal of the planning commission of the city. (Ord. 386 §1(A), 1962)

12.20.020 Method of numbering.
Numbering shall be in accordance with the following provisions:

A.    On all streets in the city, each location shall be separately numbered and numbers shall be assigned upon application with the city clerk, who shall maintain a permanent record of all numbers assigned, and to whom assigned, and the date of the assignment, and a brief description of the location to which assigned.

B.    Numbers shall be assigned on north-south streets, in such a manner that even numbers shall be on the east side of such streets, and odd numbers on the west side.

C.    All locations in the first block north of First Street shall be assigned numbers commencing with 100, the second block north of Second Street shall be assigned numbers commencing with 200, and the third block with 300, etc. the numbers running from south to north, shall increase, and each block north of First Street shall be increased by 100 over the like numbers in the block immediately to the south.

D.    All locations in the first block south of First Street shall likewise be assigned numbers commencing with 100, and the second block south shall be assigned numbers commencing with 200, etc., but all locations south of First Street, on streets running north-south shall be south locations on such street, and the word “South” shall prefix the street name, immediately following the house number.

E.    In the preparation and assignment of numbers, the city clerk is directed to use the map prepared by the planning commission, but in any case, his assignment in accordance with this chapter shall be final.

F.    All locations on east-west streets shall commence at numbers 10 nearest the shore of Clear Lake, up to 99, on the east side of Main Street, increasing from east to west.

G.    All locations in the first block west of Main Street, on east-west streets shall be assigned numbers commencing with 100, in the second block, numbers commencing with 200, etc.

H.    On all east-west streets, numbers for each location shall be assigned so that even numbers are on the north side of the street and odd numbers on the south side.

I.    In any case where, because of termination of a street, long blocks in particular instances result, the assignment of numbers in such block shall, in the discretion of the city clerk, be changed from 100, to 200 or 300, etc., within such block, to keep the assignment as near parallel with like locations either north or south, or east or west, on other streets in the city. (Ord. 386 §1(B), 1962)

12.20.030 Uniformity of size, design and color.
A.    All numbers shall be of a uniform and standard size, design, color and specifications as the city council may from time to time by resolution fix and determine, for each area in the city, upon application of such area, subdivision or special district.

B.    The city council shall by resolution adopt uniform and standard size, design, etc., which shall apply in all cases in which no other or different specifications have been adopted for such applying areas. (Ord. 386 §2(A), (B), 1962)

12.20.040 Application forms.
A.    The council shall adopt forms for application for specifications, and fix the charge therefor by resolution; provided, however, that such charge shall be uniform for all applications.

B.    All forms for the operation and effect of this chapter shall be prescribed by the city council by resolution, and shall be printed and maintained by the city clerk. (Ord. 386 552(C), 6, 1962)

12.20.050 Installation and maintenance required.
It is unlawful for any person owning, maintaining, occupying or managing any location within the city to continue to do so without at all times maintaining house numbers in place, in such manner as the same are visible from the street in front of such location, after the person has been notified by notice on a form to be prescribed by the city council by resolution, of the number assigned to such location, and of the requirement of the installation and maintenance of such number. (Ord. 386 §3, 1962)

12.20.060 Supply of numbers.
It shall be the duty of the city clerk to obtain and retain in stock a supply of house numbers meeting the specifications of the city council, which said clerk shall upon application therefor issue to any person requiring the same at a price established from time to time by the city council by resolution, and which price shall not exceed the cost of the acquisition, storage and issuance of the numbers. (Ord. 387 §4, 1962)

12.20.070 Enforcement of provisions.
It is the duty of the building inspector to notify all persons of the number assigned to each location, the requirements of this chapter that numbers be installed and maintained, and to determine whether the same are installed in such manner as to be visible from the street in front of each location. (Ord. 386 §5, 1962)

12.20.080 Violation--Penalty.
A.    The failure to secure and maintain proper house numbers at any location after notice and demand to do so, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed twenty-five dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for thirty days or both such fine and imprisonment.

B.    Each separate day after such notice and demand, and except in case of inability to secure proper numbers, each such person so occupying, owning, maintaining, managing, etc., any location within the city limits shall be guilty of a separate offense. (Ord. 386 §7, 1962)

Chapter 12.23
STREET NAMES
Sections:

12.23.010    Official names.

12.23.020    Street name selections.

12.23.030    Continuous streets.

12.23.040    Street name composition.

12.23.010 Official names.
A.    City streets may be officially named or the official name of an existing street may be changed after submittal of the proposed name to the city planning commission and city council. Submittal of a proposed name may be made by application of affected property owners or by city staff. Upon submittal of a proposed street name or street name change, the matter shall be reviewed by the city planning commission for conformance with the general plan and the existing city street name network. The planning commission shall make a recommendation to the Lakeport city council concerning the proposed name. The city council shall conduct a public hearing after giving notice in at least two public places along the street to be affected by the proposed name change and by mailing a notice of the hearing to property owners contiguous to the affected street at least ten days prior to the hearing date. At the public hearing, the city council shall consider the staff report, the recommendation of the planning commission, and the comments from affected property owners, tenants or occupants that are contiguous to the street.

B.    After considering all facts and information, the city council shall determine the need for said name or name change and make a decision thereon. Said new name or name change shall be reflected in a resolution adopted by the Lakeport city council. Thereafter said street shall be known by the name so designated. The new name or name change shall become effective sixty days after adoption of the resolution of street name or name change by the Lakeport city council. A copy of the resolution of street name or name change shall be sent to all affected city, county and state agencies, and affected property owners.

C.    Any existing street which has not been officially named by the city council shall be subject to the same notice, hearing, and decision-making process as set forth above. Thereafter, said unnamed street shall be known by the name so designated.

D.    New street names proposed as part of a subdivision shall be reviewed by staff in terms of conformance with the street name network so as to eliminate the potential for duplicate street names. Proposed subdivision street names shall be identified on the subdivision map and upon recordation of the subdivision or parcel map shall be known by the name so designated. (Ord. 739 (part), 1992)

12.23.020 Street name selections.
Street name selections shall be made on the basis of appropriateness and shall not be excessively long. Names which are historically or descriptively significant to the Lakeport area are encouraged. All streets shall be known by the same name for the entire length. Where a street changes a direction by ninety degrees or a lesser angle, each direction should be known by a different name except as otherwise provided by the Lakeport city council for a continuous collector and arterial street. (Ord. 739 (part), 1992)

12.23.030 Continuous streets.
Only those streets that extend both north and south of First Street shall be designated with the prefix “N” (North) if they are north of First Street and shall be designated with an “S” (South) if they are south of First Street. Those streets that do not intersect with and do not extend either north or south of First Street shall not be designated with the “N” or “S” directional suffix. (Ord. 739 (part), 1992)

12.23.040 Street name composition.
Street names shall contain only alphanumeric characters and shall not contain any form of punctuation. (Ord. 766, 1995)

Chapter 12.24
MAILBOXES
Sections:

12.24.010    Location.

12.24.020    Specifications.

12.24.030    Rules and regulations on file.

12.24.040    Determination of curblines.

12.24.050    Use of one side of street required when.

12.24.060    Removal or relocation--Conditions.

12.24.070    Removal or relocation--Notice.

12.24.080    Removal or relocation--Fee.

12.24.010 Location.
All mailboxes and/or similar or other containers for newspapers, shall be installed and maintained at the curbline of the city streets, and shall be located at the curb in such manner that they will not interfere with existing driveways or entrances to property, at a point in front of the property of the addressee, or as hereinafter provided, immediately across the street therefrom. (Ord. 394 §1, 1963)

12.24.020 Specifications.
Mailboxes shall be of a standard size, shape, construction and erected in accordance with the requirements and regulations of the Postmaster General of the United States, shall bear proper identification, and be installed at such height as required by said regulations. (Ord. 394 §2, 1963)

12.24.030 Rules and regulations on file.
The city clerk shall keep on file in the City Hall, a copy of all regulations, rules and requirements of the Postmaster General of the United States concerning the matters set forth in this chapter, and shall maintain the same available for examination by the citizens of the city. (Ord. 394 §3, 1963)

12.24.040 Determination of curblines.
The superintendent of streets, or such other officer of the city as the city council may from time to time designate, shall upon request, fix the location of the curbline upon city streets, maintaining a record of the request and location given, and the determination so made shall govern the location for the purposes of this chapter until some different or other determination is made by the city council, upon request therefor or upon its own motion. (Ord. 394 §4, 1963)

12.24.050 Use of one side of street required when.
On certain street in the city, all mailboxes shall be located on one side of the street only, as may from time to time be prescribed by the postmaster of the city, and filed with the city clerk. The particular streets so designated shall be maintained on file with the city clerk and shall be made available to the general public. (Ord. 394 §5, 1963)

12.24.060 Removal or relocation--Conditions.
The city shall remove from the city streets any mailbox and standard not located in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, or upon change of location of the curbline, after written notice to the property owner or addressee, for which the same is located, which notice shall specify the time the same shall be removed, and the reason therefor. (Ord. 394 §6, 1963)

12.24.070 Removal or relocation--Notice.
The city clerk shall give the owner or resident of the property or residence for which the mailbox is located, if known, or the same can be ascertained with reasonable diligence, not less than ten days’ notice of any demand for removal or relocation of any mailbox at the convenience of the city, and not less than five days’ notice of intent to or demand to remove or relocate any mailbox not located in accordance with this chapter. No penalty or other right shall accrue to the city or any of its officers for failure to give such notice, except as may be determined by the city council. (Ord. 394 §7, 1963)

12.24.080 Removal or relocation--Fee.
The city shall be entitled to the sum of five dollars as and for the reasonable value of any services performed by the city in removing any mailbox from the city streets not located in accordance with this chapter, or not relocated after notice to do so as set forth in this chapter. No reinstallation of any mailbox for the property so deprived of a mailbox shall be permitted on any street in the city until the charge for such removal has been paid. (Ord. 394 §8, 1963)

Chapter 12.28
FLOATS, FISHING AND BOAT OPERATION
Sections:

ARTICLE I. PIERS, FLOATS AND BOAT LAUNCHING RAMPS

12.28.010    Findings.

12.28.020    Fishing and swimming prohibited where.

12.28.030    Docking--Hours permitted.

12.28.040    Camping prohibited.

12.28.050    Docking--Third and Fifth Street ramps.

12.28.055    Parking restricted.

12.28.060    Exceptions.

12.28.065    Violation--Penalty.

ARTICLE II. USE OF MUNICIPAL WHARVES

12.28.070    Fishing permitted--Casting style restricted.

12.28.080    Littering prohibited.

12.28.090    Vandalism prohibited.

12.28.100    Docking or anchoring--Residents--Time limits.

12.28.110    Docking or anchoring--Nonresidents--Time limits.

12.28.120    Enforcement authority.

12.28.130    Violation--Penalty.

ARTICLE III. OPERATION OF WATERCRAFT

12.28.140    Hazardous operation prohibited.

12.28.150    Operation while intoxicated prohibited.

12.28.160    Violation--Penalty.

ARTICLE I. PIERS, FLOATS AND BOAT LAUNCHING RAMPS

12.28.010 Findings.
It is found and determined that the public health, safety and welfare of all the citizens of the city require that the use and enjoyment of city piers, floats and launching ramps located on Clear Lake be regulated as follows in this article. (Ord. 778 §1(part), 1996)

12.28.020 Fishing and swimming Prohibited where.
Fishing or swimming is not permitted on, to or from the piers or floats immediately adjacent to the Third Street and Fifth Street boat launching ramps. (Ord. 778 §1(1), 1996)

12.28.030 Docking--Hours permitted.
Docking at all piers or floats, except the floats located adjacent to the Third Street and Fifth Street ramps, is permitted for public use and convenience from five a.m. until midnight; docking is prohibited between the hours of midnight and five a.m. (Ord. 778 §1(2), 1996)

12.28.040 Camping prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person or persons to camp, or to occupy overnight between the hours of midnight and five a.m., any public piers, floats or related facilities along the boundaries of the waterfront of the city. (Ord. 778 §1(3), 1996)

12.28.050 Docking--Third and Fifth Street ramps.
Docking at the piers or floats located adjacent to the Third Street and Fifth Street ramps will only be permitted as follows:

The sides of said piers or floats which are adjacent to the ramps, and which are painted green in color, are reserved for public use and enjoyment; each user is limited to a maximum ten-minute docking period. (Ord. 778 §1(4), 1996)

12.28.055 Parking restricted.
Parking a vehicle or boat on either the Third Street or Fifth Street ramps, or blocking vehicle or boat access thereto, for more than ten minutes is prohibited. (Ord. 778 §1(5), 1996)

12.28.060 Exceptions.
Exceptions to this article may be made for special events that have been approved in advance by the city council. (Ord. 778 §1(6), 1996)

12.28.065 Violation--Penalty.
Any violation of this article is an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars for each violation. (Ord. 778 §1(7), 1996)

ARTICLE II. USE OF MUNICIPAL WHARVES

12.28.070 Fishing permitted--Casting style restricted.
Fishing with hook and line from municipal wharves and piers is permitted, but it is unlawful for any person to use throw-out lines or to throw lines overhead. (Ord. 135 §1, 1911)

12.28.080 Littering prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to deposit and leave any fish, remnants of such, bottles or other debris on any public municipal wharf or wharves, but every person bringing the same thereon shall keep them in a receptacle and when leaving, remove them. (Ord. 135 §2, 1911)

12.28.090 Vandalism prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to write upon, cut or otherwise deface any portion of the wharf or wharves or any buildings attached thereto. (Ord. 135 §3, 1911)

12.28.100 Docking or anchoring--Residents--Time limits.
It is unlawful for any person or persons residing in the city to tie, anchor or leave boats, barges or any other floating vessel or vessels upon the street side of any public municipal wharf longer than one hour at any one time. (Ord. 135 §4, 1911)

12.28.110 Docking or anchoring--Nonresidents--Time limits.
It is unlawful for any person or persons, nonresidents of the city, to tie, anchor or leave any boats, barges, or any other floating vessel or vessels upon the street side of any public municipal wharf longer than five hours at any one time; provided, however, any person having barges to load or unload may tie up to the street side of any public municipal wharf for a period of not longer than eight hours at any one time of loading or unloading. (Ord. 135 §5, 1911)

12.28.120 Enforcement authority.
It is made the duty of the chief of police to enforce the provisions of this article and to arrest any person violating them. (Ord. 135 §6, 1911)

12.28.130 Violation--Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be fined not less than five dollars nor more than twenty-five dollars. (Ord. 135 §7, 1911)

ARTICLE III. OPERATION OF WATERCRAFT

12.28.140 Hazardous operation prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to operate any boat or other water-going device on any waters within the city limits of the city in a manner dangerous to other boats or the life or limb of any person. (Ord. 348 §1, 1957)

12.28.150 Operation while intoxicated prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to operate any boat or other watergoing device upon any waters within the city limits of the city while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotics, or other drugs impairing the physical abilities of the operator. (Ord. 348 §2, 1957)

12.28.160 Violation--Penalty.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction therefor, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than thirty days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 348 §3, 1957)

Title 13
PUBLIC SERVICES
Chapters:

13.04    Water System

13.08    Cross-Connection Control

13.12    Water Rationing Procedure

13.16    Underground Utility Districts

13.20    Sewer Use and Pretreatment

13.22    Use of Public Sewers

13.30    Water System Connections

Chapter 13.04
WATER SYSTEM
Sections:

13.04.010    Water department established.

13.04.020    Office of municipal waterworks.

13.04.030    Administration.

13.04.040    Consideration of resolutions.

13.04.050    Charges--Generally.

13.04.060    Charges--Lien.

13.04.070    Meter--Required.

13.04.080    Meter--Two or more consumers.

13.04.090    Prohibited acts.

13.04.100    Fire emergency restrictions.

13.04.110    Shutoff valve required.

13.04.111    Water pressure regulator required.

13.04.120    Leaking pipes and fixtures prohibited.

13.04.130    Nonliability of city.

13.04.140    Right of entry for inspection.

13.04.150    Shutoff for repairs.

13.04.160    Shutoff for nonpayment of bills.

13.04.170    Violation--Penalty.

13.04.010 Water department established.
A city water department for managing the municipal waterworks for the city is established, which shall be under the control of the city council. (Ord. 335 §1, 1954)

13.04.020 Office of municipal waterworks.
The office of the municipal waterworks of the city shall be at the City Hall, or at such other headquarters of the offices of the city as the city council may provide from time to time. (Ord. 335 §3, 1954)

13.04.030 Administration.
A.    The city council shall, as the city water department requires, appoint a water collector who shall collect the water bills, make deposits of all moneys so collected and be qualified and required to do the bookkeeping and accounting for the same, on the forms and in the method that may be designated by the city council.

B.    The city council shall appoint a superintendent, who shall have charge of the waterworks system, and shall be responsible for the enforcement of the rules, regulations and the carrying out of the same, under the direction of the city council.

C.    The city council shall fix the compensation of all employees and prescribe their duties.

D.    The city council shall by resolution prescribe the manner and conditions under which application may be made for supplying of water by all persons desiring a water supply from the municipal waterworks.

E.    All applicants making application for connection to the municipal waterworks shall run his service pipe to the curbline of the property to connect to the meter placed by the water department. (Ord. 335 §§2, 4(part), 20, 1954)

13.04.040 Consideration of resolutions.
All resolutions provided for by this chapter shall be considered at two separate meetings of the city council, one of which may be a special called meeting or a regular adjourned meeting, and one of which may be the meeting at which said resolution is finally passed and adopted, and shall not be required to be published and become effective at the time provided in the resolution, or if no provision therefor is made, upon its final passage and adoption. (Ord. 335 §6, 1954)

13.04.050 Charges--Generally.
The city council shall, by resolution, prescribe the charges for water, and the charges shall be uniform for all applicants within the city; and the manner and time of payment and the method of collection thereof. (Ord. 335 §4(part), 1954)

13.04.060 Charges--Lien.
A.    All charges for water shall be a charge upon the property upon which such water is furnished, and shall constitute a lien on said property; and such lien may be enforced in any court of competent jurisdiction in the manner that mortgages are foreclosed provided in the Code of Civil Procedure of the state. Such charges shall also be a personal charge against the owner or occupant of the property (at the option of the city water department) and may be collected by suit therefor.

B.    Each applicant or owner or occupant of any premises supplied with water shall be responsible for water bills from the time the use of water is commenced until the collector of the waterworks system shall be notified in writing to discontinue such service.

C.    Any fees, charges and penalties authorized pursuant to this chapter which remain unpaid after the delinquent dates provided pursuant to Section 13.04.050 may be collected thereafter by the city as provided in this section and otherwise as allowed by law.

1.    The city council shall cause a report of delinquent water fees, charges and penalties to be prepared periodically. The city council shall fix a time, date and place for hearing the report and any objections or protests thereto.

2.    The city council shall cause notice of hearing to be mailed to the landowners listed on the report not less than fifteen days prior to the date of the hearing.

3.    At the hearing, the city council shall hear any objections or protests of landowners liable to be assessed for delinquent fees, charges and/or penalties. The city council may make such revisions or corrections to the report as it deems just, after which, by resolution, the report shall be confirmed.

4.    The delinquent fees, charges and/or penalties set forth in the report as confirmed shall constitute special assessments against the respective parcels of land, and are a lien on the property for the amount of such delinquent fees, charges and/or penalties and costs incurred by the city as authorized by this chapter. A certified copy of the confirmed report shall be filed with the city clerk, or auditor appointed by the city council, for amounts of the respective parcels of land as they appear on the current assessment roll. The lien created attaches upon recordation, in the office of the county recorder, of a certified copy of the resolution of confirmation. The assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as other property taxes and penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for such taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of city ad valorem property taxes shall be applicable to such assessment. (Ord. 908 §1, 2016: Ord. 335 §7, 1954)

13.04.070 Meter--Required.
All sales of water shall be by meter. (Ord. 826 §1, 2003: Ord. 335 §4(part), 1954)

13.04.080 Meter--Two or more consumers.
A.    Two or more water consumers may occupy a single structure and be served by a master water meter, provided that:

1.    The division of the structure does not now or in the future result in separate ownerships;

2.    The structure use is consistent with Title 17 of this code and improvements are made with the proper building permits, at which time the city shall determine the adequacy of the master water meter to serve the proposed use;

3.    The property owner or agent shall agree in writing to pay all charges for water served to the premises;

4.    A hookup charge is paid for each residential unit in residential structures as defined in Chapter 17.08 of this code shall be exempted from paying a hookup charge. The hookup charge shall be based on the size of the water meter required for each unit and shall not be less than that for a 5/8” X 3/4” meter. A unit shall be defined as a separate living space. In the case of common living spaces, the equivalent of a unit shall be defined as the full-time occupancy of each 2.3 persons using the common space. (Ord. 826 §2, 2003; Ord. 677 §1, 1988: Ord. 335 §4(part), 1954)

13.04.090 Prohibited acts.
It is unlawful for:

A.    Any person to tamper with or interfere with or damage any meter, pipeline or other property of the waterworks department;

B.    Any person to pile any lumber, brush or other objects on top of, or break or cause to be broken, any meter box, meter, cut off, hydrant, faucet or exposed pipe or conduit of the city water system;

C.    Any person to make any bypass between the meter and the main, or to make any connection with the main without permission of the superintendent of city waterworks;

D.    Any person, other than the authorized employees of the city water department, to turn the water on after the same has been turned off at any meter or connection, or for any person to take or use water without first notifying the superintendent of waterworks;

E.    Any owner or occupant of property supplied with water to furnish water to others, or use the same on other property than that for which the same has been furnished and charges thereon paid;

F.    Any person to take water from the waterworks and system, save as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 335 §5, 1954)

13.04.100 Fire emergency restrictions.
In case of fire alarm or other emergency, all water may be immediately shut off by an authorized employee of the city, excepting that for use of said fire or other emergency; and any member of the fire department and city employee may enter upon any premises within said city for the purpose of closing any hydrant or water outlet that may be open at such a time. (Ord. 335 §8, 1954)

13.04.110 Shutoff valve required.
Each consumer shall have on his own premises a hand valve, in a place easy of access for the convenient shutting off of the water supply to such consumer. (Ord. 335 §9, 1954)

13.04.111 Water pressure regulator required.
Each connection to the city water system serving a building shall have a water pressure regulator to limit the static water pressure at the building being served to a maximum of eighty pounds per square inch in accordance with Section 608.2 of the 1998 California Plumbing Code. The water pressure regulator shall be located between the required shutoff valve and the service to the building. The water pressure regulator shall be installed, owned and maintained by the owner of the property being served. (Ord. 801, 1999)

13.04.120 Leaking pipes and fixtures prohibited.
Each consumer of water shall keep all connections, faucets, hydrants, pipes, outlets and plumbing fixtures tight and free from leakage, dripping or waste of water; and for failure to do so, the superintendent of waterworks may shut off said water supplied to such premises, until said leaks or waste shall be prevented. (Ord. 335 §10, 1954)

13.04.130 Nonliability of city.
The city and the water department will not be responsible for the breaking of any pipe or service cock or for any other interruption of the supply of water by reason of the breaking of machinery or stoppage for necessary repairs. (Ord. 335 §12, 1954)

13.04.140 Right of entry for inspection.
Any officer, inspector, foreman or other authorized employee of the water department shall, upon presentation of proper credentials, have free access at all reasonable hours to any premises supplied with city water for the purpose of making any inspection of the entire water system upon the premises. (Ord. 335 §11, 1954)

13.04.150 Shutoff for repairs.
The city reserves the right to shut off the water at any time for the purpose of making repairs or making extensions to the system or for any other purpose and will not be responsible for any damage resulting from the same. (Ord. 335 §13, 1954)

13.04.160 Shutoff for nonpayment of bills.
The city reserves the right to shut off the water from the premises of any person, firm or corporation known to be using or to have been using the water in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. Shutoff for nonpayment shall only be done after notice and opportunity to be heard provided prior to water service in fact being shut off. Parties found to be intentionally violating the above noted provisions shall not be entitled to water service until they legally connect to the water system and pay an additional sum of five hundred dollars as a penalty for each such violation. (Ord. 826 §3, 2003: Ord. 609 §1, 1982: Ord. 335 §14, 1954)

13.04.170 Violation--Penalty.
Any person or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter or who interferes or tampers with or opens, disconnects, connects, uncovers, mutilates or damages any covers, mutilates or damages any water pipe or mains or any connection thereof, or anything appurtenant thereto, or used therewith, without having first obtained permission from the city council shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine in the sum of not exceeding one hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period not exceeding fifty days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 335 §15, 1954)

Chapter 13.08
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL1
Sections:

13.08.010    Purpose.

13.08.020    Authority.

13.08.030    Definitions.

13.08.040    Mitigation and prevention.

13.08.050    Discontinuance of service.

13.08.060    Right of entry.

13.08.070    Requirements for certification as a backflow prevention device tester.

13.08.075    Backflow prevention device tester responsibilities.

13.08.080    Remedies cumulative.

13.08.010 Purpose.
The purpose of these regulations is to protect the city of Lakeport water system against actual or potential cross-connections to such potential sources of contamination or pollution as may exist on the water user’s premises:

A.    By eliminating existing cross-connections between the City of Lakeport water system and auxiliary water supplies or other sources of potential contamination; and

B.    By preventing the occurrence of future cross-connections. (Ord. 736 (part), 1992)

13.08.020 Authority.
These regulations are in accordance with the State of California Administrative Code, Title 17 - Sections 7583 et seq. (Ord. 736 (part), 1992)

13.08.030 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the words set out in this section shall have the following meanings:

“Air-gap separation (AG)” is a physical break between the supply line and a receiving vessel.

“Approved water supply” is a water supply whose potability is regulated by a state or local health agency, i.e., the city of Lakeport water system.

“Auxiliary water supply” is any water supply other than that received from a public water system.

“City” means city of Lakeport and duly authorized agents.

“Cross-connection” is an unprotected actual or potential connection between a potable water system used to supply water for drinking purposes and any source or system containing unapproved water or a substance that is not or cannot be approved as safe, wholesome, and potable. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or change-over devices, or other devices through which backflow could occur, shall be considered to be cross-connections.

“Cross-connection control survey” shall mean any written correspondence from city to a water user requesting information related to the implementation, compliance and monitoring of the provisions of this chapter.

“Double check valve assembly (DC)” is an assembly of at least two independently acting check valves including tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the check valve assembly and test cocks available for testing the watertightness of each check valve.

“Health agency’ means the California Department of Health Services.

“Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device (RP)” is a backflow preventer incorporating not less than two check valves, an automatically operated differential relief valve located between the two check valves, a tightly closing shut-off valve on each side of the check valve assembly, and equipped with necessary test cocks for testing.

“User connection” is the point of connection of a user’s piping to the water supplier’s facilities.

“Water user” is any person obtaining water from a public water supply including the owner of the property receiving such water. (Ord. 736 (part), 1992)

13.08.040 Mitigation and prevention.
A.    No Cross-Connection Allowed. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation at any time to make or maintain or cause to be made or maintained, temporarily or permanently, for any period of time whatever, any cross-connection between plumbing pipes or water fixtures being served with water by the city and any other source of water supply or to maintain any sanitary fixture or other appurtenances of fixtures which by reason of their construction may cause or allow backflow into the city of Lakeport water system and/or service of water pipes or fixtures of any user of the city of Lakeport water system. Each property owner shall complete a cross-connection control survey when requested by the city to do so.

B.    Backflow Prevention Devices. Wherever backflow protection has been found necessary on a user connection, then any and all connections to the city of Lakeport water system entering such premises, buildings, or structures shall be protected by approved backflow prevention devices and shall be subject to the following conditions:

1.    Backflow prevention devices shall be installed, tested and certified within sixty days of notification by the city to do so.

2.    A permit shall be obtained from the city building department prior to installing any devices; the permit fee shall be waived for a period of six months following adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

3.    Only backflow prevention devices approved by the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern California shall be approved for installation.

4.    Backflow prevention devices shall be selected and installed in a manner prescribed in the State Department of Health Services Sanitary Engineering Section’s “Manual of Cross-Connection Control Procedures and Practices” or as prescribed by another acceptable authority and plans for which have been approved by the city engineer.

5.    The State Department of Public Health requires that the owners of any premises on which backflow prevention devices are installed, shall have the devices tested annually by a certified tester. Reports of such tests shall be filed with the city. These devices shall be serviced, overhauled or replaced whenever they are found to be defective or substandard and all costs of testing, repair and maintenance shall be borne by the water user.

6.    Backflow prevention devices shall be subject to occasional inspection and testing by the city.

C.    Type of Backflow Protection Required. The type of protection that shall be provided to prevent backflow into the city of Lakeport water system shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard that exists on the consumer’s premises. The type of protective device required (listed in an increasing level of protection) shall be: Double Detector Check Valve Assembly (DDC), Double Check Valve Assembly (DC), Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Device (RP), or an Air-Gap Separation (AG). The water use may choose a higher level of protection than required by the city of Lakeport. The minimum types of backflow protection required to protect the public water supply, will be determined by the table below. Situations which are not covered in the table below shall be evaluated on a case-by-case basis and the appropriate backflow protection shall be determined by the city of Lakeport.

Table of Hazards and Protection Required

Degree of Hazard

Minimum Type of Backflow Prevention

1.

Sewage and Hazardous Substances.

a.

Premises where the public water system is used to supplement the reclaimed water supply.

AG

b.

Premises where there are wastewater pumping and/or treatment plants and there is no interconnection with the potable water system. This does not include a single-family residence that has a sewage lift pump. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the city of Lakeport.

AG/RP

c.

Premises where reclaimed water is used and there is no interconnection with the potable water system. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the city of Lakeport.

AG/RP

d.

Premises where hazardous substances are handled in any manner in which the substances may enter the potable water system. This does not include a single-family residence that has a sewage lift pump. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the city of Lakeport.

AG/RP

e.

Premises where there are irrigation systems into which fertilizers, herbicides, or pesticide are, or can be, injected.

RP

2.

Auxiliary Water Supplies.

a.

Premises where there is an auxiliary water supply which is interconnected with the public water system. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the city of Lakeport.

AG/RP

b.

Premises where there is an auxiliary water supply and there are no interconnections with the public water system. A DC may be provided in lieu of an RP if approved by the city of Lakeport.

RP/DC

3.

Fire Protection Systems.

a.

Premises where the fire system is directly supplied from the public water system and there is an auxiliary water supply on or to the premises (not interconnected).

DDC

b.

Premises where the fire system is supplied from the public water system and interconnected with an auxiliary water supply. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the city of Lakeport.

AG

c.

Premises where the fire system is supplied from the public water system and where either elevated storage tanks or fire pumps which take suction from private reservoirs or tanks are used.

DC

4.

Dockside Watering Points and Marine Facilities.

a.

Pier hydrants for supplying water to vessels for any purpose.

RP

b.

Premises where there are marine facilities.

RP

5.

Premises where entry is restricted so that inspection for cross-connection cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at sufficiently short notice to assure that cross-connections do not exist.

RP

6.

Premises where there is a repeated history of cross-connections being established or re-established.

RP

D.    Protection Against Interstreet Flow. Two or more user connections supplying water from different street mains to the same building, structure or premises through which an interstreet flow may occur, shall have backflow prevention devices on each user connection.

E.    Violations. Violations of this chapter include but are not limited to the following:

1.    Failure of a water user to truthfully complete and return a cross-connection control survey to the city within fifteen days of the date that said survey was provided to the water user;

2.    Removing, bypassing or otherwise rendering inoperable a required backflow prevention device;

3.    Failure to provide the city with annual test results conducted by a certified tester within thirty days of notification to do so by city;

4.    Failure to install a backflow prevention device, have same tested by a certified tester and furnish said test results to the city;

5.    Failure to install a backflow prevention device with the proper permits;

6.    Failure to notify city prior to providing an auxiliary water supply to a property supplied by city water.

F.    Penalties for Violations. Violations of this chapter shall be cited as infractions. Citations shall be issued by the city police department. Any person convicted of an infraction for violation of this chapter shall be punished by:

1.    A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation;

2.    A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year;

3.    A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation for the same ordinance within one year.

Each such person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted to continue.

G.    Auxiliary Water Supply. No person shall provide an auxiliary water supply to a property without notification to city if said property is served by city water. (Ord. 736 (part), 1992)

13.08.050 Discontinuance of service.
A.    In addition to citing water users for violations of this chapter, water service to any premises may be discontinued by the city after notification if:

1.    Cross-connections exist on the premises;

2.    If any defect is found in an installed backflow prevention device;

3.    If a backflow prevention device has been removed, bypassed or rendered inoperable;

4.    If the water user fails to install a backflow prevention device when required by the city;

5.    If the user fails to submit a copy of the annual backflow device test results within the time specified.

B.    Water service will not be restored until such condition or defects are corrected unless the user posts a deposit with city in the amount of five hundred dollars. Three hundred dollars of the deposit will be refunded if user corrects the condition or defect which resulted in the water service being discontinued.

C.    If user fails to correct the condition or defect within thirty days of posting the deposit, the entire deposit shall be forfeited to city and the water service will again be disconnected until the condition or defect is corrected. (Ord. 736 (part), 1992)

13.08.060 Right of entry.
The city representative assigned to inspect premises relative to possible hazards shall carry proper credentials of his office, upon exhibition of which he shall have the right of entry, during usual business hours, to inspect any and all buildings and premises in the performance of his duty. This right of entry shall be a condition of provision of water service. (Ord. 736 (part), 1992)

13.08.070 Requirements for certification as a backflow prevention device tester.
A.    Each applicant for certification as a tester of backflow prevention devices shall file an application with the utility superintendent, together with a fee as may be established by the city council. The utility superintendent shall issue a backflow and testing certificate for qualified applicants.

B.    Competency in all phases of backflow prevention device testing and repair must be demonstrated by means of education and/or experience in order to obtain a city backflow testing certificate. The following are minimum requirements:

1.    Hold a valid certification from the American Water Works Association (A.W.W.A.) California-Nevada Section, or such other organization that may be recognized by the city of Lakeport and the health agency.

2.    Evidence that he has available the necessary tools and equipment to properly test such devices. (Ord. 736 (part), 1992)

13.08.075 Backflow prevention device tester responsibilities.
A.    The tester shall be responsible for the competency and accuracy of all tests and reports prepared.

B.    The city backflow testing certificate issued to any tester expires concurrently with his A.W.W.A. certification and may be revoked, suspended or not renewed by the city for improper testing, repairs and/or reporting. (Ord. 736 (part), 1992)

13.08.080 Remedies cumulative.
The procedures and penalties provided for in this chapter are cumulative and nonexclusive. (Ord. 736 (part), 1992)

1
    Prior ordinance history: Ord. 705.


Chapter 13.12
WATER RATIONING PROCEDURE
Sections:

13.12.010    Purpose.

13.12.020    Definitions.

13.12.030    Declaration of water emergency--When.

13.12.040    Notice.

13.12.050    Wasteful uses of water are prohibited.

13.12.060    Request for voluntary restrictions of water use--Stage I.

13.12.070    Prohibition of non-essential water use--Stage II.

13.12.080    Further non-essential uses prohibited-- Stage III.

13.12.090    Water rates.

13.12.100    Variances.

13.12.110    Landscaping maintenance.

13.12.120    Water shutoff.

13.12.130    Enforcement--Designated persons.

13.12.140    Violation--Penalty.

13.12.010 Purpose.
A.    This chapter is intended to establish a procedure whereby the city council can restrict or prohibit demands on the existing water supply; prohibit all non-essential uses of water as defined in this chapter; and to allocate the available water supply during any water shortage emergency to ensure that sufficient water will be available for human consumption, sanitation and fire protection.

B.    The purpose of this chapter is to preserve the use of the city’s water supply, to eliminate all non-essential water usage, and to provide for an allocation of existing water resources to ensure a sufficient water supply for human consumption, sanitation and fire protection. This chapter shall be liberally construed to effectuate its purpose. (Ord. 693 §I(1), (2), 1989)

13.12.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as stated in this section.

A.    “Customer” means a person using water supplied by the city of Lakeport.

B.    “Coordinator” means the mayor of the city of Lakeport or his/her designated representative.

C.    “Department” means the public works department of the city.

D.    “Hand-watering” means the water supplied to a customer through a hose connected to the customer’s piping system while such hose is handheld and such water is used outside of the customer’s home.

E.    “Irrigate” means to water land, whether by channels, by flooding, by sprinkling, or any other means whatsoever except hand-watering.

F.    “Water” means water supplied by the city of Lakeport. (Ord. 693 §I(3), 1989)

13.12.030 Declaration of water emergency--When.
When it appears that the city may be unable to supply the normal demands and requirements of water customers, the city council may, by resolution, declare a water emergency. The resolution shall specify the stage of emergency existing as defined in this chapter and shall place into effect the appropriate provisions of this chapter. Resolutions declaring Stage II and/or Stage III emergencies, as defined in this chapter, shall be effective immediately upon being passed by the city council. (Ord. 693 §I(4), 1989)

13.12.040 Notice.
All resolutions, except those declaring a Stage II or Stage III emergency, passed by the city council under this chapter shall be published by the city clerk at least once a week for four weeks in a newspaper of general circulation located within the county of Lake. (Ord. 693 §I(15), 1989)

13.12.050 Wasteful uses of water are prohibited.
Wasteful uses shall be determined by the coordinator and shall include, but not be limited to, allowing water to flow off of the customer’s property, excessive irrigation, and failure to repair leaks. (Ord. 693 §I(5), 1989)

13.12.060 Request for voluntary restrictions of water use--Stage I.
Whenever the city council, by resolution, declares that a Stage I water emergency exists, the mayor shall issue a proclamation urging citizens to institute such water conservation measures on a voluntary basis as may be required to reduce water demand to coincide with the available supply. The, city clerk shall publish such proclamation at least once a week for four weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within the county for the purpose of giving notice to the city’s water customers. (Ord. 693 §I(6), 1989)

13.12.070 Prohibition of non-essential water use--Stage II.
A.    It is unlawful for any person to use water for any non-essential use as defined in this chapter, whenever the city council determines by resolution, that a Stage II water emergency exists.

B.    The following uses of water shall be considered as non-essential:

1.    Use of water from public hydrants for any purpose other than fire protection and/or prevention;

2.    Use of water through any meter when the consumer had been given two days notice to repair one or more leaks and has failed to complete such repairs;

3.    Use of water to irrigate grass, lawns, ground cover, shrubbery, vegetable gardens, trees, or other outdoor vegetation by other than hand watering and/or drip irrigation;

4.    Use of water for the construction of any structure, including such use in dust control;

5.    Use of water to wash any sidewalk, walkways, driveway, street, parking lot, or other hard-surfaced area by hosing or by otherwise direct use of water from faucets or other outlets.

6.    Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, trailer, airplane, or boat by hosing or otherwise using water directly from a faucet or other outlet.

7.    Use of water to fill or refill any swimming pool. (Ord. 693 §I(7), 1989)

13.12.080 Further non-essential uses prohibited--Stage III.
In addition to the non-essential uses set forth in Section 13.12.070, the following additional uses are determined to be non-essential when the council has, by resolution, declared that a Stage III water emergency exists.

A.    Use of water in excess of a daily usage allotment of fifty gallons per day per permanent resident (two hundred cubic feet per month per permanent resident);

B.    All other uses not expressly set forth in Stage II shall be limited to fifty percent of the prior water use for a similar period as determined by the department from its records. Where no such record exists, prior water use shall be deemed to be the average prior water use of similar existing services as shall be determined by the department from its records.

C.    The use of water to irrigate and for hand watering is prohibited.

D.    For the purposes of this section, the number of permanent residents shall be determined as follows: Each customer in whose name water is supplied to a residence shall, upon request of the coordinator, advise him/her under penalty of perjury of the number of permanent residents using water supplied to that residence. If such a residential customer shall fail to so advise the coordinator, such residence shall be permitted the water allocation provided for in this chapter for one permanent resident. (Ord. 693 §I(8), 1989)

13.12.090 Water rates.
Water rates shall be set from time to time by resolution of the city council. Water rates may be set for the purposes of encouraging conservative water usage practices. (Ord. 693 I(9), 1989)

13.12.100 Variances.
A.    The coordinator may:

1.    Grant temporary variances for the uses of water otherwise prohibited; or

2.    Adjust, temporarily, any or all customer’s allotment, if he/she finds and determines that, due to unusual circumstances, to fail to grant such a variance would cause an emergency condition affecting health, sanitation, or fire protection of the applicant or the public; further, he/she may grant such adjustment in the case of a mixed residential/non-residential use if he/she finds that such adjustment is necessary to place an equivalent allotment burden on the applicant.

B.    The city council shall ratify or revoke any such variance or adjustment at its next scheduled meeting. No such variance or adjustment shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any violations of this chapter. (Ord. 693 §I(10(part)), 1989)

13.12.110 Landscaping maintenance.
Use permits requiring the maintenance of landscaping shall be modified to suspend the maintenance provision whenever a Stage III water condition is declared, and property owners shall not be required by the city to replace affected landscaping. (Ord. 693 §I(10(part)), 1989)

13.12.120 Water shutoff.
Water may be shut off by the department with appropriate notice whenever the coordinator determines there has been a wilful failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter, any other provisions of this code to the contrary notwithstanding. Charges for reconnection or restoration of service which has been terminated pursuant to this section shall be at the rates and on the conditions set by resolution or other appropriate action of the city council. (Ord. 693 §I(11), 1989)

13.12.130 Enforcement--Designated persons.
A.    Each police officer of the city shall, in connection with his/her duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this chapter.

B.    The coordinator and his designated employees shall have the duty and are authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 693 §I(13), 1989)

13.12.140 Violation--Penalty.
It is a misdemeanor for any person to use or apply water received from the city contrary to or in violation of any restriction or prohibition specified in this chapter, punishable by being imprisoned in the county jail for not more than thirty days, or by fine of not more than three hundred dollars, or both such fine and imprisonment. Any violation of this chapter permitted to continue after notice shall be a separate offense and shall be punishable as such under this section; further, each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 693 §1(12), 1989)

Chapter 13.16
UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
Sections:

13.16.010    Definitions.

13.16.020    Public hearing by council.

13.16.030    Designation by resolution.

13.16.040    Removal of overhead facilities-- Requirements.

13.16.050    Removal of overhead facilities--Temporary exception.

13.16.060    Removal of overhead facilities--Exceptions.

13.16.070    Notice to affected parties.

13.16.080    Responsibility of utilities.

13.16.090    Responsibility of property owners.

13.16.100    Responsibility of city.

13.16.110    Extension of time limits.

13.16.120    Violation--Penalty.

13.16.010 Definitions.
Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases defined in this section are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions:

A.    “Commission” means the Public Utilities Commission of the state.

B.    “Person” means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships and their agents and employees.

C.    “Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures” means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar service.

D.    “Underground utility district” or “district” means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.16.030 of this chapter.

E.    “Utility” includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. (Ord. 437 §I, 1968)

13.16.020 Public hearing by council.
A.    The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service.

B.    The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least fifteen days prior to the date thereof.

C.    Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard.

D.    The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 686, 1988: Ord. 437 §2, 1968)

13.16.030 Designation by resolution.
A.    If, after any such public hearing the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (Ord. 437 §3, 1968)

13.16.040 Removal of overhead facilities--Requirements.
Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 13.16.030 of this chapter, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when said overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as said overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 13.16.090 of this chapter, and for such reasonable time required to remove said facilities after the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. 437 54, 1968)

13.16.050 Removal of overhead facilities--Temporary exception.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten days without authority of the council in order to provide emergency service. The council may grant special permission on such terms as the council may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. (Ord. 437 §5, 1968)

13.16.060 Removal of overhead facilities--Exceptions.
This chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.16.030 of this chapter shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution not apply to the following types of facilities:

A.    Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer;

B.    Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;

C.    Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited;

D.    Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred volts;

E.    Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street;

F.    Antennas, associated equipment and supporting structures used by a utility for furnishing communication services;

G.    Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets and concealed ducts;

H.    Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. (Ord. 437 §6, 1968)

13.16.070 Notice to affected parties.
A.    Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.16.030 of this chapter, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by said resolution of the adoption thereof. The city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to applicable rules and regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission.

B.    Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.16.030 of this chapter together with a copy of this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. (Ord. 437 §7, 1968)

13.16.080 Responsibility of utilities.
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.16.030 of this chapter, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. (Ord. 437 §8, 1968)

13.16.090 Responsibility of property owners.
A.    Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall perform construction and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in Section 13.16.080 of this chapter and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served, all in accordance with applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission if the above is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.16.030 of this chapter, the city engineer shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to he owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll to provide the required underground facilities within ten days after receipt of such notice.

B.    The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States mail, in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner’s name appears, and must be addressed to such owner’s last-known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears, to General Delivery, city of Lakeport. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the city engineer shall, within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten inches in size to be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises.

C.    The notice given by the city engineer to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, and shall state that if said work is not completed within thirty days after receipt of such notice, the city engineer will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefited and become a lien upon such property.

D.    If upon the expiration of the thirty-day period, the said required underground facilities have not been provided, the city engineer shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the city engineer shall, in lieu of providing the required underground facilities have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to said property. Upon completion of the work by the city engineer, he shall file a written report, with the city council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which said time shall not be less than ten days thereafter.

E.    The city engineer shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner, in the manner hereinabove provided for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment.

F.    Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there are any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment.

G.    If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the city engineer and the city engineer is directed to turn over to the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of said properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and said assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which said assessment was not paid. Said assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as the property taxes are due and payable; and if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per year. (Ord. 437 §9, 1968)

13.16.100 Responsibility of city.
City shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.16.030 of this chapter. (Ord. 437 §10, 1968)

13.16.110 Extension of time limits.
In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.16.030 of this chapter cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civic disobedience or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. (Ord. 437 §11, 1968)

13.16.120 Violation--Penalty.
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punishable therefor as provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 437 §12, 1968)

Chapter 13.20
SEWER USE AND PRETREATMENT
Sections:

ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS

13.20.010    Purpose and policy.

13.20.020    Definitions.

13.20.030    Abbreviations.

13.20.040    Severability.

13.20.050    Conflict.

ARTICLE II. REGULATIONS

13.20.060    Permissible discharges.

13.20.070    General discharge prohibition.

13.20.080    Prohibited discharges.

13.20.090    Prohibited substances or characteristics.

13.20.100    Prohibited discharge location.

13.20.110    National categorical pretreatment standards.

13.20.120    Specific pollutant limitations.

13.20.130    State and federal requirements and standards.

13.20.140    CLMSD right of revision.

13.20.150    Prohibited dilution.

13.20.160    Slug discharges.

13.20.170    Hazardous waste discharges.

13.20.180    Prohibition on medical waste.

13.20.190    Connection requirements.

13.20.200    Extension of mains.

13.20.210    Subdivision system requirements.

13.20.220    Annexation to district--Contract.

ARTICLE III. FACILITIES REQUIREMENTS

13.20.230    Spill containment facilities.

13.20.240    Monitoring/metering facilities.

13.20.250    Drawing submittal requirements.

13.20.260    Pollution prevention requirements.

ARTICLE IV. ADMINISTRATION

13.20.270    Wastewater discharges.

13.20.280    Responsibility of users.

13.20.290    Classes of users.

13.20.300    Wastewater discharge permit.

13.20.310    Reporting requirements.

13.20.320    Monitoring.

13.20.330    Signatory requirements.

13.20.340    Rights of entry.

13.20.350    Pretreatment.

13.20.360    Publication of users in significant noncompliance.

13.20.370    Records retention.

13.20.380    Confidential information.

ARTICLE V. ENFORCEMENT

13.20.390    Enforcement mechanisms.

13.20.400    Informal administrative actions.

13.20.410    Administrative orders and compliance schedules.

13.20.420    Noncompliance fees.

13.20.430    Assessment of charges for obstruction or damage to CLMSD facilities or operations.

13.20.440    Suspension or termination of service.

13.20.450    Administrative civil penalties.

13.20.460    Civil action.

13.20.470    Criminal action.

13.20.480    Notification procedures.

13.20.490    Costs.

13.20.500    Responding to significant noncompliance.

ARTICLE VI. HEARINGS AND APPEALS

13.20.510    Availability of administrative appeal.

13.20.520    Show cause hearings.

ARTICLE VII. FEES

13.20.530    Purpose.

13.20.540    Sewer service charges.

13.20.550    Scope of rates, fees and charges.

13.20.560    Payment of fees, charges and delinquencies--Creation of lien.

13.20.570    Reinstatement deposit.

13.20.580    Connection fee--Construction fund.

13.20.590    Maintenance fees--Maintenance fund.

ARTICLE VIII. FATS, OILS, AND GREASE PROGRAM

13.20.600    FOG purpose.

13.20.610    Application to install a FOG pretreatment system.

13.20.620    FOG discharge limits.

13.20.630    FOG prohibitions and violations.

13.20.640    FOG fines.

13.20.650    FOG variance for cause request/appeals.

ARTICLE IX. SPECIAL PURPOSE DISCHARGE PERMIT

13.20.660    Special purpose discharge permit application.

13.20.670    Conditions and limitations.

13.20.680    Permit fee.

13.20.690    Permit modifications of terms and conditions.

13.20.700    Permit duration.

13.20.710    Discharge fees.

* Prior legislation: Ords. 427, 695 and 730.

ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS

13.20.010 Purpose and policy.
This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for contributors to the wastewater collection and treatment system of the city of Lakeport municipal sewer district (hereafter CLMSD) and enables the CLMSD to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 as amended and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403).

The objectives of this chapter are:

A.    To comply with the laws of the state of California and of the United States relating to the protection of the environment, control of water pollution, disposal of hazardous wastes and pretreatment of industrial discharges to publicly owned treatment works.

B.    To prevent the introduction of wastes which will interfere with the operation of the system or other CLMSD operations.

C.    To prevent the introduction of wastes into the CLMSD wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters.

D.    To prevent the introduction of substances which would cause the CLMSD to fail to meet air quality goals of the Lake County air quality management district.

E.    To prevent introduction of toxic substances to the CLMSD wastewater system which could reach the environment in toxic amounts.

F.    To prevent the introduction of wastes into the system which may affect the CLMSD’s ability to dispose of, recycle, or reclaim its sludge or other residuals.

G.    To reasonably maintain the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater from the system.

H.    To prevent the introduction of wastes that the CLMSD facilities are not designed to adequately treat and may therefore adversely affect the environment or may cause a violation of the CLMSD NPDES permit or may contribute to the need for modification of the CLMSD NPDES permit.

I.    To protect CLMSD personnel while conducting activities related to the collection, treatment and disposal of wastes through the CLMSD facilities.

J.    To prevent a public hazard or public nuisance arising from the collection, treatment and disposal of wastes through the CLMSD system.

K.    To prevent the introduction of wastes to sewers connected to the CLMSD system that could result in the CLMSD being classified as a hazardous waste treatment, storage or disposal facility under the laws of the state of California or the United States.

This chapter provides for the regulation of contributors to the CLMSD wastewater collection system through the issuance of permits to certain users and through enforcement of general requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, and requires user reporting.

This chapter shall apply to all discharges within the CLMSD and to discharges from other governmental bodies or agencies who are, by contract or agreement with the CLMSD, users of the CLMSD treatment plant. Except as otherwise provided herein, the director of the CLMSD will administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 872 §1.1, 2008)

13.20.020 Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated:

"Act" or "the Act" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq.

"Authorized representative of industrial user" may be:

1.    A principal executive officer, if the industrial user is a corporation;

2.    A general partner or proprietor, if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively;

3.    A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above, if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the discharge originates and if such representative is identified in writing by the individual designated in subsection (1) or (2) of this definition.

"Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)" is the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, over five days at twenty degrees Celsius, expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter, mg/L).

"Building sewer/private sewer lateral" means the pipeline conveying sewage from the plumbing fixtures in the structure to a point where the private property ends and the public right-of-way begins. The building sewer is located on private property and is maintained by the property owner.

"Building sewer leakage test" means the procedure approved by the CLMSD to determine the amount of leakage in the building sewer.

"Bypass" means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an industrial user’s treatment facility.

"California Plumbing Code" means written guidelines, regulations and ordinances governing the plumbing criteria for type and use of plumbing systems in the state of California and its political subdivisions.

"Categorical industrial user" means all industrial users subject to national categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N.

"Categorical standards" means national pretreatment standards which specify quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties that may be discharged by industrial users in specified industrial subcategories as defined in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471.

"Chemical oxygen demand" (COD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized, by a strong chemical oxidant, in the oxidation of organic and oxidizable inorganic material under standard laboratory procedures, expressed in terms of weight and concentration (mg/L).

"City of Lakeport municipal sewer district" means the collective wastewater treatment system owned and/or operated by the city, including all devices, systems and appurtenances thereto used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, distribution and reclamation of municipal sewage, industrial wastes of liquid nature, or other wastewater. The city of Lakeport municipal sewer district is referred to herein as "CLMSD."

"Class I user" means any user who is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards.

"Class II user" means any nondomestic user of the CLMSD wastewater disposal system who is not subject to national categorical standards and (1) has an average discharge flow of twenty-five thousand gallons or more per day, excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling water, and blowdown wastewaters; or (2) contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic (BOD, TSS) capacity of a treatment plant; or (3) has a reasonable potential, in the opinion of the CLMSD, to adversely affect CLMSD facility operation or for violating a pretreatment standard, local limit, or discharge requirement; or (4) has been determined by the CLMSD to discharge wastewater having a potential variability in the character of the wastewater, or the potential for increased operational or administrative cost to the CLMSD due to the characteristics of the waste.

"Class III user" means any nondomestic user who is not designated as a Class I or a Class II user. Class III users may include users who are not industrial nor commercial users and (1) have a reasonable potential to adversely affect the CLMSD’s ability to meet the objectives of this chapter; or (2) generate hazardous waste, whether or not said waste is discharged into the sanitary sewer system, or if, in the determination of the CLMSD, there is a potential for this waste to be discharged into the sewer, even through accident, in nonprocess or process of handling of the waste; or (3) store or use hazardous materials, whether or not a hazardous waste is produced in the industrial or commercial process, if, in the determination of the CLMSD, a potential exists for significant impact upon the CLMSD facilities due to a release of these materials into the environment.

Class III users may be individually designated by the CLMSD based on the criteria set forth above, or on categorization of the user as a member of a particular business category. A Class III user designation may include, but is not limited to, landfill operations, landfill leachate, or ground water cleanup sites.

Class IV User. Any nondomestic user who is not designated as a Class I, Class II, or Class III user may be designated as a Class IV user if the user (1) has a reasonable potential to adversely affect the CLMSD’s ability to meet the objectives of this chapter; or (2) generates hazardous waste, whether or not said waste is, in the normal course of the industrial or commercial process, discharged into the sanitary sewer system, or if, in the determination of the CLMSD, there is a potential for this waste to be discharged into the sewer, even through accident, in nonprocess or process of handling of the waste; or (3) stores or uses hazardous materials, whether or not a hazardous waste is produced in the industrial or commercial process, if, in the determination of the CLMSD, a potential exists for significant impact upon the CLMSD facilities due to a release of these materials into the environment. Class IV users may be individually designated by the CLMSD based on the criteria set forth above or on categorization of the user as a member of a particular business category. The Class IV user designation shall include, but is not limited to, the following business categories: analytical laboratories, clinical laboratories, dry cleaners, laundries, vehicle maintenance facilities, vehicle repair facilities, gasoline stations, printing shops, printing allied industries, photo processors, pesticide formulators, pesticide applicators, dental offices, dental laboratories and x-ray laboratories, and veterinary providers.

"CLMSD board" means the board of directors of the city of Lakeport municipal sewer district.

"CLMSD facilities" means all of the CLMSD system of collecting, conveying and treating; including, but not limited to, the collection system and treatment plant. This includes any publicly owned facility connected to the CLMSD collection system which generates wastewater treated at the CLMSD treatment plant.

"Collection system" means the CLMSD pipelines, pump stations, manholes and other similar facilities which accept, collect and convey sanitary sewage to the treatment plant.

"Cooling water" means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat.

"Cost recovery" shall refer to costs associated with the cleanup and/or decontamination of a site after discharge of substances into the sanitary sewer, storm sewer and/or to the environment that caused interference, pass-through or a sanitary sewer blockage. This includes cleanup and decontamination of all structures/areas including residential, commercial, surface waters and the environment.

"Director" means the CLMSD board-appointed director of the city of Lakeport municipal sewer district or his/her designee.

"Domestic user" means any person, including those located outside the jurisdictional limits of the city, who contributes, or causes or permits the contribution of, wastewater into the CLMSD from ordinary living processes of humans of such character as to permit satisfactory disposal, without special treatment, into the public sewer by means of a private building sewer. The parameters by which a domestic user shall be distinguished from a nondomestic user is the concentration of BOD and suspended solids. The concentration shall be considered to have no more than three hundred milligrams per liter BOD and suspended solids.

"Domestic wastewater" means the liquid, solid, and water-carried waste derived from ordinary living processes of humans of such character as to permit satisfactory disposal, without special treatment, into the public sewer by means of a private building sewer. The parameters by which domestic wastewater shall be distinguished from nondomestic wastewater or industrial or commercial wastewater is the concentration of BOD and suspended solids. The concentration shall be considered to have no more than three hundred milligrams per liter BOD and suspended solids.

"Enforceable best management practices (E-BMPs)" means methods, tools, and techniques that have been determined to be the most effective and practical means of preventing or reducing pollution, including documentation of employee training, documentation of grease interceptor cleaning, and removal and disposal of grease.

"Environmental Protection Agency" or "EPA" means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency.

"Fats, oils, and greases (FOG)" means organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are measured using analytical test procedures established in 40 CFR Part 136. Fats, oils, and greases are collectively referred to herein as "grease," "greases," and/or "FOG."

"Food service facilities (FSF)" means those facilities primarily engaged in activities of preparing, serving, or making available food or foodstuffs for consumption by the public such as a restaurant, commercial kitchen, grocery store, caterer, hotel, school, hospital, prison, correctional facility, or care institution. These facilities use one or more of the following preparation activities: frying, baking, grilling, sauteing, rotisserie cooking, broiling, boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting, poaching, infrared heating, searing, barbecuing, and any other food preparation activity that produces a hot nondrinkable food product in or on a receptacle that requires washing.

"Grab sample" means a sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time.

"Grease interceptor" means a device for separating and retaining greases and like compounds prior to entry into the CLMSD facilities. These devices also serve to remove and collect settleable solids from food service facilities prior to entry into the sanitary sewer. Such devices are collectively referred to herein as "grease interceptors."

"Grease interceptor minimum design capability" means the design features of a grease interceptor and its ability or volume to effectively intercept and retain greases from grease-laden wastewater discharge to the sanitary sewer.

"Hazardous pollutants" means any constituent or combination of constituents that is classified as hazardous under state or federal regulations or is included on the federal list of toxic pollutants as specified in 40 CFR Part 403.

"Holding tank waste" means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers and vacuum-pump tank trucks.

"Indirect discharge" means the discharge or the introduction of pollutants from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act (33 USC 1317) into the CLMSD treatment works (including holding tank wastes discharged into the system).

"Industrial user (IU)" means a source of indirect discharge. (See definition of "indirect discharge.")

"Industrial waste or wastewater" means all water-carried wastes and wastewater of the community, excluding domestic wastewater, derived from any producing, manufacturing, processing, institutional, commercial, agricultural, or other operation. Industrial wastewater may also include wastes of human origin similar to domestic wastewater which have been mixed with industrial wastes or wastewater prior to discharge to CLMSD facilities.

"Interceptor" means a device for separating and retaining greases and like compounds prior to entry into CLMSD facilities. These devices also serve to remove and collect settleable solids prior to entry into CLMSD facilities.

"Interference" means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources:

1.    Both inhibits or disrupts the CLMSD, its treatment processes or its operations, use, or disposal, and therefore causes a violation of any requirement of the CLMSD National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or prevents sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Act (33 USC 1345), the Clean Air Act, and the Toxic Substances Control Act;

2.    Is likely to endanger life, health, or property or otherwise cause a nuisance; or

3.    In the opinion of the CLMSD, otherwise adversely affects the CLMSD’s ability to meet the objectives of Section 13.20.010.

"National categorical pretreatment standard" means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317) which applies to industrial users. These regulations are found in 40 CFR, Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471.

"National Pollution Discharge Elimination System or NPDES permit" means a permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1342).

"New source" means a facility from which there is, or may be, a discharge of pollutants, construction of which began after the publication of the proposed pretreatment standards pursuant to Section 307(c) of the Act, which will apply to the facility if the standards are promulgated, provided certain location and construction criteria are met as defined in 40 CFR 403.3(k).

"Noncooking facilities" means those facilities primarily engaged in the preparation of precooked foodstuffs that do not include any form of cooking. These include cold dairy and frozen foodstuffs preparation and serving facilities.

"Notice of violation (NOV)" means a document informing the user that the user has violated this chapter and requiring user to prescribe appropriate corrective action.

"Ordinance," referring to the term "this ordinance" and/or "pretreatment ordinance" and similar uses of the term "ordinance," shall refer to the entirety of the ordinance codified in this chapter, as may be amended and modified.

"Owner" shall mean individual, firm, company, corporation, or group upon whose property the building or structure is located or will be constructed.

"Pass-through" means a discharge which exits the CLMSD into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which cause, or in the determination of the CLMSD have a potential for causing, a violation of any requirement of the CLMSD NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).

"Person" means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context.

"pH" means the logarithm (base ten) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in moles per liter of solution. pH is a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution.

"Pollutant" includes sewage or any characteristic of sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous, or radioactive, associated with human habitation, or of human or animal origin, or from any commercial producing, manufacturing, or processing operation of whatever nature.

"Pollution" means an alteration of the quality of the waters of the United States by waste to a degree which unreasonably affects (1) such waters for beneficial use or (2) facilities which serve such beneficial uses, or which creates a hazard to the public health.

"Pretreatment" or "treatment" means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into CLMSD facilities. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR Section 403.6(d).

"Pretreatment requirement" means any substantive or procedural pretreatment requirement, other than a national pretreatment standard, applicable to industrial users (IUs).

"Pretreatment standard" means any regulation of the CLMSD, state, or EPA containing pollutant discharge limits or other procedural or substantive requirements of all users.

"RCRA" means the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 USC 6901 et seq.) and as amended.

"RUE" means the residential unit equivalent representing the average amount of sewage generated by a detached single-family dwelling in the city. The volume of the sewage flow generated by an RUE is approximately two hundred gallons per day which is equal to approximately eight hundred cubic feet per month. The RUE flow rate does not include the extraneous leakage that may occur in the piping between the property line and the plumbing fixtures inside and outside of the structure.

"Sanitary sewer" means a pipe or conduit intended to carry wastewater or waterborne wastes from homes, businesses, and industries to the CLMSD; a sewer collection system.

"Significant industrial user (SIU)" means any industrial user of the CLMSD facilities which is:

1.    A categorical industrial user (CIU); or

2.    Any other industrial user that:

a.    Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand gallons per day or more of process wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling water, and boiler blowdown wastewaters); or

b.    Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic (BOD, TSS) capacity of the treatment plant; or

c.    Has a reasonable potential, in the opinion of the CLMSD, to adversely affect CLMSD facility operation or for violating a pretreatment standard or requirement;

3.    The CLMSD may determine that an industrial user which has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting CLMSD facility operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement is not a significant industrial user. 40 CFR 403.3(t)(2).

"Significant noncompliance" means one or more of the following:

1.    Chronic violations, defined as those in which sixty-six percent or more of all the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit for the average limit for the same pollutant parameter;

2.    Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in which thirty-three percent or more of all the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC equals 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);

3.    Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer-term average) that the CLMSD determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through (including endangering the health of the CLMSD facility, personnel or the general public);

4.    Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare, or the environment, or has resulted in the CLMSD’s exercise of its emergency authorities under 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) to halt or prevent such a discharge;

5.    Failure to meet, within ninety days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;

6.    Failure to provide, within thirty days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules.

"Slug discharge" means a discharge capable of causing adverse impacts to the CLMSD, its workers, or the environment, or any pollutant including an oxygen-demanding pollutant released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which may cause interference with the operation of the CLMSD sewerage system. The discharge will be considered a slug discharge if the flow rate or concentrations or quantities of pollutants exceed, for any time period longer than fifteen minutes, more than five times the average twenty-four-hour concentration, quantity or flow during normal operations. A slug discharge is considered to be a discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill, or a noncustomary batch discharge. Batch discharges are intentional, controllable discharges that occur periodically within an industrial user’s process (typically the result of a noncontinuous process). Accidental spills are unintentional, largely uncontrolled discharges that may result from leaks or spills of storage containers or manufacturing processes in an area with access to floor drains.

"Standard Industrial Classification (SIC)" means a federal classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President of the United States of America, Office of Management and Budget.

"State" means the state of California.

"Stormwater" means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.

"Suspended solids" means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering.

"Total suspended solids (TSS)" refers to a standardized water quality measurement that uses a filter to capture and weigh trapped particles from a water sample.

"Toxic pollutant" means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed in Appendix A to the ordinance codified in this chapter.

"Trap" means a cast iron or stainless steel containment device used for trapping substances and to prevent grease, sand or flammable liquids from entering the sewerage system.

"Treatment plant" means any facility owned by the CLMSD that is designed to provide treatment to wastewater.

"User" means any person, including those located outside the jurisdictional limits of the city, who contributes, or causes or permits the contribution of, wastewater into the CLMSD.

"Variance for cause request" means a submittal provided by a food service facility or other user to provide site-specific technical information which demonstrates why a grease interceptor is not feasible, practicable, and/or necessary for a particular use, activity and/or structure.

"Wastewater" or "waste" means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, together with any ground water, surface water, and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter CLMSD facilities.

"Wastewater discharge permit" is set forth in Section 13.20.300.

"Waters of the state" means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof.

"Waters of the U.S." means all portions of oceans within twelve nautical miles of baseline of any shore of any state in the U.S.; streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which carry water across or share jurisdiction or rights with more than any single state within the United States of America. (Ord. 872 §2.1, 2008)

13.20.030 Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:

BOD--Biochemical Oxygen Demand

CCR--California Code of Regulations

CFR--Code of Federal Regulations

COD--Chemical Oxygen Demand

EPA--Environmental Protection Agency

L--Liter

mg--Milligrams

mg/L--Milligrams per Liter

NPDES--National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System

SIC--Standard Industrial Classification

TSS--Total Suspended Solids

USC--United States Code

(Ord. 872 §2.2, 2008)

13.20.040 Severability.
If any provision, paragraph, word, section, or article of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions, paragraphs, words, sections, and articles shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 872 §2.3, 2008)

13.20.050 Conflict.
All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or conflicting with any part of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict. (Ord. 872 §2.4, 2008)

ARTICLE II. REGULATIONS

13.20.060 Permissible discharges.
Wastewater may be discharged into public sewers for collection, treatment, and disposal by the CLMSD; provided, that such wastewater discharge is in compliance with this chapter and/or conditions of any wastewater discharge permit; and further provided, that the user pays all applicable CLMSD sewer fees and charges including any penalties or charges assessed under this chapter. (Ord. 872 §3.1, 2008)

13.20.070 General discharge prohibition.
No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass-through or interference. These general prohibitions and the specific prohibitions contained in this chapter apply to each user introducing pollutants into CLMSD facilities whether or not the user is subject to national pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or CLMSD pretreatment standards or requirements. (Ord. 872 §3.2, 2008)

13.20.080 Prohibited discharges.
A user may not discharge, or cause to be discharged, wastewater into any CLMSD facility if it contains substances or has characteristics which, either alone or by interaction with other wastewater, cause or threaten to cause:

A.    Damage to CLMSD facilities.

B.    Interference or impairment of operation or maintenance of CLMSD facilities.

C.    Obstruction of flow in CLMSD facilities.

D.    Hazard to human life.

E.    Interference with treatment plant or disposal processes or any alteration of the CLMSD treatment plant processes.

F.    In no case shall substances discharged to the CLMSD facilities cause the plant to be in noncompliance with federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations pertaining to sludge, biosolids or effluent disposal.

G.    Unreasonable interference with recycling and reclamation of wastewater, residues, sludge or scum.

H.    The CLMSD to violate its NPDES permit or the receiving water quality standards.

I.    Flammable or explosive conditions.

J.    A noxious or malodorous condition, a public nuisance, a hazard to life, or conditions sufficient to prevent normal entry into the sewers or other CLMSD facilities for maintenance and repair.

K.    Objectionable coloration or other condition in the quality of the CLMSD treatment plant influent which interferes with or passes through the treatment plant.

L.    Conditions which violate any statute, rule, regulation, or ordinance of any public agency relating to releases of hazardous wastes, hazardous substances or other pollutants to the environment when such release is to any portion of CLMSD facilities.

M.    Any alteration or change of the CLMSD NPDES permit or any additional regulatory supervision, intervention or oversight of the CLMSD operations.

N.    Any significant alteration of CLMSD operations, including but not limited to affecting the ability of the CLMSD to procure adequate insurance and/or subjecting the CLMSD operations to significantly increased potential liability. (Ord. 872 §3.3, 2008)

13.20.090 Prohibited substances or characteristics.
A.    Any liquids, solids, or gases which, by reason of their nature or quantity, are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances, to create a fire or explosion hazard or damage to CLMSD facilities or be injurious to human health and safety or to the operation of CLMSD facilities. At no time shall a waste stream exceed a closed cup flash point of one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit or sixty degrees Celsius using the test method specified in 40 CFR Part 261.21. At no time shall two successive readings on a combustible gas meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system), be more than five percent nor any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. The meter shall be properly calibrated in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions using pentane as the calibration standard. The materials which may be prohibited if they cause explosive or fire dangers as defined herein include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, and sulfides.

B.    Any solid or viscous substance in amounts or concentrations which may cause or threaten to cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or pass-through of, or interference with, the operations of any CLMSD facilities, such as, but not limited to, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, cat litter, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastic, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting or machine oils, products of mineral oil origin, mud, cement grout, glass, grinding or polishing wastes, grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails or whole blood.

C.    Any discharges having a pH less than 6.0 or equal to or greater than 12.0 or having any other corrosive property outside the specified range in Appendix A, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter, or corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, humans or animals.

D.    Any wastewater containing hazardous pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, to constitute a hazard to human or animal health or safety, to create an adverse effect on the waters of the state, or to cause the CLMSD to exceed the limitations set forth in a national pretreatment standard.

E.    Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference or pass-through, but in no case heat in such quantities that the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant exceeds forty degrees Celsius or one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit.

F.    Any pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, COD, etc.) released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, alone or in combination with others, may cause interference or pass-through. Regardless of whether a slug discharge causes or will cause interference or pass-through, in no case shall a slug discharge have a flow rate or contain concentrations or quantities of pollutants that exceed, for any time period longer than fifteen minutes, more than five times the average twenty-four-hour concentration, quantities, or flow during normal operation.

G.    Any discharge which results in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems within any CLMSD facility.

H.    Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids.

I.    Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes unless:

1.    The user is authorized to use radioactive materials by the State Department of Health or other governmental agency empowered to regulate the use of radioactive materials; and

2.    The waste is discharged in strict conformity with current California Radiation Control Regulations (California Code of Regulations, Title 17) for safe disposal; and

3.    The user is in compliance with all rules and regulations of all other applicable regulatory agencies.

J.    Any stormwater, ground water, rain water, street drainage, subsurface drainage, yard drainage or diatomaceous earth filter backwash, unless a specific permit is issued by the CLMSD. The CLMSD may approve such discharge only when no other reasonable alternative for disposal is available and all other provisions of this chapter are met.

K.    Any unpolluted water including, but not limited to, cooling water, process water or blowdown from cooling towers or evaporative coolers or any other unpolluted water unless a permit for such has been obtained from the CLMSD prior to the discharge. The CLMSD may approve the discharge of such water only when no reasonable alternative method of disposal is available and all other provisions of this chapter are met.

L.    Any waste defined as hazardous, by any definition set forth in federal and/or state statutes or regulations, unless such waste has been delisted or decertified by the appropriate federal or state agency, and/or a variance has been granted by the appropriate federal or state agency, including provisions for discharge to a CLMSD facility, and said variance provisions are approved by the CLMSD.

M.    Any substance, waste, wastewater, or constituent thereof as may be specifically prohibited or prohibited by concentration levels as may be set forth in local limits adopted by resolution by the CLMSD board.

N.    Any substance, waste, wastewater or constituent thereof, which may by itself or in combination with other discharges cause the CLMSD to violate any permit conditions related to toxicity of the effluent or otherwise cause or contribute to the potential for toxic substances being released from CLMSD facilities into the environment in toxic amounts.

O.    Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through.

P.    Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the CLMSD. (Ord. 872 §3.4, 2008)

13.20.100 Prohibited discharge location.
No user shall discharge any wastewater directly into a manhole or other opening in the CLMSD sewerage system other than through sewer laterals or other sewer connection approved by the CLMSD, unless a permit has been obtained for such discharge. A permit will be issued only for such direct discharge in the event the discharge is otherwise in compliance with provisions of this chapter and no other alternative is reasonably available in the opinion of the CLMSD. (Ord. 872 §3.5, 2008)

13.20.110 National categorical pretreatment standards.
National categorical pretreatment standards, found in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, are hereby incorporated into this chapter and made a part thereof. (Ord. 872 §3.6, 2008)

13.20.120 Specific pollutant limitations.
No person shall discharge wastewater to a CLMSD facility which exhibits any characteristic which is specifically prohibited by an action of the CLMSD board, or any wastewater containing constituents in excess of any specific constituent level limitations as may be set by the CLMSD board by resolution.

Any violation of a specific pollutant limitation as may be set forth in a CLMSD resolution shall subject the user to the same administrative actions, penalties, and/or enforcement actions as would be available for any other violation of this chapter. The term "ordinance," as used elsewhere within this chapter, shall be read to include the specific pollutant limitations and/or waste characteristics as may be set forth by resolution. See Appendix A to the ordinance codified in this chapter for maximum allowable concentrations as adopted by resolution. All specific pollutant limitations set by the CLMSD shall be deemed pretreatment standards for the purposes of Section 307(d) of the Act. (Ord. 872 §3.7, 2008)

13.20.130 State and federal requirements and standards.
In the event that either state or federal standards and requirements for discharges to CLMSD facilities are more stringent than the limitations, requirements, and standards set forth in this chapter, the most stringent standard or requirement shall apply. Modifications of the federal or state standards and requirements which are more stringent than the limitations, standards, and requirements as set forth in this chapter and are promulgated subsequent to the adoption of this chapter shall be applied to discharges to CLMSD facilities at such time and in such manner as is set forth in Sections 13.20.300(D) and (F) and 13.20.690. (Ord. 872 §3.8, 2008)

13.20.140 CLMSD right of revision.
The CLMSD reserves the right to establish by ordinance or resolution more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the CLMSD facilities if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in this chapter. No revision of standards or requirements hereunder shall subject the CLMSD to civil liability or penalty for interference with a vested right of any user. (Ord. 872 §3.9, 2008)

13.20.150 Prohibited dilution.
No user shall increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the national pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the CLMSD or state, with this chapter or the user’s permit, or to establish an artificially high flow rate for permit mass emission rates. An increase in the use of process water which is reasonably proportional to increased production and which is required for said increase in production will not be considered an excessive discharge hereunder. (Ord. 872 §3.10, 2008)

13.20.160 Slug discharges.
A.    All users shall be prohibited from allowing slug discharges, as elsewhere defined herein, from entering the CLMSD sewerage system.

B.    Each user shall provide protection from slug discharges of restricted materials or other substances regulated by this chapter. Facilities to prevent slug discharges of restricted materials shall be provided and maintained at the user’s own cost and expense.

C.    In accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(v), the CLMSD must evaluate, at least once every two years, whether each SIU needs a slug discharge control plan. Upon evaluation, certain users will be required to prepare slug discharge prevention and contingency plans (SDCP) containing at least the following information:

1.    A description of the discharge practices including nonroutine batch discharges.

2.    A description of stored chemicals.

3.    The procedures for promptly notifying the CLMSD of slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate a specific discharge prohibition with procedures for follow-up written notification within five days.

4.    If required by the CLMSD, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills including maintenance and inspection of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building or containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures or equipment for emergency response.

5.    If required by the CLMSD, follow-up practices to limit the damage suffered by the treatment plant or the environment.

These plans shall be submitted to the CLMSD for review and approval. All users required to have SDCP plans shall submit such a plan within three months and complete implementation within six months of receiving notice regarding the requirements of such plan. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify the user’s facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter.

D.    In the case of a slug discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately notify the CLMSD of the incident. The notification shall include location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume and corrective action. The user shall provide the CLMSD with a detailed, written report of this incident in a manner and within the time frame as elsewhere provided in this chapter.

E.    A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s premises advising the employees whom to call in the event of a slug discharge. The user shall ensure that all employees who may cause or allow such slug discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure.

F.    Each user who violates any of the requirements of the slug discharge program, or allows a slug discharge to occur, shall be subject to the enforcement provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 872 §3.11, 2008)

13.20.170 Hazardous waste discharges.
All industrial users shall notify the CLMSD, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge to CLMSD facilities of a substance which if otherwise disposed of would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261 or as otherwise defined by state statute or regulation.

Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of the discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the industrial user discharges more than one hundred kilograms of such waste per calendar month to CLMSD facilities, the notification shall also contain the following information, if known: (A) an identification of the hazardous waste constituents contained in the waste; (B) an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month; and (C) an estimation of the mass constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following twelve months. Industrial users shall provide notification prior to obtaining a discharge permit.

In the case of any notification made under this section, the industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the level of toxicity of hazardous waste generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. Nothing contained in this section is intended to modify the prohibitions set forth in Section 13.20.090(N). (Ord. 872 §3.12, 2008)

13.20.180 Prohibition on medical waste.
A.    No user shall discharge solid wastes from hospitals, clinics, offices of medical doctors, convalescent homes, medical laboratories or other medical facilities to the sewerage system including, but not limited to, hypodermic needles, syringes, instruments, utensils or other paper and plastic items of a disposable nature except where prior written approval for such discharges is given by the CLMSD director.

B.    The CLMSD shall have the authority to require that any discharge of an infectious waste to the sewer be rendered noninfectious prior to discharge if the infectious waste is deemed to pose a threat to the public health and safety, or will result in any violation of the applicable waste discharge requirements. (Ord. 872 §3.13, 2008)

13.20.190 Connection requirements.
A.    Every lot, block, tract or parcel of land occupied by a residence, building, structure or place of business, producing sewage within the CLMSD or area serviced by special agreement with the CLMSD, to which the nearest property line is within two hundred feet of the point at which a lateral may be connected to the CLMSD, shall be connected to such, excepting only such lots, blocks, tracts or parcels of land served by an adequate, existing septic tank or disposal system in good working order.

B.    Except as provided below, no septic tank or system shall be constructed or connected to any structure built, erected, moved or reconstructed, on any premises within the CLMSD, or on premises in any area contracting for discharge of sewage into the CLMSD, if the nearest line of such premises is within two hundred feet of the point of connection to the system.

In the event that the CLMSD cannot immediately accommodate the flow from the premises for any reason, the use of a septic tank or system may be approved by the CLMSD; provided, that the following conditions are satisfied:

1.    The appropriate sewage expansion fees for the premises are paid.

2.    The appropriate sewage connection fees are paid.

3.    The facilities needed to connect the premises to the CLMSD are in place or are guaranteed by a cash deposit in an amount of two hundred percent of the estimated installation cost for the facilities.

4.    The monthly sewer service charges that normally would be paid by the premises are paid to the CLMSD during the period that the septic tank or system is in use.

5.    The user(s) of the premises agree to conditions of use and abandonment of the septic tank or system as prescribed by the CLMSD.

C.    No lateral service connection shall serve more than one ownership.

D.    No existing septic tank or separate disposal system serving any property or area within such two-hundred-foot distance which hereafter becomes defective, and requires major repair work or reconstruction, shall be so repaired or reconstructed except by a special grant permitting a variance authorized by the CLMSD, upon application therefor; but such use or user shall be connected into the CLMSD. "Major repairs or reconstruction" is defined as any repair or reconstruction requiring the installation of a new tank, leaching field or equivalent, or such work as will exceed fifteen percent of the cost of all laterals and connections or appurtenances thereto, constructed on the property of any applicant, or on any area outside the CLMSD. Such repair or reconstruction shall be inspected and approved by the CLMSD, prior to being covered or concealed and before the connection pursuant to a permit is made.

E.    It is unlawful to lay any lateral or connection line or appurtenance thereto on the property of any user or applicant other than with such materials as the CLMSD may prescribe by resolution.

F.    It is unlawful for any person, other than the CLMSD, its agents or employees, to connect any pipe, drain or facility with, or cause the same to penetrate, break, injure, remove or open any portion of, the sewerage system of the CLMSD, or any line, pipe, manhole, flush tank, pump, meter, motor inspection line or any other part of or appurtenance to such system, without a written permit therefor, issued by the CLMSD.

G.    The city council shall prescribe by resolution the conditions, forms, fees and manner of connecting to the CLMSD. (Ord. 872 §3.14, 2008)

13.20.200 Extension of mains.
The city council shall prescribe by resolution the manner, financing, and provision for any refunds to promote extension of collector mains in the CLMSD, except for ordinary costs associated within subdivision boundaries or in areas served by the CLMSD, and except special districts organized for the purpose of such construction. (Ord. 872 §3.15, 2008)

13.20.210 Subdivision system requirements.
A.    All new subdivisions within the CLMSD or in areas served by the CLMSD shall have an adequate collection system for sewage.

B.    The plan, design and size of mains must be approved by the CLMSD for such purpose. Such system shall include provision for future growth within the area or adjacent areas which will ultimately use mains within such subdivision, and shall comply with standards otherwise established within the city.

C.    The subdivider shall pay all costs, as described in this chapter, of such system. (Ord. 872 §3.16, 2008)

13.20.220 Annexation to district--Contract.
A.    Additional areas may be annexed to the CLMSD in the manner provided by law.

B.    All charges therefor shall be prescribed by resolution of the city council.

C.    Contracts for acceptance and treatment of sewage shall be entered into only with areas which contemplate future annexation to the CLMSD. Such contracts shall require compliance with provisions of this chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant hereto and shall not provide for acceptance and treatment without annexation for a period of more than ten years, and shall be so drawn that they shall encourage and promote annexation at the earliest date after original construction. (Ord. 872 §3.17, 2008)

ARTICLE III. FACILITIES REQUIREMENTS

13.20.230 Spill containment facilities.
All users shall provide spill containment for protection against discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this chapter. Such protection shall be designed to secure the discharges and to prevent them from entering into the CLMSD sewer system in accordance with reasonable engineering standards. Such facilities shall be provided and maintained at the user’s expense. (Ord. 872 §4.1, 2008)

13.20.240 Monitoring/metering facilities.
A.    The CLMSD may require the user to construct and maintain in proper operating condition, at the user’s sole expense, flow monitoring, constituent monitoring and/or sampling facilities.

B.    Any sample taken from a sample box or other representative sampling location is considered to be representative of the discharge to CLMSD facilities.

C.    Monitoring or metering facilities may be required to include a security closure that can be locked to prevent unauthorized access.

D.    The location of the monitoring or metering facilities shall be subject to approval by the CLMSD.

E.    The user shall provide to the CLMSD immediate, clear, safe and uninterrupted access to the user’s monitoring and metering facilities.

F.    When required by the CLMSD, the user shall install a suitable control manhole in the side sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the CLMSD. The manhole shall be installed by the user at the user’s expense, and shall be maintained by the user at their expense, and shall be maintained as to be safe and accessible at all times. (Ord. 872 §4.2, 2008)

13.20.250 Drawing submittal requirements.
A.    Detailed plans shall be submitted to the CLMSD for review of existing or proposed construction of pretreatment facilities, spill containment facilities, monitoring facilities, metering facilities, and operating procedures. CLMSD approval of plans for proposed construction shall be received prior to commencement of construction. The review of the plans and procedures shall in no way relieve the user of the responsibility of modifying the facilities or procedures in the future, as necessary, to meet the requirements of this chapter or any requirements of other regulatory agencies.

B.    Three copies of all drawings shall be submitted for review.

C.    All drawings shall include the following:

1.    North arrow;

2.    Scale size;

3.    User name, project site, address, and assessor’s parcel number;

4.    Drawing name and drawing number;

5.    Date drawn or revised;

6.    Name of draftsman and name of person approving drawing.

D.    The CLMSD may require drawings to scale depicting the manufacturing process (waste-generating sources), spill containment, pretreatment facilities, and/or monitoring/metering facilities.

E.    The CLMSD may require a schematic drawing of the pretreatment facilities.

F.    The CLMSD may require the drawings be prepared by a California registered chemical, mechanical, or civil engineer. (Ord. 872 §4.3, 2008)

13.20.260 Pollution prevention requirements.
User shall provide pollution prevention plans, and/or pollution prevention audits, and/or waste management plans, to identify and quantify waste streams, and identify and evaluate source reduction measures. Evaluation and implementation measures may include, but are not limited to, input changes, operational improvements, production process changes, product reformulation, product substitution, recycling, inventory control, employee education and training, and other steps as necessary to avoid or reduce waste produced. (Ord. 872 §4.4, 2008)

ARTICLE IV. ADMINISTRATION

13.20.270 Wastewater discharges.
It shall be unlawful to discharge any waste or wastewater to any CLMSD facility without a CLMSD permit except as is authorized by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 872 §5.1, 2008)

13.20.280 Responsibility of users.
It shall be the responsibility of the user to comply with all of the provisions of this chapter. The omission to act by the CLMSD and/or the failure of the CLMSD to acknowledge the nature of the operation of the user and/or the properties of the user’s wastewater shall not relieve the user of responsibility to comply with the conditions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, such requirements regarding permitting, pretreatment, monitoring and reporting. It shall be the responsibility of the user to make determinations as to the nature of its operation and wastewater flow and to take such actions as may be required under this chapter prior to any discharge of wastewater, whether or not the user has been informed by the CLMSD of the requirements which may apply to the user regarding its discharge.

All users must notify the CLMSD of changes to be made to processes or methods of operation which may affect the nature of the discharge. This information shall be reported to, and be approved by, the CLMSD prior to the user’s initiation of the changes.

All industrial users who meet the definition of Class I, Class II, or Class III and who are currently connected or contribute to CLMSD facilities, or who propose to connect or contribute to CLMSD facilities, shall make application for a wastewater discharge permit. This application shall be made before connecting to or contributing to CLMSD facilities, or within ninety days after the enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter in the event the user is currently connected and not currently permitted. All existing industrial users connected to or contributing to CLMSD facilities and having a current wastewater discharge permit shall be required to obtain a new permit upon the expiration of their existing permit.

Class IV users may be required to receive a permit in order to connect to the CLMSD facilities or to continue to discharge to CLMSD facilities. At such time as the CLMSD undertakes such a program to permit Class IV users, existing Class IV users will be required to apply for a permit within ninety days of notice to said users by personal service, mail or publication. Thereafter it shall be the responsibility of all Class IV users to obtain a permit prior to connection. (Ord. 872 §5.2, 2008)

13.20.290 Classes of users.
The CLMSD will classify all users in accordance with the principal activity conducted on the premises where the discharge occurs. The purpose of the classification is to facilitate regulation of discharges to CLMSD facilities on the basis of each user’s waste quality, quantity and flow. The classification will further provide a means of imposing an appropriate level of oversight, control and enforcement according to the source of the discharge. As set forth in Section 13.20.020, there are two categories of users: domestic users and nondomestic users. Nondomestic users are categorized as Class I, II, III, or IV.

All users are subject to the prohibitions set forth in this chapter, with such federal and state statutes and regulations as may apply, and the specific pollutant limitations as may be promulgated by the CLMSD board either by ordinance or resolution.

Domestic users under normal circumstances will not be required to apply for or receive a wastewater discharge permit as defined in this chapter; provided, that said domestic user discharges only that wastewater which is consistent with the definition of domestic wastewater set forth herein.

Nondomestic users may be subject to wastewater discharge permit requirements depending on the volume, characteristics, and origin of their wastewater discharge. Industrial users may be required to supply such information and data concerning their processes, including discharge samples, as may be necessary for the CLMSD to determine whether such user should be designated as Class I, II, III or IV. Industrial users must, if requested, provide such other information regarding the nature of the entity, its operations, storage and use of chemicals and storage and use of hazardous substances as may be reasonably necessary to make such determination as to the classification of said user. The CLMSD may also require information relating to potential for accidental discharges of hazardous or prohibited substances to a CLMSD facility. Such inquiries may include information regarding the current disposal procedures of the user with regard to chemicals and/or substances which are not in the ordinary course of the user’s operations discharge to a CLMSD facility.

A.    Class I. For the purpose of this chapter, any user subject to the national categorical pretreatment standards is a categorical industrial user (CIU) and will be designated a Class I user.

B.    Class II. The CLMSD may designate a nondomestic user who is not subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard, but may be considered a significant industrial user (SIU), to be a Class II user, based on whether the discharge of wastewater is equal to or greater than twenty-five thousand gallons per average work day flow, or whether it has in its untreated wastewater pollutants which are in excess of any pretreatment standard, including any standard identified in this chapter or local limit set by resolution of the CLMSD board, or whether it may, in the opinion of the CLMSD, have a significant impact, either singularly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the CLMSD’s ability to meet the objectives of this chapter.

In addition, the designation of a nondomestic user as a Class II user may be based on the unusual character of the wastewater due to its volume, strength, composition, or its derivation from a hazardous waste or substance, or the potential variability in the character of the wastewater, or on the potential for increased administrative cost to the CLMSD due to the unusual character of the waste. Any additional administrative costs to be considered may include increased potential for the administrative oversight by federal, state and local agencies as well as the potential for increased liability exposure and associated legal costs. The CLMSD may also take into consideration difficulties in enforcement of this chapter under a wastewater discharge permit and the enforcement violation and compliance history of the user with the CLMSD, as well as other regulatory agencies.

C.    Class III. The CLMSD may designate any nondomestic user who is not designated as a Class I or Class II user as a Class III user. Class III users may include nondomestic users who are not industrial nor commercial users and (1) have a reasonable potential to adversely affect the CLMSD’s ability to meet the objectives of this chapter; or (2) generate hazardous waste, whether or not said waste is discharged into the sanitary sewer system, or if, in the determination of the CLMSD, there is a potential for this waste to be discharged into the sewer, even through accident, in nonprocess or process of handling of the waste; or (3) store or use hazardous materials, whether or not a hazardous waste is produced in an industrial or commercial process, if, in the determination of the CLMSD, a potential exists for significant impact upon CLMSD facilities due to a release of these materials into the environment.

Class III users may be individually designated by the CLMSD based on the criteria set forth in this subsection, or on categorization of the user as a member of a particular business category. A Class III user designation may include, but is not limited to, landfill operations, landfill leachate, or ground water cleanup sites.

D.    Class IV. Any nondomestic user who is not designated as a Class I, Class II, or Class III user may be designated as a Class IV user if the user (1) has a reasonable potential to adversely affect the CLMSD’s ability to meet the objectives of this chapter; or (2) generates hazardous waste, whether or not said waste is, in the normal course of the industrial or commercial process, discharged into the sanitary sewer system, or if, in the determination of the CLMSD, there is a potential for this waste to be discharged into the sewer, even through accident, in nonprocess or process of handling of the waste; or (3) stores or uses hazardous materials, whether or not a hazardous waste is produced in the industrial or commercial process, if, in the determination of the CLMSD, a potential exists for significant impact upon CLMSD facilities due to a release of these materials into the environment.

Class IV users may be individually designated by the CLMSD based on the criteria set forth in this subsection or on categorization of the user as a member of a particular business category. The Class IV user designation shall include, but is not limited to, the following business categories: analytical laboratories, clinical laboratories, dry cleaners, laundries, vehicle maintenance facilities, vehicle repair facilities, gasoline stations, printing shops, printing allied industries, photo processors, pesticide formulators, pesticide applicators, dental offices, dental laboratories and x-ray laboratories, and veterinary providers. (Ord. 872 §5.3, 2008)

13.20.300 Wastewater discharge permit.
A.    Permit Application. All Class I, Class II, and Class III users are required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit by completing and filing with the CLMSD an application in the form prescribed by the CLMSD. At such time as the CLMSD undertakes such a program to permit Class IV users, existing Class IV users will be required to apply for a permit within ninety days of notice to said users by personal service, mail or publication. Thereafter it shall be the responsibility of all Class IV users to obtain a permit prior to connection. A permit fee may be assessed at the time of the application as set by the CLMSD board by resolution. Existing Class I, Class II, and Class III users shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within ninety days following the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and proposed new users shall apply at least thirty days prior to connecting to or contributing to CLMSD facilities. In support of the application, the user may be required to submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, some or all of the following information:

1.    Name and address of the operator or owner and location of the facility for which the permit application is being made.

2.    SIC number(s) according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Executive Office of the President of the United States, Office of the Budget, 1972, as amended, for all operations conducted at the facility.

3.    A list of all environmental control permits and hazardous substance release response (spill) plans that are held by or for the facility.

4.    Time(s) and duration of all process discharges.

5.    Average daily and fifteen-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations if any. Flow rates shall be provided for each regulated process stream.

6.    Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation.

7.    Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials which are or could be discharged. A description of any and all existing or proposed wastewater pretreatment facilities. Construction drawings and design criteria shall also be submitted.

8.    The nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by the CLMSD, state, or national pretreatment standards, or which are otherwise requested by the CLMSD. Pollutant data shall be provided for each regulated process stream. In the case of an existing user, a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards.

9.    The nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by state or federal standards concerning the release or discharge of any hazardous substance or waste.

10.    If additional pretreatment, housekeeping, process changes and/or operations will be required to meet the pretreatment standards; the shortest schedule by which the user shall provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established by the EPA, the state or the CLMSD for the applicable standard. The following conditions will apply to this schedule:

a.    The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.).

b.    Not later than fourteen days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the CLMSD director including, as a minimum, whether or not the user complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which the user expects to comply with the increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established.

11.    Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production.

12.    Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day).

13.    Number, type and volume/amount of hazardous substances stored on the premises and a description of the method of storage and/or the containment device for such substance.

14.    A description of the spill protection and emergency response procedures used or proposed to be used at the facility.

15.    Waste minimization plans or audits.

16.    Number and classification of employees, and hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system.

17.    A certification statement that the information presented in the permit application is true and accurate to the best of the responsible person’s knowledge.

18.    Any other information as may be deemed by the CLMSD to be necessary to evaluate the permit application.

B.    Permit Application Evaluation. All new prospective industrial users shall arrange for a CLMSD representative to conduct a walk-through site inspection of the user’s facilities during the ninety-day period prior to connecting to CLMSD facilities. New industrial users shall submit to the CLMSD, within ninety days after commencement of discharge to CLMSD facilities, an analysis of said discharge delineating wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not limited to, those mentioned in Article II of this chapter.

The CLMSD will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the CLMSD may determine that no wastewater discharge permit is required, or the CLMSD may determine that the user is either a Class I, Class II, Class III or Class IV user.

If the CLMSD determines that the user is a Class I, Class II or Class III user, the CLMSD will issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to the terms and conditions provided in this chapter. If the CLMSD determines that the user is a Class IV user, the CLMSD may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to the terms and conditions provided in this chapter.

C.    Permit Conditions. Permits may contain provisions, requirements and standards appropriate to carry out the objectives of this chapter, including but not limited to the following:

1.    The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to CLMSD facilities.

2.    Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics. These limits may be based on pollutant concentration and/or mass and may include prohibitions on discharge of said pollutants.

3.    Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulation and/or equalization.

4.    Requirements for installation and maintenance of sampling and flow metering facilities.

5.    Requirements for monitoring programs which may include flow metering; sampling locations; methods of sampling; frequency of sampling; number; types and standards for tests; and reporting schedule.

6.    Compliance schedules.

7.    Requirements for submission of technical reports or periodic compliance reports.

8.    Requirements for maintaining and retaining, for a minimum of three years, plant records relating to wastewater discharge, hazardous waste manifests and chemical inventories as specified by the CLMSD.

9.    Requirements for notification of the CLMSD of any new introduction of pollutants or any change in plant processes or in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into CLMSD facilities.

10.    Requirements for notification of slug or accidental discharges, including discharge limit violations, or upset of the pretreatment facility.

11.    Requirements for providing the CLMSD with design and construction plans and specifications of the wastewater pretreatment facility whether proposed or in existence.

12.    Requirements for providing the CLMSD with plans and specifications of the user’s industrial or commercial operation and/or processes, including such other information as the CLMSD may reasonably request that pertains to the industrial user’s operation.

13.    Requirements for providing the CLMSD with waste minimization audits/plans.

14.    Requirements for notification of any planned alteration of the proposed or existing wastewater pretreatment system.

15.    Requirements for the notification of the CLMSD of planned alterations of the operations processes of the industrial user which could result in an alteration of the user’s process discharge or the potential for an accidental spill or slug discharge.

16.    Requirements prohibiting bypass of the wastewater pretreatment facility, unless bypass is essential for maintenance, or unavoidable to prevent loss of life, injury or severe property damage.

17.    Requirement that the user notifies the CLMSD prior to any proposed bypass other than due to accident or emergency.

18.    Requirements to have emergency spill plans on file with the CLMSD.

19.    Requirements to certify that the industrial user has not discharged through a CLMSD facility hazardous substances without a permit, which substances have been stored or used in the user’s process and which the user contends will not, in the ordinary course of the user’s operation, enter the sewer system.

20.    Requirements for resampling following a discharge violation and the submittal of reports explaining the cause of the violation and the steps that have been or shall be taken to prevent a recurrence of the violation.

21.    Requirements for providing access to CLMSD personnel at all reasonable times to conduct sampling and/or inspection of any and all processes which can contribute to waste stream, including the actual wastewater discharge.

22.    Requirements for providing the CLMSD with operation and maintenance records for the wastewater pretreatment facility, including periodic updates, as appropriate.

23.    The prohibition of dilution as partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with permit conditions.

24.    Signatory requirements specifying the responsible corporate officer for the industrial user.

25.    Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the CLMSD to ensure compliance with this chapter.

26.    Technical provisions or requirements related to the wastewater pretreatment facility which, in the opinion of the CLMSD, may be necessary to ensure the adequacy and reliability of the wastewater pretreatment system. These technical conditions may include conditions requiring continuous monitoring, training personnel, alarm systems, automated shutoff, flow-through monitoring, and/or provisions for discharges in batch amounts only subsequent to sample testing.

D.    Duration of Permits. Permits will be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed three years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of ninety days prior to the expiration of the user’s existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the CLMSD during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in Article II are modified or other just cause exists. The user will be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least thirty days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit will include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.

E.    Wastewater Discharge Permit. The CLMSD will require Class I, Class II, and Class III users to have a wastewater discharge permit for connecting to or contributing wastewater to CLMSD facilities. At such time as the CLMSD undertakes such a program to permit Class IV users, existing Class IV users will be required to apply for a permit within ninety days of notice to said users by personal service, mail or publication. Thereafter it shall be the responsibility of all Class IV users to obtain a permit prior to connection. The wastewater discharge permit will incorporate the provisions of this chapter by reference including all requirements and standards as may be set forth herein or promulgated by the CLMSD board by resolution. In addition, the permit may contain additional provisions, including but not limited to the following:

1.    Provisions for liquidated damages for discharges in violation of the discharge prohibitions and limitations of this chapter and/or of such special prohibitions or limitations as may be set forth in the permit. These liquidated damages provisions may be proposed without regard to proof of pass-through, damage to the environment, or interference with CLMSD facilities or operations and may be assessed on a strict liability basis for violation of the noted provisions.

2.    Requirements for providing proof of insurance, indemnification of the CLMSD, and bonding in order to adequately protect the CLMSD, in its judgment, from the potential of the increased exposure to liability due to the user’s discharge.

3.    Provisions for revocation of the permit and wastewater sewer service for violation of this chapter or other wastewater permit condition(s).

4.    Any and all other conditions as may be deemed appropriate by the CLMSD to ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter and the objectives set forth herein.

F.    Permit Modifications. Within ninety days of promulgation of a national pretreatment standard, the wastewater discharge permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standards within the time frame prescribed by such standard. When a user, subject to a national pretreatment standard, has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit as required by subsection B of this section, the user shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within one hundred eighty days after the promulgation of the applicable national pretreatment standard. In addition, the user with an existing wastewater discharge permit shall submit to the CLMSD director, within one hundred eighty days after the promulgation of an applicable national pretreatment standard, the information required by subsection A of this section.

In the event the CLMSD determines that it is necessary in order to comply with the objectives of this chapter to impose more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the CLMSD facilities than are set forth in an existing permit (for reasons other than issuance of a new national pretreatment standard), the CLMSD shall have the right to require such reasonable modifications of an existing permit to incorporate such more stringent limitations or requirements. In the event such permit modification is required, the user will be provided with reasonable time to make such modifications to its processes or procedures as may be required to meet the more stringent limitations and requirements. After consultations with the user, a compliance schedule agreement will be issued which would set forth a reasonable schedule for the user to comply with the more stringent standards. If the permit modification will require construction or acquisition of equipment related to pretreatment, the compliance schedule agreement will provide for up to one hundred eighty days to comply; however, this period may be extended for a period not to exceed an additional one hundred eighty days upon determination by the CLMSD director or CLMSD engineer that good cause exists for an additional period. To the extent that the user remains in compliance with the permit conditions in effect prior to amendment during the compliance period, the user shall not be liable pursuant to the terms of this chapter for noncompliance with the more stringent standards or requirements during the period of the compliance schedule agreement; provided, that the user is also complying with the terms of said compliance schedule agreement.

G.    Permit Transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without the prior approval of the CLMSD. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the application of the terms and conditions of this chapter, including enforcement penalties, from applying to a succeeding owner, successor in interest, or other assigns of an existing contract of permit holder. (Ord. 872 §5.4, 2008)

13.20.310 Reporting requirements.
A.    Notification of Slug Discharge or Accidental Discharge or Accidental Spill. It is the responsibility of all users to immediately telephone and notify the CLMSD of any slug discharge or accidental discharge or accidental spill as defined in Section 13.20.160. Notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume and corrective actions.

1.    Written Notice. Within five days following the accidental discharge, accidental spill, or slug discharge, the user shall submit to the CLMSD director a detailed written report describing the cause of the incident and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to CLMSD facilities, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other applicable law.

2.    Notice to Employees. Users who are employers shall permanently post a notice on their bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees of the user whom to call in the event of such a discharge. The user shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure.

B.    Baseline Monitoring Report. All industrial users, subject to categorical pretreatment standards, shall submit to the CLMSD a baseline monitoring report (BMR) within one hundred and eighty days of the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard or one hundred and eighty days after final decision on a category determination by EPA or the state, whichever is earlier. The BMR shall contain the information specified in 40 CFR 403.12(b), including a statement reviewed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and certified by a qualified professional indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. The information required for application for a permit under Section 13.20.300(A) and/or for modification of a permit under Section 13.20.300(F) may fulfill the requirements of the baseline monitoring report. If in submitting information to apply for or modify a permit, the user also intends to fulfill the requirements for the BMR, the user shall so state.

C.    Compliance Report. Within ninety days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements or, in the case of a new user connection, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into CLMSD facilities, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the CLMSD, per 40 CFR 403.12(b), a report which includes the following information:

1.    Name and address of facility, including the name of the operator and owners.

2.    List of any environmental permits held by and for the facility.

3.    Description of operations, including:

a.    Nature of operations;

b.    Average rate of production;

c.    SIC code;

d.    Diagram of discharge points to the sanitary system.

4.    Flow measurement, in gallons per day.

5.    Measurement of pollutants.

6.    Certification statement signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user.

7.    Compliance schedule, if additional pretreatment and/or actions will be required to meet pretreatment standards.

Filing of this compliance report does not relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other applicable law or failure to meet the applicable pretreatment standards and requirements subsequent to the date for final compliance with such applicable standard.

D.    Compliance Schedule Reports. Compliance schedule reports must include the following per 40 CFR 403.12(c):

1.    A schedule containing increments of progress leading to construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for compliance of categorical standards.

2.    Increments of progress shall not be greater than nine months.

3.    Progress report shall be submitted to the CLMSD not later than fourteen days following the end date in the schedule, whether or not it complied with the increments of progress set forth in the schedule.

E.    Periodic Compliance Reports.

1.    Class I and II users and SIUs shall submit a report to the CLMSD twice a year or more frequently as specified in the permit. Unless otherwise specified in the permit, reports for Class I and II users and SIUs are due on the 30th of January and December of each year. Class III users may be required to submit periodic compliance reports depending on the nature of their discharge. Periodic compliance reports shall be submitted within forty-five days of collection of the wastewater samples. The compliance report shall contain such information as may be deemed by the CLMSD to be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Compliance reports shall, at a minimum, contain the following:

a.    The results of sampling and analysis showing the nature and concentration of pollutants which are limited by pretreatment standards or which are specified in the permit for each regulated stream.

b.    A record of average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period for each regulated stream.

c.    Such other wastewater effluent data as the user has obtained since the last compliance report, whether or not that data is specifically required by the user’s permit.

d.    Methods utilized by the user in collecting the wastewater sample for analysis, including but not limited to the sampling device(s) used, the sampling period, the amount of each sample collected, sample handling and preservation techniques used, and date of sample delivery to the laboratory for analysis.

e.    For those CIUs subject to production-based pretreatment standards, the user’s actual average production rate for the reporting period.

2.    Resampling Requirement. In the event a sample from a periodic compliance report indicates that a constituent is in violation of the allowable concentration levels as set forth in the user’s permit, the user shall inform the CLMSD within twenty-four hours of becoming aware of the violation, repeat the sampling and pollutant analysis for the parameter in violation, and submit in writing the results of this second analysis within thirty days of the discovery of the first violation. The initial sampling and analysis report shall be submitted within five days of discovering the violation, with a cover report setting forth the causes of the violation, the remedial actions taken to date in regard to the violation, and the scheduled additional actions which will be implemented to prevent a recurrence.

3.    The CLMSD may also at any time require a signed statement by the user setting forth management practices and/or material usage practices which have an effect on the nature, volume and quality of the wastewater discharge and/or which potentially will affect the ability to comply with pretreatment standards and requirements.

4.    The CLMSD may impose mass limitations on users where the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. In such cases, the report required under subsection (E)(1)(a) of this section shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. These reports shall contain the results of all sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow, concentration and mass of pollutants regulated by the applicable pretreatment standard. The user shall provide the actual average production rate of the regulated processes during the reporting period. (Ord. 872 §5.5, 2008)

13.20.320 Monitoring.
A.    Monitoring Requirements. Any user may be required to provide wastewater samples and/or monitoring results or to submit to monitoring by the CLMSD in order to assist the CLMSD in establishing the appropriate class of the user and/or to evaluate compliance with the standards and requirements of this chapter.

1.    Classification Sampling. All industrial users may be required to sample and analyze their discharge to determine the appropriate class of the user. Classification sampling shall be at the CLMSD’s request. The number and type of samples and pollutants analyzed shall be as specified by the CLMSD in order to adequately characterize the user’s discharge(s).

2.    Baseline Sampling. All Class I, Class II and Class III users shall sample and analyze their discharge as part of a permit application or modification of a permit as specified in Sections 13.20.300(A) and (F). In addition, all users subject to categorical pretreatment standards who are required to submit baseline monitoring reports, as specified in Section 13.20.310(B), shall sample and analyze their discharge in accordance with the requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(b). Samples shall be analyzed for constituents or characteristics including, but not limited to, those mentioned in Article II of this chapter and/or in applicable state or national pretreatment standards or as otherwise required by the CLMSD.

3.    Initial Compliance Sampling. All Class I, Class II and Class III users shall sample and analyze their discharge for the compliance report as specified in Section 13.20.310(C). Samples shall be analyzed for those pollutants regulated in the applicable pretreatment standard or as otherwise required by the CLMSD.

4.    Periodic Compliance Sampling. All Class I, Class II and Class III users shall sample and analyze their discharge to evaluate compliance with the user’s permit. Periodic compliance sampling shall be conducted at least twice each year unless specified more frequently in the user’s permit or in the applicable national pretreatment standard. Samples shall be analyzed for those pollutants regulated in the applicable pretreatment standard or as otherwise required by the CLMSD.

5.    Confirmation Sampling. Whenever sampling results indicate that the user’s discharge is in violation of any pretreatment standard, the user shall collect a second sample to assess the degree of violation. For the second sample, the user need only analyze for the pollutant(s) found to be in violation. The user shall provide the CLMSD with the results from the confirmation sampling within thirty days of the date the violation was discovered.

6.    Sampling and Evaluation Program (SEP). If confirmation sampling indicates a second violation, then the CLMSD may initiate a SEP. The SEP will be conducted by the CLMSD and may include collection of from three to five samples. The SEP will establish whether there is continued noncompliance by the user. Samples collected during the SEP may be analyzed for other pollutants in addition to the pollutant(s) in violation.

7.    Other Compliance Sampling. All Class I, Class II and Class III industrial users may be required by the CLMSD to conduct compliance sampling in addition to those described above. This could include, but is not limited to, sampling required by the CLMSD in an enforcement compliance schedule agreement.

8.    CLMSD Sampling. The CLMSD may collect and analyze samples on its own or request the user to split samples to evaluate compliance with this chapter or the user’s permit. The CLMSD also reserves the right to conduct all sampling and analysis for the user with all costs to be paid by the user. In the event that data obtained by the CLMSD differs from data provided by the user, the CLMSD data shall be presumed accurate unless and until the user provides substantial evidence otherwise. In the event that the CLMSD performs the sampling, whether announced or unannounced, the user may request that the CLMSD split its samples and provide one of the split samples for the user’s independent analysis.

B.    Sampling Procedures. All sampling and testing undertaken for the purpose of compliance with the requirements of this chapter shall be undertaken in the manner set forth herein. Except as otherwise provided in this section, each sample shall be a composite, discrete sample which reflects the discharge of the user’s regulated waste stream(s) throughout the entire work day or twenty-four-hour period. Samples for pH, cyanide, sulfide, phenols, oil and grease, and volatile organics shall be grab samples. Minimum frequency for composite samples shall be each hour, and for grab samples at least every four hours. Each regulated waste stream shall be sampled and analyzed separately unless the user’s permit allows for sampling and analyzing the combined waste streams.

The methods of obtaining the sample shall be specified by the CLMSD in the user’s permit. As an alternative, a sampling program proposed by the user shall be submitted to the CLMSD for review prior to initiating said program. The CLMSD may state special sampling requirements as needed to ensure compliance with this chapter.

C.    Sampling and Analytical Procedures. All samples shall be collected, preserved, and analyzed in accordance with the procedures presented in 40 CFR 136 (Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for the Analysis of Pollutants). Unless approved otherwise by the CLMSD, all analyses shall be performed by laboratories certified by the state for the specific pollutants and matrix to be analyzed.

D.    Sampling Records. For each sampling event, the user shall record and maintain the following information:

1.    The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the names of the person or persons taking the samples.

2.    Sample preservation used.

3.    The dates analyses were performed.

4.    Chain of custody of sample.

5.    Who performed the analyses.

6.    The analytical techniques/methods used.

7.    The results of such analyses.

E.    Monitoring Facilities. The CLMSD may require monitoring facilities, to be provided and operated at the user’s own expense, to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of regulated discharge. The monitoring facility shall be accessible to CLMSD staff at all times and should normally be situated on the user’s premises, but the CLMSD may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.

There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user.

Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the CLMSD requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications.

F.    Obtaining a Sewer Lateral Certificate of Compliance for the Privately Owned Portion of a Sewer Lateral/Building Sewer. Setting forth the minimum standards to which private sewer laterals will be repaired, replaced, or relined for the purpose of obtaining a sewer lateral certificate of compliance. The CLMSD requires the cleaning, inspection, and testing of private sewer laterals connected to public sewers and serving residential, multifamily residential, commercial or industrial use properties upon the occurrence of stipulated property events. The CLMSD assumes that all sewer laterals, not meeting the requirements set forth in this section and not subject to the exemptions provided herein, allow inflow and infiltration into CLMSD facilities.

1.    In the CLMSD, the exempted transactions or events requiring the cleaning, inspection and testing of a private sewer lateral are:

a.    The application for a new connection to the sewer collection system;

b.    The application for a building permit for a remodel of any structure being served by the private sewer lateral where the cost of the cumulative value of applicable improvements over the past five years exceeds forty-five thousand dollars in 2007 dollars and adjusted every year for inflation;

c.    The application for a building or plumbing permit to install additional toilet facilities on the property served;

d.    The application for a change of use on property served from residential to commercial or from non-restaurant commercial to restaurant commercial;

e.    Any repair or replacement of the main sewer to which the private sewer lateral is connected;

f.    A determination by the director that the cleaning, inspection, and testing is required for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare; or

g.    The user chooses to close and stop payment for an existing sewer account without the transfer of such account to another user.

2.    The property owner is responsible for the repair or replacement of a privately owned sewer lateral which has been found through testing and inspection to exhibit conditions which would permit excessive infiltration to enter the sewer collection system or excessive exfiltration. The "privately owned sewer" is defined as that part of the sewer lateral that is required to be maintained by the property owner in accordance with ordinances adopted by the CLMSD and described in Section 13.20.020 under "building sewer/private sewer lateral." Upon completion of the repair or replacement of the private sewer lateral, re-inspections are to be conducted until the private sewer lateral passes the required testing. "Excessive infiltration or exfiltration" is defined as exceeding the allowable amount as specified herein. Once the private sewer lateral has successfully passed the inspection and testing procedure, the director shall execute a sewer lateral certificate of compliance which shall be filed with the director and the building department having jurisdiction and recorded with the county recorder of Lake County.

3.    There are two categories of sewer lateral certification of compliance for the continued service of a lateral based upon materials and performance:

a.    A ten-year certificate for existing laterals that do not conform to the current material standards for new laterals as established in the California Plumbing Code adopted by the CLMSD and do not exfiltrate at a rate greater than that established in the exfiltration pressure test for existing laterals (refer to the provisions specified in specified pressure tests of these standards).

b.    A twenty-five-year certificate for existing, existing repaired or existing replaced private sewer laterals that meet the current material and testing standards for new laterals as established in the California Plumbing Code adopted by the CLMSD. For a twenty-five-year certificate, the private sewer lateral must be watertight. An alternative testing and inspection procedure for a ten-year certificate consisting only of a CCTV inspection of the private sewer lateral is applicable when the potential for hydrostatic conditions around the private sewer lateral does not exist.

4.    Currently, all property served by the CLMSD is within the zone designated as having the potential for hydrostatic pressures. In the CLMSD there are four exemptions to the cleaning, inspection, and testing requirements set forth in this chapter other than certain transfers of interest in real property and they are:

a.    Private sewer laterals that have been inspected within the last twenty-five years where the lateral is made of PVC, metal, or other modern material meeting the California Plumbing Code;

b.    Private sewer laterals that have been inspected within the last ten years where the lateral is not made of PVC, metal, or other modern material meeting the California Plumbing Code;

c.    Private sewer laterals that were last installed or replaced within the last twenty-five years where the lateral is made of PVC, metal, or other modern material meeting the California Plumbing Code; and

d.    Any building where the director determines that testing and/or repairs have been made in accordance with this chapter within the last five years.

5.    Certificates of compliance will be issued indicating that the private sewer lateral is exempt from the inspection and testing provisions of this chapter if the private sewer lateral meets the exemptions stated above. However, the certificate of compliance for an exemption expires upon the occurrence of an event requiring the inspection or testing or upon the occurrence of another exempted event.

G.    Approved Repair Methods and Materials for Privately Owned Sewer Laterals.

1.    Materials used in the repair or replacement of existing private sewer laterals which have failed to pass an inspection and/or test shall be made of pipe materials, fittings, couplings, and other joining materials which have been approved for use pursuant to the current edition of the California Plumbing Code at the time of the inspection and/or testing, and as modified and specified in these standards.

2.    Private sewer laterals constructed of an approved pipe material which have cracked pipe sections where the pipe has retained its original shape and does not show excessive deflection and is not subjected to hydrostatic pressures either outside or inside the pipe may be repaired with an approved cured-in-place spot repair lining.

3.    Private sewer laterals which are subjected to hydrostatic water conditions either inside or outside the pipe and which have not passed a required pressure test may be repaired with an approved cured-in-place pipe lining system installed within the entire length of the sewer lateral from the wye in the sewer main to the private sewer lateral cleanout closest to the building footing or replaced in its entirety with approved pipe materials. At the conclusion of the repair, replacement, or relining the complete sewer lateral must pass specified pressure tests.

4.    The replacement of damaged pipe sections with approved materials, fittings, and couplings is only acceptable where the private sewer lateral is not subjected to hydrostatic pressures either inside or outside of the pipe unless the complete private sewer lateral can pass the required pressure test after the repairs are complete.

5.    Whenever fifty percent or less of the private sewer lateral is repaired, replaced, or relined (minor or no repair), cleanouts shall be provided to grade to facilitate the inspection and testing at either the junction of the building drain and the private sewer lateral at a point approved by the permitting agency, typically within two feet of the structure being served by the lateral, or at or near the property line at a point and in a manner approved by the city of Lakeport community development department if in the public right-of-way, or at a point and in a manner approved by the permitting agency if not in the public right-of-way and on private property. For that portion of the private sewer lateral being repaired, replaced, or relined, cleanouts shall also be provided to grade at intervals not to exceed one hundred feet in run of a cleaning snake to reach the adjacent run of a cleaning snake, and for each aggregate horizontal change in direction exceeding one hundred thirty-five degrees in accordance with the California Plumbing Code.

6.    Whenever a private sewer lateral is more than fifty percent replaced or relined (major repair or replacement), cleanouts shall be provided to grade in accordance with the California Plumbing Code which include all of the following locations:

a.    At the junction of the building drain and the private sewer lateral at a point approved by the permitting agency, typically within two feet of the structure being served by the lateral.

b.    At intervals not to exceed one hundred feet in run of a cleaning snake to reach the adjacent run of a cleaning snake, and for each aggregate horizontal change in direction exceeding one hundred thirty-five degrees.

c.    At or near the property line at a point and in a manner approved by the city of Lakeport community development department if in the public way, or at a point and in a manner approved by the permitting agency if not in the public way and on private property.

7.    Approved trenchless technologies such as pipe bursting may be utilized to replace private sewer laterals.

8.    Spot repairs consisting of the placement of metal or other sheeting materials and concrete or mortar will not be accepted.

9.    Remortaring of joints as a repair method is not acceptable without prior approval of the permitting agency.

10.    Pipe and pipe couplings shall be joined and installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. Pipe repairs shall be made in a manner which provides the least number of pipe joints.

11.    Damaged wyes at the sewer main shall be replaced by the CLMSD.

H.    Backfilling Methods in the Public Right-of-Way for Privately Owned Sewer Laterals. Backfilling methods utilized in the public right-of-way shall conform to the standards and specifications adopted by the agency having jurisdiction of the public right-of-way and in accordance with the provisions of the encroachment permit issued by the permitting agency.

I.    Types of Pipe Damage That Must Be Repaired or Pipe Sections Replaced for Privately Owned Sewer Laterals.

1.    Where the private sewer lateral is not subjected to hydrostatic conditions and the exfiltration test is not required (allowed CCTV inspection), the pipe repairs must be made for the following pipe conditions:

a.    A separation or offset in the pipe joint, including any fish mouth condition at the joint.

b.    Holes or cracks in the pipe bell, barrel, or coupling.

c.    For PVC pipe, a deflection in the pipe cross-section exceeding one-fourth inch.

d.    Failed trench section causing excessive belly or sump condition in a pipe section causing retention of water of one inch or more.

e.    Root penetration into the pipe.

2.    Where the private sewer lateral is subjected to hydrostatic conditions and the pipe repair option selected is pipe lining, repairs shall be made to the private sewer lateral prior to the installation of the liner and the repair shall correct the following deficiencies:

a.    A separation or offset in the pipe joint including any fish mouth condition at the joint which the lining system cannot bridge based on the liner manufacturer’s recommendations.

b.    Holes in the pipe bell, barrel, or coupling that the lining system cannot bridge.

c.    For PVC pipe, a deflection in the pipe cross-section exceeding one-fourth inch.

d.    Failed trench section causing excessive belly or sump condition in a pipe section causing retention of water of one inch or more.

e.    Root penetration into the pipe.

f.    Other lateral defects which the manufacturer of the lining system recommends be corrected prior to the placement of the liner.

J.    Hydrostatic Pressure Conditions Defined for Privately Owned Sewer Laterals.

1.    Hydrostatic pressures exist around the private sewer lateral when the lateral is completely or partially submerged by ground water or exists within the lateral when discharges to the lateral exceed the capacity of the pipe or are subject to water head.

2.    The following circumstances shall be prima facie evidence that the private sewer lateral is subject to hydrostatic pressures:

a.    The property being served by the CLMSD is located within a special flood hazard area as defined by the latest flood insurance rate map issued by the National Flood Insurance Program; and if any portion of the property is located within one hundred feet of the bank of a stream, creek or drainage ditch and any portion of the lateral is below the elevation of the nearest bank.

b.    For commercial or industrial uses, at any time the discharge to the private sewer lateral exceeds the following flows for a three-inch-diameter sewer pipe at the indicated slopes or if there exists on the property a plumbing fixture that has the indicated capacity:

i.    Fifty gallons per minute with slope of one-eighth inch per foot;

ii.    Thirty-five gallons per minute with slope of one-eighth inch per foot.

c.    For commercial or industrial uses, at any time the discharge to the private sewer lateral exceeds the following flows for a four-inch-diameter sewer pipe at the indicated slopes or if there exists on the property a plumbing fixture that has the indicated capacity:

i.    One hundred gallons per minute with slope of one-eighth inch per foot;

ii.    Seventy-five gallons per minute with slope of one-eighth inch per foot.

d.    For commercial or industrial uses, at any time the discharge to the private sewer lateral exceeds the following flows for a six-inch-diameter sewer pipe at the indicated slopes or if there exists on the property a plumbing fixture that has the indicated capacity:

i.    Three hundred ten gallons per minute with slope of one-eighth inch per foot;

ii.    Two hundred fifteen gallons per minute with slope of one-eighth inch per foot.

e.    Verification from a closed circuit television inspection that clear water is being discharged into the sewer main from the private sewer lateral.

f.    Evidence that a basement sump pump is utilized on the property being served.

3.    All pressure laterals shall be pressure tested at one and one-half times the operating pressure and no more than a one percent pressure loss shall be detected within a ten-minute test.

K.    Specified Pressure Tests for Privately Owned Sewer Laterals. When hydrostatic pressure conditions can exist outside or inside of the private sewer lateral at any time, the private sewer lateral shall be pressure tested by the exfiltration method by plugging the end of the private sewer lateral at its point of connection to the public sewer and completely filling the private sewer lateral with water from the lowest to the highest point thereof. To perform a pressure test, the private sewer lateral must have a cleanout located near the building footing which is served by the private sewer lateral or at the property line. If the cleanout does not exist, one must be installed by a qualified owner/builder or by a licensed contractor under a plumbing permit issued by the agency having jurisdiction over the property as part of the test procedure. The contractor or qualified owner may perform preliminary pressure tests prior to completing the backfill operations; however, the final pressure test shall be performed after the completion of the backfill operations. A video inspection of the downstream side of the test plug must be performed during the exfiltration pressure test to confirm that the test plug has sealed.

1.    The exfiltration pressure test for a gravity private sewer lateral shall be performed with potable or recycled water by filling the private sewer lateral to a level three inches below the lowest floor drain or fixture connection to the building drain system up to a maximum water column of thirty-three feet above the test plug in the lateral at the lateral wye fitting below the property line cleanout. If necessary, a stand pipe shall be fitted to the top of the cleanout to achieve the required testing water level. The testing water level shall also be at least higher than the elevation of the back edge of the public sidewalk at the point above the approximate location of the private sewer lateral, or the top of curb if there is no public sidewalk or the edge of pavement if there is no curb or public sidewalk. An approved backwater valve and cleanout shall be installed at the property line if there is any gravity-drained plumbing fixture in the structure being served that is below the elevation of the back edge of the public sidewalk at the point above the approximate location of the sewer lateral, or the top of curb if there is no public sidewalk or the edge of pavement if there is no curb or public sidewalk. A lateral may be tested in segments subject to the approval of the inspector. When segmental pipe testing is performed, each tested pipe segment must not exceed the allowed leakage rate.

2.    The private sewer lateral will have passed the pressure test if the testing water level within the testing standpipe does not drop more than the indicated rate for the given diameter of testing standpipe indicated below. The allowed leakage per sewer lateral is 212.5 gallons per day or 8.85 gallons per hour or .15 gallons per minute or 34.08 cubic inches per minute.

a.    Three-inch diameter: five inches per minute;

b.    Four-inch diameter: two and one-half inches per minute;

c.    Six-inch diameter: one and one-half inches per minute.

L.    The Metering of Pumps. All users operating pumps that convey any discharge to the CLMSD shall meter such pumps. All pumps and meters shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user and be located as to allow safe and continuous access at all times. Such meters may be read by CLMSD representatives. (Ord. 872 §5.6, 2008)

13.20.330 Signatory requirements.
All applications, reports or other information submitted to the CLMSD must contain the following certification statement:

I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision and in accordance with the system designed to insure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person(s) who manage the system, or those directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for knowingly submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.

This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user as defined in 40 CFR 403.12(l)(1-4). BMRs and ninety-day compliance reports shall also be certified by a qualified professional in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(b)(6). (Ord. 872 §5.7, 2008)

13.20.340 Rights of entry.
The CLMSD has the right of inspection of the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the objectives of this chapter are being met and all standards and requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is generated or discharged, or where hazardous substances or hazardous wastes are present, shall allow the CLMSD or its representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photographing, analysis, records examination, records copying or performance of any of their duties. The CLMSD, or its authorized representative, accompanied by such other representatives of other public agencies as may be appropriate, shall have the right to set up on the user’s property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations.

Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry onto their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the CLMSD, along with other authorized representatives, shall be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.

Such inspection(s) will be made with the consent of the owner or possessor of such facilities or, if such consent is refused, with a warrant duly issued pursuant to the procedures set forth in Title 13 (commencing with Section 1822.5) of Part 3 of the California Code of Civil Procedure; provided, however, that in the event of an emergency affecting public health or safety, such inspection may be made without consent or the issuance of a warrant. To the extent that the owner or possessor of the premises requires that a warrant be received, the CLMSD may, in its discretion, suspend the permit and/or any other right to discharge to sanitary facilities immediately, and such suspension may continue until such time as a warrant has been received and the inspection has been completed. If no violation of this chapter is found, the suspension will be lifted. In the event that violations of this chapter or the CLMSD permit, if applicable, are found, then the suspension may, in the discretion of the CLMSD, be continued, or permit and/or right to discharge to CLMSD facilities terminated, or other enforcement remedies may be sought.

The CLMSD may choose to inspect the facility to determine compliance with all standards set forth in this chapter, the CLMSD permit, if applicable, and additionally, such inspections may be undertaken to verify the wastewater flows and strengths reported by the user. (Ord. 872 §5.8, 2008)

13.20.350 Pretreatment.
Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all national pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal regulations, or this chapter, or the CLMSD permit, whichever is earliest. Any facilities required to pre-treat wastewater to a level acceptable to the CLMSD shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user’s expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the CLMSD for review, and shall be approved by the CLMSD before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the CLMSD under the provisions of this chapter. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be approved by the CLMSD prior to the user’s initiation of the changes. (Ord. 872 §5.9, 2008)

13.20.360 Publication of users in significant noncompliance.
Pursuant to federal requirements, the CLMSD shall annually publish, in the highest circulated daily newspaper in the CLMSD service area, a list of the users who were in significant noncompliance with any pretreatment requirements or standards at any time during the twelve previous months. The notification will also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the user(s) during the same twelve months. (Ord. 872 §5.10, 2008)

13.20.370 Records retention.
All records relating to compliance with pretreatment requirements and standards shall be made available to officials of the EPA, state, and CLMSD, or their authorized representatives. Such records shall include for all samples: (A) the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the names of the person or persons taking the samples; (B) the dates analyses were performed; (C) who performed the analyses; (D) the analytical techniques/methods used; and (E) the results of such analyses. These records shall be retained for a minimum of three years, or longer in the case of unresolved litigation, enforcement action, or when requested by the CLMSD, state or EPA. (Ord. 872 §5.11, 2008)

13.20.380 Confidential information.
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits, monitoring programs and inspections will be available to the public or other governmental agency without notification unless the user specifically requests confidentiality and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the CLMSD that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user.

When requested by a user furnishing information to the CLMSD, the portions of that information which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes will not be made available for inspection by the public but will be made available upon written request to other governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter, and/or the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES). Those portions of the information will also be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the user furnishing the information. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information.

Information and data requested from a user which the user believes to be proprietary and the release of which to the public would substantially impair the operations of the user may alternatively be provided to the CLMSD for its review at the facility of the user rather than provided to the CLMSD for its keeping, at the discretion of the CLMSD. The burden will be on the user to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the CLMSD that such information is proprietary and that this alternative procedure is necessary or appropriate and will not prevent the CLMSD from properly carrying out the objectives of this chapter.

Information accepted by the CLMSD which is demonstrated to be confidential will not be transmitted to anyone other than a governmental agency without prior notification to the user. (Ord. 872 §5.12, 2008)

ARTICLE V. ENFORCEMENT

13.20.390 Enforcement mechanisms.
It is the intent of this article to provide adequate mechanisms to achieve a maximum degree of compliance with this chapter by all users. These enforcement provisions apply to all classes of users to the extent such user violates any provision of this chapter or administrative order of the CLMSD pursuant to this chapter. In order to achieve the maximum degree of compliance desired, the CLMSD will use a variety of enforcement mechanisms. The enforcement mechanisms set forth range from informal administrative action to formal criminal prosecution. The CLMSD may, in its discretion, implement the use of any mechanism or the concurrent use of several mechanisms in order to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The enforcement mechanisms provided herein may be cumulative in respect to such other enforcement mechanisms or civil and criminal penalties as may be otherwise available under the laws of the state of California and the United States of America. Nothing in this chapter is intended to prevent state and/or federal regulatory agencies from undertaking enforcement actions as may otherwise be available due to a violation of this chapter which also constitutes a violation of state and/or federal statutes and regulations.

The enforcement mechanisms available to the CLMSD for violations of the provisions of this chapter, applicable CLMSD resolutions and permit provisions are the following:

A.    Informal administrative action (including notices of violation and warning notices).

B.    Administrative orders, compliance schedules, and other reports.

C.    Imposition of fines and fees for noncompliance with permit requirements.

D.    Imposition of penalties for noncompliance with administrative orders.

E.    Assessment of charges for obstruction or damage to CLMSD facilities or operations.

F.    Suspension or termination of services.

G.    Civil action.

H.    Criminal action. (Ord. 872 §6.1, 2008)

13.20.400 Informal administrative actions.
CLMSD staff may, on an informal basis, take action against a user for minor violations or technical or clerical shortcomings of a user or a user’s compliance submittals. These informal administrative actions may include informal notices (i.e., telephone calls to the user’s representative), notices of violation (NOVs), informal meetings or warning letters. Such action will not prevent a subsequent or concurrent imposition of noncompliance fees or other enforcement mechanisms. (Ord. 872 §6.2, 2008)

13.20.410 Administrative orders and compliance schedules.
When the CLMSD finds that a user has violated the prohibitions or requirements of this chapter, or the provisions of a wastewater discharge permit, or applicable state or federal regulations, the CLMSD may issue an administrative order directed at those users not complying with such prohibitions, limitations, requirements or provisions to (A) cease to discharge immediately (suspension of service); (B) comply with requirements immediately; or (C) make such changes to their pretreatment facility and procedures immediately as to ensure full compliance.

The CLMSD may also issue, under the circumstances set forth above, an order containing a compliance schedule or a time schedule setting forth dates by which specific corrective actions must be completed. Any user subject to a compliance schedule shall submit to the CLMSD, for each compliance step in the schedule, a report stating whether or not compliance was achieved. Where compliance is not achieved, the report must state the reasons for noncompliance, steps being taken to comply with the schedule, and the date when compliance with the increment in question is expected. Each report must be submitted not later than fourteen days after the date of the compliance step specified in the compliance schedule.

All users shall submit to the CLMSD any other reports as deemed reasonable and necessary by the CLMSD, in addition to those described above, to demonstrate compliance with this chapter, their wastewater discharge permit, or any applicable state or federal regulations. Such reports include, but are not limited to, any reports or plans required by state, federal or local laws or regulations, including this chapter. (Ord. 872 §6.3, 2008)

13.20.420 Noncompliance fees.
A.    Noncompliance Fees for Pollutant Limitation Violations. If a periodic compliance sampling performed by the user or the CLMSD reveals noncompliance by the user with the prohibitions or specific pollutant limitations contained in this chapter, the permit, or resolutions by the CLMSD board, or which violates specific national pretreatment standards or state standards on discharges, then the user is liable for fees of up to one thousand dollars for each day of violation per violation. The purpose of these fees is to compensate the CLMSD for additional costs of sampling, monitoring, laboratory analysis, treatment, disposal and administrative processing incurred as a result of the noncompliance. These fees will be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any penalties as may be assessed pursuant to Sections 13.20.450, 13.20.460 and 13.20.470.

1.    For the purpose of this section, a fee of three hundred dollars shall be imposed for each violation of the constituent limit for the first violation of that constituent limit during the term of the permit.

2.    Second or subsequent violations of this same constituent limit during the term of the permit may result in increased fees for each violation of the constituent limit resulting from a single day’s sample. The maximum fee which shall be imposed for multiple violations of any constituent limits from a single day’s sample, where one or more of the individual constituent violations constitute second or subsequent violations of that constituent, shall be one thousand dollars per day.

3.    Whenever periodic compliance samples or the CLMSD unannounced samples indicate a significant noncompliance (SNC), the CLMSD may undertake a sample and evaluation program. This program will consist of CLMSD sampling of the user’s wastewater at the first opportunity convenient to the CLMSD. Daily samples may be taken each day for up to five days. The CLMSD or outside laboratory will analyze these samples for the violating constituents and provide notice to the user in regard to the results of said sampling. Violations that may occur during the sample and evaluation program shall constitute subsequent violations under this chapter or under any applicable law.

4.    In the event a sampling and evaluation program indicates a need for corrective actions to be undertaken, the CLMSD may place the user on a compliance schedule or undertake another sampling and evaluation program. A compliance schedule shall provide for minimum required actions to be undertaken by the user to alleviate the violation and a schedule for completion of said actions. This compliance schedule may include interim constituent level maximums. All violations of constituent maximums or other requirements set forth in the compliance schedule, including failure to meet schedule dates, shall subject the violator to a fee of one thousand dollars per violation. Each day in which the user fails to meet a schedule date may, in the discretion of the CLMSD, constitute a separate violation. Any violation of a constituent limit during the compliance schedule period may also result in the implementation of an additional sample and evaluation program.

B.    In addition to the penalty fees set forth in subsection A of this section, a significant violation of the discharge standard may result in the immediate termination of the user’s permission to discharge, at the discretion of the CLMSD. The termination of permission to discharge may be for a set period or for the entire remaining term of the permit, at the discretion of the CLMSD. Any violation of the discharge standards where a constituent concentration is determined to be five times the concentration standard set forth in Appendix A, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall be determined to be a significant violation. Any series of three or more violations of the same constituent within a one-year period shall constitute a significant violation.

C.    Preliminary Determination of Noncompliance with Permit Requirements. Noncompliance with permit discharge requirements may be determined by an analysis of a sample of the effluent of a user for a constituent or condition specified in the user’s permit. If the effluent of a user is found by the analysis of the sample to be in excess of the concentrations or conditions specified in the permit, or concentrations or conditions incorporated by reference therein, noncompliance fees as set forth in subsection A of this section shall be levied. The user shall notify the CLMSD, as specified in Section 13.20.480(B), of the violation and shall collect a second sample of the effluent for analysis. Pursuant to Section 13.20.320(A)(5), the user shall provide the CLMSD with the results of the second sample within thirty days of the date the violation was discovered. If the second sample reveals noncompliance, then the sampling and evaluation program may be initiated by the CLMSD.

D.    Sampling and Evaluation Program.

1.    If the sampling and evaluation program (SEP) reveals noncompliance by the user with the prohibitions or specific pollutant limitations specified in this chapter or in the user’s permit, the user shall pay fees as specified above and may be assessed all other costs incurred during the SEP for sampling and analysis, including labor, equipment, materials, outside services and overhead.

2.    If noncompliance by the user with the prohibitions or limitations of this chapter or of the user’s permit is determined following the initiation of an SEP, the CLMSD may implement one of the following enforcement actions:

a.    Amend the existing permit through an enforcement compliance schedule agreement (ECSA). This may be done after consultation with the user and when the user has shown good faith in trying to comply but requires additional time for construction and/or acquisition of equipment related to pretreatment. The permit may be amended with the ECSA for a period up to one hundred eighty days; however, this period may be extended for a period not to exceed an additional one hundred eighty days upon determination by the CLMSD director that good cause exists for an additional period. No further extensions shall be granted except upon approval of the CLMSD board.

b.    If a user remains in noncompliance because corrective action is not taken within a reasonable time after completion of the SEP or the expiration of the ECSA, then an administrative order may be issued. Additionally, any of the other enforcement actions as outlined in this chapter may also be commenced. The payment of noncompliance fees will not bar the CLMSD from undertaking such enforcement procedures as are otherwise set forth herein. (Ord. 872 §6.4, 2008)

13.20.430 Assessment of charges for obstruction or damage to CLMSD facilities or operations.
When a user’s discharge, whether due to negligence, accident, spill or otherwise, causes an obstruction, damage or any other impairment to CLMSD operation or facilities, the CLMSD may impose a charge on the user for the cost to clean or repair the facility, or costs incurred to resume normal operations. An administrative service fee of twenty-five percent of the CLMSD costs may be added to these charges. The total amount shall be paid within thirty days of invoicing by the CLMSD. If it can be shown that the user’s discharge caused or significantly contributed to the CLMSD violating its discharge requirements or incurring additional expenses or suffering loss or damage to the operation or facilities, then the user shall be responsible for any costs or expenses, or a prorated portion of such expenses, including assessments or penalties imposed by other agencies or the court on the CLMSD. (Ord. 872 §6.5, 2008)

13.20.440 Suspension or termination of service.
A.    Suspension of Service. The CLMSD may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater discharge permit by issuance of a cease and desist order when the CLMSD makes the determination that such suspension is necessary. A suspension shall be justified in order to prevent an actual or threatened discharge which presents, or may present, an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of individuals or the environment, causes or may cause interference to the treatment plant or other CLMSD operations, or causes or may cause the CLMSD to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. Additionally, a permit may be suspended for any of the conditions justifying revocation of permit as set forth in subsection B of this section. Nothing in this subsection shall limit the rights of the CLMSD to suspend or terminate service pursuant to specific permit conditions which may be more stringent.

The CLMSD may take steps to immediately halt or prevent a discharge that threatens the health and welfare of individuals. Any user notified of a suspension of service and/or the wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the discharge. In the event of a failure of the user to comply voluntarily with the administrative order, the CLMSD will take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to CLMSD facilities or endangerment to persons or the environment. The CLMSD may reinstate the wastewater discharge permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge.

B.    Revocation of Permit. Any user who violates the following conditions is subject to having its permit revoked:

1.    Any user who knowingly gives or provides a false statement, representation, record, report, plan or other document to the CLMSD or falsifies, tampers or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under Section 13.20.320;

2.    Failure of a user to factually and completely report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his/her discharge;

3.    Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics;

4.    Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring;

5.    Failure of a user to notify the CLMSD immediately of accidental discharge and/or take appropriate corrective action to prevent a recurrence;

6.    Failure of a user to file a periodic compliance report in such time and in such manner as is required by this chapter;

7.    Significant violation(s) of the permit requirements or conditions and/or violation of this chapter. Any violation of discharge standards where a constituent concentration is determined to be five times the limit for that constituent or any series of three or more violations of the same constituent within a one-year period shall constitute a significant violation;

8.    Failure to pay fees and charges, including noncompliance fees or other penalties established pursuant to this chapter.

C.    Immediate Termination of Discharge. In the case of an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present an imminent danger to the health or welfare of persons, the CLMSD may, after reasonably attempting to informally notify the user, take all necessary steps to halt or prevent such discharge including but not limited to the disconnection of the user’s water service, the disconnection of the user’s access to CLMSD facilities and all associated punitive actions described in the most recent edition of the California Building Code. (Ord. 872 §6.6, 2008)

13.20.450 Administrative civil penalties.
Pursuant to the authority of California Government Code Sections 54739 through 54740.6, the CLMSD or CLMSD staff may issue administrative complaints, conduct administrative hearings and/or impose civil penalties in accordance with the procedures set forth in these sections for violation of the CLMSD requirements relating to pretreatment of industrial waste or the prevention of the entry of industrial waste into the CLMSD collection system or treatment works. These penalties shall be as follows:

A.    In an amount which shall not exceed two thousand dollars for each day for failing or refusing to furnish technical or monitoring reports.

B.    In an amount which shall not exceed three thousand dollars for each day for failing or refusing to timely comply with any compliance schedule established by the CLMSD.

C.    In an amount which shall not exceed five thousand dollars per violation for each day for discharges in violation of any waste discharge limitation, permit condition, or requirement issued, reissued, or adopted by the CLMSD.

D.    In an amount which shall not exceed ten dollars per gallon for discharges in violation of any suspension, cease and desist order or other orders, or prohibition issued, reissued, or adopted by the CLMSD.

Unless appealed, orders setting administrative civil penalties shall become effective and final upon issuance thereof, and payment shall be made within thirty days.

As to court actions authorized by the above-referenced sections, the CLMSD council, or other special council designated by the CLMSD board, will institute appropriate actions to effect statutory authorized remedies, upon order of the CLMSD board. (Ord. 872 §6.7, 2008)

13.20.460 Civil action.
The CLMSD board may direct the city of Lakeport council or other special council to bring such civil actions as may be available by law or in equity in any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to recover such charges, fees, penalties and/or damages as may be assessed or may be incurred under the provisions of this chapter.

A.    Injunction. Whenever a discharge of wastewater is in violation of or has the reasonable potential to violate any provision of this chapter, permit condition, or any federal pretreatment standard and requirement as set forth in 40 CFR Section 403.8 et seq., or user fails to submit required reports, or refuses to allow the CLMSD entry to inspect or monitor the user’s discharge, the CLMSD may petition the superior court for the issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction, or both, as may be appropriate to restrain the continued violation or to prevent threatened violations by the user.

B.    Civil Actions for Penalties. Any user who violates any provision of this chapter, permit condition, cease and desist order, prohibition or effluent limitation shall be liable civilly for a penalty not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars for each day in which such violation occurs pursuant to California Government Code Section 54740. The CLMSD council, or other special council designated by the board, upon order of the CLMSD board, will institute such actions as may be appropriate in the superior court to impose, assess and recover such sums.

C.    Other Civil Actions. The CLMSD may require compliance with permit conditions or limitations by issuing administrative orders, including cease and desist orders, and compliance schedules. Said orders are enforceable in a California court of general jurisdiction. The CLMSD, however, may directly undertake any court action available by law or equity, including but not limited to a civil action for penalties, without first seeking an administrative order or making use of a compliance schedule, and it may concurrently undertake such administrative and court actions as deemed appropriate. (Ord. 872 §6.8, 2008)

13.20.470 Criminal action.
A.    General Criminal Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, permit, administrative order, prohibition or effluent limitation is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction is punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars per day per violation or imprisonment of up to thirty days in the county jail, or both. Each day a violation occurs may constitute a new and separate offense and may subject the violator to an additional full measure of penalties as set forth herein.

B.    Falsifying Information. Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter, or wastewater discharge permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter, shall upon conviction be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or imprisonment for not more than thirty days in the county jail, or both. Each separate act of falsification, tampering, or knowingly rendering inaccurate information shall constitute a new and separate offense and shall be subject to the penalties contained herein.

Nothing in this section is intended to exclude the potential for prosecution under the applicable perjury statutes of the state of California to the extent such falsification was incorporated in a document signed under the penalty of perjury. (Ord. 872 §6.9, 2008)

13.20.480 Notification procedures.
A.    Notification to User. Whenever the CLMSD finds that any user has violated or is violating the provisions of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained herein, the CLMSD may serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within thirty days of the date of this notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction of the violation shall be submitted to the CLMSD by the user. Failure to respond to the violation shall be considered a separate violation.

Whenever the CLMSD assesses a noncompliance fee, penalty or other form of enforcement action under the provisions of this chapter, the CLMSD will serve upon such user a written notice stating the nature of the enforcement action being taken.

B.    Notification to CLMSD. When a user discovers that he has violated or is violating a provision of this chapter, wastewater discharge permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirement contained therein, including a violation as may be caused by accidental discharge or spill, the user shall immediately notify the CLMSD upon discovery of such violation. Thereafter, within five days following the accidental discharge or discovery of a violation, the user shall submit to the CLMSD a detailed, written report, describing the accidental discharge or violation, and the measures taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. This written report regarding the violation may be included as a part of a periodic compliance report, or other report as may be required under this chapter, as long as the written report is provided within five days of discovery. Said notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, penalty, fee or other liability which may be incurred as a result of the violation. (Ord. 872 §6.10, 2008)

13.20.490 Costs.
All costs associated with the CLMSD undertaking enforcement actions pursuant to this chapter, including attorney’s fees for civil actions undertaken, shall be paid by the user. These costs may include, but not be limited to, the costs for termination of service, reinstatement of service, compliance sampling and analysis and administrative activities undertaken by the CLMSD. However, if the user prevails in an appeal to the CLMSD board or a civil action taken to nullify an enforcement action pursued by the CLMSD under this chapter, the user shall not be responsible for the costs incurred by the CLMSD in pursuing said enforcement action. (Ord. 872 §6.11, 2008)

13.20.500 Responding to significant noncompliance.
Any violation of pretreatment requirements, including limits, sampling, analysis, reporting and meeting compliance schedules, and regulatory deadlines, is an instance of noncompliance for which the industrial user is liable for enforcement including penalties. The CLMSD is required to identify violations or patterns of violations by industrial users that are deemed to be instances of significant noncompliance (SNC). To the extent that a violation or pattern of violations is determined to be SNC, the CLMSD will give additional priority to enforcement actions with regard to that industrial user. Additionally, the determination of SNC will be used as the basis for reporting same to the regulatory authorities and the publishing of the list of users who are in significant noncompliance as is required of the CLMSD by law. The following are criteria for significant noncompliance which will be used in determining instances of SNC.

A.    Violations of Wastewater Discharge Limits.

1.    Chronic Violations. Chronic violations shall be deemed to be present when sixty-six percent of all the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same parameter (any magnitude of exceedence).

2.    Technical Review Criteria Violations. A technical review criteria (TRC) violation occurs if at least thirty-three percent of all the measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the TRC. "TRC" is defined as 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH.

3.    Other Effluent Limit Violations. Any other violation(s) of an effluent limit (average or daily maximum) that the CLMSD determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference (e.g., slug discharges) or pass-through (including adverse effect on any toxicity testing); or endangered the health of CLMSD facilities, personnel or the general public.

4.    Danger to Human Health or Welfare. Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment of human health/welfare or of the environment and has resulted in the exercise of CLMSD emergency authority to immediately halt or prevent such a discharge.

B.    Violation of Compliance Milestones. Failure to meet any compliance schedule milestone, contained in any order given to the user by the CLMSD, including an ECSA for starting and completing construction, or attainment of final compliance, by ninety days or more after scheduled date shall result in additional enforcement mechanisms including a suspension or termination of service and/or civil action.

C.    Failure to Provide Proper Data. Failure to provide reports for compliance schedules, self-monitoring data, or categorical standards (baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports, and periodic reports) within thirty days after the date such reports or other data are due shall result in an imposition of fines and fees for noncompliance as described in Section 13.20.420.

D.    Failure to Accurately Report. Failure of a user to accurately and promptly report any noncompliance, and any attempt to circumvent the reporting requirements or otherwise withhold noncompliance data from the CLMSD shall result in an imposition of fines and fees for noncompliance as described in Section 13.20.420.

E.    Other Violations. Any other violation or group of violations that the CLMSD determines may adversely affect its operations or the accomplishment of the objectives of this chapter shall result in administrative action as described in this article. (Ord. 872 §6.12, 2008)

ARTICLE VI. HEARINGS AND APPEALS

13.20.510 Availability of administrative appeal.
Any user, permit applicant or permit holder affected by any decision, enforcement action or determination made by the CLMSD interpreting or implementing the provisions of this chapter or in any permit issued herein may file with the CLMSD director a written request for reconsideration of a staff decision, action or determination within fifteen days of notification of said staff decision, action or determination. The written request for reconsideration shall detail facts supporting the user’s request and such facts shall include a statement listing all relevant facts which shall be considered including such facts as may not have been known or available to the CLMSD at the date of such action. The CLMSD director will render a decision on the request for reconsideration within fifteen days of receipt of the request, unless the CLMSD director requests additional information from CLMSD staff or the user. The CLMSD director will concur with, modify or rescind the action, decision or determination previously made or may grant a show cause hearing regarding such decision, action or determination. If the ruling on the request for reconsideration made by the CLMSD director is unacceptable, the user may, within ten days after the date of notification of the CLMSD director’s determination, file with the CLMSD secretary a request for appeal to the CLMSD board.

A user shall not have a right to an appeal to the CLMSD board unless the user has complied with the procedures concerning the request for reconsideration by the CLMSD director as set forth above.

When a written request for appeal to the CLMSD board has been properly filed with the CLMSD secretary, the CLMSD secretary shall schedule the matter to be heard by the CLMSD board within forty-five days from the date of the filing of the written request. The CLMSD board will make a ruling on the appeal within fifteen days from the date of the hearing unless the board requests additional information from CLMSD staff or the user. (Ord. 872 §7.1, 2008)

13.20.520 Show cause hearings.
A.    The CLMSD may order any user who violates any of the provision(s) of this chapter, or permit condition(s), to appear before a designated hearing officer to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice will be provided to the user specifying the time and place of the hearing. A notice for a show cause hearing will set forth the violation, the reasons why an action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and such other information as will notify the user of the nature of the hearing. The user has the burden of proof to demonstrate that the proposed action should not be taken or that the decision, action or determination previously made should be rescinded or modified. A notice of hearing will be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days before the hearing. Service of the notice may be made on an agent of the user or officer of the user’s business entity.

B.    A CLMSD employee or officer may conduct the hearing and take evidence, or the CLMSD may designate another independent person to do so. The CLMSD will not, as a matter of course, provide for stenographic recording of the hearing; however, the user may provide for such stenographic recordation at its own expense.

C.    After the hearing officer has reviewed the evidence, administrative orders may be issued which specifically relate to the issues set forth in the notice of show cause hearing. If the user is dissatisfied with the determination of or the administrative order issued by the hearing officer, the user may file a written request for appeal to the CLMSD board. The request for appeal shall be filed with the CLMSD secretary within ten days of the issuance of the determination order of the hearing officer. The CLMSD secretary will calendar the matter before the CLMSD board within forty-five days of the date of filing of the written request for appeal to the CLMSD board. (Ord. 872 §7.2, 2008)

ARTICLE VII. FEES

13.20.530 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to provide for both the recovery of costs from users of CLMSD facilities and related programs established herein and to provide for a sewer service charge to be imposed on all users of the CLMSD sewerage system. The applicable charges or fees will be set forth in the CLMSD schedule of rates, fees and charges. (Ord. 872 §8.1, 2008)

13.20.540 Sewer service charges.
All users shall pay a sewer service charge for the CLMSD wastewater disposal services. The sewer service charge shall reflect the quantity, quality and flow of the wastewater of the user and will be based on the CLMSD’s operating costs to intercept, treat and dispose of the wastewater.

The sewer service charge will be set from time to time by the CLMSD board. (Ord. 872 §8.2, 2008)

13.20.550 Scope of rates, fees and charges.
The CLMSD may adopt charges and fees to compensate the CLMSD for its activities under this chapter which may include:

A.    Setting up and operating the CLMSD sewer use and pretreatment program, septage program, industrial user notification program and slug discharge program.

B.    Monitoring, sampling, inspection and surveillance procedures.

C.    Reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction.

D.    Processing permit applications.

E.    Implementation of administrative and legal enforcement measures.

F.    Other fees as the CLMSD may deem necessary to carry out the requirements of the programs contained herein.

These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this chapter and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the CLMSD. These fees and charges may include staff costs, as well as legal, consulting and laboratory costs, associated with the CLMSD activities in implementation of these programs. See Appendix B, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter, for more details. (Ord. 872 §8.3, 2008)

13.20.560 Payment of fees, charges and delinquencies--Creation of lien.
A.    Except as otherwise provided, all fees, charges and penalties made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter are due and payable upon receipt of notice thereof. All such amounts shall become delinquent thirty days after the date of invoice.

B.    A penalty for delinquent accounts will be charged in accordance with the following:

1.    Thirty days after the date of invoice, a penalty of ten percent of the base invoice amount, not to exceed a maximum of one thousand dollars.

2.    Ninety days after the date of invoice, an additional penalty of ten percent of the base invoice amount shall be imposed; the cumulative total of the penalties will not exceed a maximum of four thousand dollars.

C.    Any invoice outstanding and unpaid after ninety days will be cause for immediate initiation of permit revocation proceedings.

D.    Penalties charged under this section shall not accrue to those invoices successfully appealed, provided the CLMSD receives written notification of said appeal prior to the payment due date. Payment of disputed charges is still required during CLMSD review of any appeal submitted by users.

E.    Any fees, charges and penalties authorized pursuant to this chapter which remain unpaid after the delinquent dates as set forth in this section may be collected thereafter by the CLMSD as provided in this section and otherwise as allowed by law.

1.    The CLMSD shall cause a report of delinquent sewer fees, charges and penalties to be prepared periodically. The CLMSD shall fix a time, date and place for hearing the report and any objections or protests thereto.

2.    The CLMSD shall cause notice of the hearing to be mailed to the landowners listed on the report not less than fifteen days prior to the date of the hearing.

3.    At the hearing, the CLMSD shall hear any objections or protests of landowners liable to be assessed for delinquent fees, charges and/or penalties. The CLMSD may make such revisions or corrections to the report as it deems just, after which, by resolution, the report shall be confirmed.

4.    The delinquent fees, charges and/or penalties set forth in the report as confirmed shall constitute special assessments against the respective parcels of land, and are a lien on the property for the amount of such delinquent fees, charges and/or penalties and costs incurred by the CLMSD as authorized by this chapter. A certified copy of the confirmed report shall be filed with the clerk, or auditor appointed by the CLMSD, for amounts of the respective parcels of land as they appear on the current assessment roll. The lien created attaches upon recordation, in the office of the county recorder, of a certified copy of the resolution of confirmation. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as other property taxes and penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for such taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of ad valorem property taxes shall be applicable to such assessment. (Ord. 909 §1, 2016: Ord. 872 §8.4, 2008)

13.20.570 Reinstatement deposit.
Permitted users who have been subject to enforcement proceedings may be required to deposit with the CLMSD an amount determined by the CLMSD director prior to permission being granted for further discharges to CLMSD facilities. The deposit shall be provided as a security to ensure that the requirements of this title are complied with, and all fees and charges associated with the user’s permit are paid. The security may be returned after one year; provided, that the user has not been subject to any enforcement actions or enforcement fees within that one-year period. The deposit shall be cash or other security acceptable to the CLMSD. (Ord. 872 §8.5, 2008)

13.20.580 Connection fee--Construction fund.
A.    All connection fees collected from applicants within the CLMSD shall be deposited in an appropriate construction fund, and shall be expended for major repair, improvement and expansion of the facilities of the CLMSD.

B.    All such funds collected from applicants outside the CLMSD shall be placed in a separate fund for such area, and pending annexation or termination of the contract with such area shall be expended only as provided by such contract. Upon annexation, any balance in such special fund shall be transferred to the CLMSD connection fee fund. Upon termination of the contract, such fund balance shall be disbursed as provided by such contract. (Ord. 872 §8.6, 2008)

13.20.590 Maintenance fees--Maintenance fund.
All maintenance charges collected by the CLMSD, whether collected from users within or without the CLMSD, shall be placed in the maintenance fund of the CLMSD and shall be expended for operation and normal maintenance of the existing facilities of the CLMSD, and the facilities of such areas outside the CLMSD as the contracts with such areas may provide for the CLMSD to maintain; provided, however, that the CLMSD may collect from users from outside the CLMSD, in areas served by the CLMSD, such additional charges along with the normal maintenance charges as such contracts may provide, which additional charges shall be deposited, maintained and expended as provided by such contracts. (Ord. 872 §8.7, 2008)

ARTICLE VIII. FATS, OILS, AND GREASE PROGRAM

13.20.600 FOG purpose.
The purpose of this article is to outline the wastewater pretreatment requirements for food service facilities and other commercial facilities that discharge FOG in their wastewater flow. All new and existing facilities that generate and discharge FOG in their wastewater flow shall install, operate and maintain a FOG pretreatment system. The requirements of this article shall supplement and be in addition to the requirements of the city of Lakeport municipal sewer district’s sewer use ordinance (this Chapter 13.20). (Ord. 872 §9.1, 2008)

13.20.610 Application to install a FOG pretreatment system.
Properly sized grease interceptors are required for all commercial food and restaurant facilities connected to the CLMSD, and all facilities described in subsection B of this section unless otherwise designated by the director. The CLMSD does not accept waste products with FOG into the sanitary sewer system or any of the wastewater treatment facilities.

A.    Interceptors Required. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when in the opinion of the director they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for buildings used solely for residential purposes. All grease interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the director, meet minimum design capability and follow all E-BMPs. Grease interceptors shall be so located as to be readily and easily accessible for user cleaning and CLMSD inspection.

B.    Maintenance of Interceptors.

1.    All grease interceptors shall be maintained by the user, at his/her expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. Grease interceptors shall be installed by users as required by the director. Grease interceptors shall be installed at the user’s expense, when such user operates a food service facility, school, child care facility with twenty or more children, deli, meat market, grocery store, bakery, entertainment club, caterer, church and fraternal organization, or when deemed necessary by the director for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease or any other substance deemed harmful to the city of Lakeport municipal sewer district.

2.    The sizing of grease interceptors will be based on the number of seats (EPA 1 Procedure) or the number of meals served in a single day (EPA 2 Procedure) or other methods approved by the director. All such grease interceptors shall be serviced and emptied of accumulated waste content as required in order to maintain minimum design capability or effective volume of the grease interceptor, but not less often than once every sixty days, or more often as determined by the director. Indoor grease interceptors shall be cleaned a minimum of once every fourteen days. Users who are required to, based on solids, pass water through a grease interceptor shall:

a.    Provide for a minimum hydraulic retention time of twenty-four minutes at actual peak flow or twelve minutes at the calculated theoretical peak flow rate, as predicted by the Uniform Plumbing Code fixture criteria, between the influent and effluent baffles with twenty percent of the total volume of the grease interceptor being allowed for sludge to settle and accumulate, identified hereafter as a "sludge pocket."

b.    Remove any accumulated sludge pocket as required, but at intervals of not longer than once every sixty days, or more often as determined by the director, at the user’s expense. Grease interceptors shall be kept free of inorganic solid materials such as grit, rocks, gravel, sand, eating utensils, cigarettes, shells, towels, rags, etc., which could settle into this pocket and thereby reduce the effective volume of the grease interceptor.

c.    Accept the following conditions: if any skimmed or pumped wastes or other materials removed from grease interceptor are treated in any fashion on site and reintroduced back into the grease interceptor as an activity of and after said on-site treatment, the user shall be responsible for the attainment of established grease numerical limit consistent with and contained in Section 13.20.620 on all discharges of wastewater from said grease interceptor into the city of Lakeport’s sanitary sewer collection and treatment system.

d.    Operate the grease interceptor in a manner so as to maintain said device such that attainment to the grease limit is consistently achieved. "Consistent" shall mean any wastewater sample taken from said grease interceptor shall be subject to terms of numerical limit attainment described in Section 13.20.620. If legitimate space constraints (as determined by the director) exist that prohibit the sewer user from installing a grease interceptor, a variance for cause request may be submitted (Section 13.20.650).

e.    Understand and agree that: the use of biological additives as a grease degradation agent is conditionally permissible, upon prior written approval by the director. Any food service facility using this method of grease abatement shall maintain the interceptor in such a manner that attainment of the grease wastewater discharge limit, as measured from the interceptor’s outlet, is consistently achieved.

f.    Understand and agree that: the use of automatic grease removal systems is conditionally permissible, upon prior written approval by the director. Any food service facility using this equipment shall operate the system in such a manner that attainment of the grease wastewater discharge limit, as measured from the unit’s outlet, is consistently achieved.

g.    Understand and agree that: the director reserves the right to make determinations of grease interceptor adequacy and need based on review of all relevant information regarding grease interceptor performance. The director reserves the right to conduct facility site and building plan review and to require repairs to, modification of, or replacement of such interceptors.

3.    All users shall provide a written record of interceptor maintenance and/or pumping to the director within five working days after such work has been completed.

4.    Non-grease-laden sources shall not be connected to sewer lines upstream of the grease interceptor. Grease interceptors are intended only for grease-laden sources.

5.    Should an obstruction of a CLMSD sewer main(s) occur that causes a sewer overflow to the extent that an impact on the environment is realized and that said overflow or failure of the sanitary sewer collection system to convey sewage can be attributed in part or in whole to an accumulation of grease in the CLMSD sewer main(s), the CLMSD will take appropriate enforcement actions, as stipulated in Sections 13.20.630 and 13.20.640, against the generator or contributor of such grease.

C.    Facilities to Install Interceptors.

1.    All facilities described in subsection (B)(1) of this section shall be required to install grease interceptors within one year of written notification by the director, or file a variance for cause request within six months of the same notification (Section 13.20.650). If the variance is not granted by the director, the user will have six months from written notification of denial to complete said installation as directed.

2.    If an overflow or failure of the sanitary sewer collection system to convey sewage can be attributed in part or in whole to an accumulation of grease from an existing FSF without a grease interceptor, the CLMSD will require the FSF to install a grease interceptor within one hundred eighty days of written notification. Any additional fixtures that are added to the existing FSF that discharge grease-laden waste streams shall be plumbed into the interceptor. If said fixtures cause the interceptor to exceed its minimum design capability, a new interceptor may be required by the director.

3.    Except as provided herein, for a period of one year following adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, although installation of grease interceptors will be required to be installed, no enforcement actions will be taken under this article for failure to achieve limits on grease discharges from grease interceptors. If, during this one-year period, an obstruction of a CLMSD sewer main(s) occurs that causes a sewer overflow to the extent that an impact on the environment is realized and that said overflow or failure of the sanitary sewer collection system to convey sewage can be attributed in part or in whole to an accumulation of grease in a CLMSD sewer main(s), the CLMSD will take appropriate enforcement actions, as stipulated in Sections 13.20.630 and 13.20.640, against the generator or contributor of such grease.

4.    Access manholes, with a minimum diameter of twenty-four inches, shall be provided over each chamber and sanitary tee. The access manholes shall extend at least to finished grade and be designed and maintained to prevent water inflow or infiltration. The manholes shall also have readily removable lids and inflow and infiltration saucer covers in order to facilitate inspection, allow for grease removal, and permit wastewater sampling activities.

D.    Design Requirements for Grease Interceptors.

1.    As per California Plumbing Code requirements, grease interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperatures, shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers. The grease interceptor shall contain a baffle system, which adequately diverts and slows the flow to avoid short-circuiting. Grease interceptors located in roadways or parking lots shall be traffic rated.

2.    Since the FSF is liable for the condition of their pretreatment devices, the FSF owner/representative should witness all cleaning/maintenance activities in order to verify that the grease interceptor is being fully cleaned and properly maintained.

E.    How to Determine the Size of an Exterior, In-Ground Grease Interceptor. As determined by the director, the user installing a grease interceptor may be required to use either the sizing criteria of the Manning formula or the formula described in the most recent edition of the California Plumbing Code to determine the size of said grease interceptor.

The Manning formula for calculating grease interceptor sizing is:

Gallons of interceptor = [[(1) = GPM/fixture (derived from Manning formula) x (2) = total # fixture ratings of grease-laden waste streams] + (3) direct flow from a dishwasher, laundry washer, glass washer (in GPM)]] x (4) = 24-minute retention time

Components of equation =

1.    GPM/Fixture. The following examples are derived from the Manning formula. It takes into account the slope; roughness of the pipe (plastic) used, and pipe diameter size. When applying the Manning formula, we arrive at the drainage rates of various pipe diameter sizes:

0.5 inch pipe diameter = 0.8 GPM/fixture

1.0 inch pipe diameter = 5.0 GPM/fixture

1.5 inch pipe diameter = 15 GPM/fixture

2.0 inch pipe diameter = 33 GPM/fixture

2.5 inch pipe diameter = 59 GPM/fixture

3.0 inch pipe diameter = 93 GPM/fixture

2.    Fixture Ratings of Grease-Laden Waste Streams. In the data below, fixtures that have a heavy grease-laden waste stream received higher values, while fixtures with a light grease-laden waste stream received lower values.

Common commercial kitchen fixtures and their corresponding rating (each):

2, 3, or 4 compartment pot sink = 1.0

1 or 2 compartment meat prep sink = 0.75

Pre-rinse sink = 0.5

1 or 2 compartment vegetable prep sink = 0.25

Can wash = 0.25

Mop sink = 0.25

Floor drain = 0.00

3.    Direct Flow from Dishwashers, Laundry Washers, and Glass Washers. These flows must be added directly to the GPM flow because of their potential for discharging large quantities of water in a short time period. Since these appliances have pumps, the Manning formula cannot be applied to predict flow. Make sure to use the manufacturer’s discharge rate for flow in GPM but not less than the draw down rate.

4.    Twenty-Four Minute Retention Time. Engineers have determined that when applying several criteria to determine proper grease (animal and vegetable lipids) separation (using Stokes’s Law, specific gravity of lipids, etc.), a twenty-four-minute retention time is required.

Example No. One: A restaurant has the following fixtures in their kitchen (all fixtures have a 1.5 inch pipe diameter):

· One three-compartment pot sink

· One pre-rinse sink

· One two-compartment vegetable prep sink

· One dishwasher that discharges ten GPM

Using the formula to size exterior grease interceptors, we get:

Gallons needed for grease interceptor

= [15 GPM x [1 + 0.5 + 0.25] + 10 GPM] x 24 minutes

= [[15 GPM x 1.75] + 10 GPM] x 24 minutes

= 26.25 GPM + 10 GPM x 24 minutes

= 36.25 GPM x 24 minutes

= 870 gallons; round up to the next size =

A 1,000-gallon grease interceptor is required.

Example No. Two: A restaurant has the following fixtures:

At 0.5 inch pipe diameter: Pre-rinse sink

At 1.5 inch pipe diameter:

· One three-compartment pot sink

· 1 pre-rinse sink

· 1 meat prep sink

· 1 vegetable prep sink

At 3.0 inch pipe diameter:

· 1 can wash

Using the formula to size exterior grease interceptors, we get:

For the pre-rinse sink, we take

0.8 GPM x 0.5 = 0.4 GPM

For the 1.5 inch pipe diameter fixtures:

15 GPM x [1 + 0.5 + 0.75 + 0.25] = 37.5 GPM

For the can wash:

93 GPM x 0.25 = 23.25 GPM

Add 0.4 GPM + 37.5 GPM + 23.25 GPM = 61.15 GPM x 24 minutes = 1,468 gallons; round up to the next size =

A 1,500-gallon grease interceptor is required.

F.    How to Determine the Size of an Indoor Point-of-Use Grease Interceptor.

1.    Step One.

a.    Determine the cubic contents of the fixture by multiplying length times width times depth.

b.    Number of compartments times 24 inches long by 24 inches wide by 14 inches deep. Cubic contents: 3 times 24 times 24 times 14 equals 24,192 cubic inches.

2.    Step Two.

a.    Determine the capacity in gallons. One gallon equals 231 cubic inches.

b.    Contents in gallons: 24,192 divided by 231 equals 104.7 gallons.

3.    Step Three.

a.    Determine actual drainage load. The fixture is usually filled to about 75 percent of capacity with wastewater. The items to be washed displace about 25 percent of the fixture content. Actual drainage load equals 75 percent of fixture capacity.

b.    Actual Load: .75 times 104.73 gallons equals 78.55 gallons.

4.    Step Four.

a.    For design considerations, it is good practice to calculate the flow rate in GPM equal to or greater than 75 percent of the fixture capacity.

b.    Calculated flow rate for design capacity in GPM on 75 percent of fixture capacity: 75 percent of fixture capacity equals 78.55 gallons. Flow rate equals 78.55 GPM.

5.    Step Five.

a.    Select the grease interceptor that matches the calculated design flow rate. Note: Select the next larger size when the flow rate falls between two sizes.

b.    Hence, any value greater than 78 but less than or equal to 79 should be considered 79. In this example, a grease interceptor with a minimum design capability of 79 GPM is needed.

G.    Notification of Change in Ownership or Closure of a Food Service Facility.

1.    A change in ownership of a FSF shall be reported to the director in writing within thirty days of the ownership change. Failure to comply will result in a minor violation, failure to submit records. See Section 13.20.640.

2.    Any FSF that goes out of business shall report such closure to the director in writing within thirty days of closure and shall ensure that any grease interceptor shall be cleaned and pumped before the building is vacated. Failure to comply shall result in an intermediate violation, failure to maintain necessary equipment. See Section 13.20.640. (Ord. 872 §9.2, 2008)

13.20.620 FOG discharge limits.
A.    Types of Wastes Prohibited. Any water or waste which may contain more than one hundred parts per million, by weight, of FOG. (Ord. 872 §9.3, 2008)

13.20.630 FOG prohibitions and violations.
A.    No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed into the sanitary sewer collection system any of the following:

1.    Hot water running continuously through a grease interceptor.

2.    Discharge of concentrated alkaline or acidic solutions into a grease interceptor.

3.    Discharge of concentrated detergents into a grease interceptor.

4.    Discharge of FOG into the sanitary sewer system.

B.    It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person or user to:

1.    Modify a grease interceptor’s structure without consent from the director.

2.    Provide falsified data and/or information to the CLMSD, including but not limited to grease interceptor maintenance and/or cleaning records.

3.    Violate or fail to comply with any applicable section or provision of this article.

Violations

Days from Notification to Correct Violation

Equipment Not Registered

30 days

Equipment Not Properly Installed

90 days

Major Violations

30 days

Intermediate Violations

60 days

Minor Violations

90 days

(Ord. 872 §9.4, 2008)

13.20.640 FOG fines.
Any user that is identified, in whole or in part, as the source of a sanitary sewer blockage and/or overflow shall be assessed a fine of no less than five hundred dollars and no more than twenty-five thousand dollars per incident, plus cost recovery, in addition to any fines dispensed from the state of California. Users committing one or more of the offenses listed herein will be assessed the corresponding amounts on a calendar year basis. The user will have no more than one hundred eighty days from written notification by the director to surrender said moneys to the CLMSD.

The fines associated with all violations of this chapter including minor, intermediate, and major violations and subsequent violations will be set from time to time by the CLMSD board. (Ord. 872 §9.5, 2008)

13.20.650 FOG variance for cause request/appeals.
A.    Variance.

1.    A variance to deviate from any/all requirements set forth in Section 13.20.610 may be requested of the CLMSD upon submission of sufficient documentation. Such documentation shall provide a written explanation for the need to vary from the requirements of Section 13.20.610. After submission of a request to the CLMSD, the CLMSD will review all information submitted and will notify the user in writing of its acceptance or denial of the variance request. All users requesting a variance shall agree to submit to a variance study and the associated fee.

2.    The CLMSD has the right to discontinue the variance study at any time the FSF or other director-designated facility adversely affects the sanitary sewer collection system or treatment works. Fees associated with the variance request will be set from time to time by the CLMSD board, which includes estimated costs associated with processing and conducting the variance study. All fees are non-refundable and shall be paid in advance.

3.    A variance to exceed the interval requirement for scheduled maintenance set forth in this article may be granted if the accumulated grease cap and sludge pocket measurements remain below twenty-five percent of the total depth from the grease interceptor’s interior floor to the static or working water level, at any point between the influent and effluent pipes/baffles of the grease interceptor.

4.    No variance will be granted to exceed a one hundred eighty-day maintenance interval, with the exception of schools and seasonal event facilities that may exceed a one hundred eighty-day maintenance interval upon submitting a variance application to the director and receiving written permission from the director.

5.    Any user who is found to violate the twenty-five percent rule as set forth in subsection (B)(6) of this section may be required to pump more frequently than monthly.

B.    Variance Study Procedure. Once a variance has been granted, a variance study shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedures:

1.    Prior to a variance study, the grease interceptor shall be completely pumped and sufficiently cleaned by a servicing company at the user’s expense. A variance study cannot be conducted unless the grease interceptor is properly serviced, as determined by the director.

2.    The user shall contact the CLMSD a minimum of two working days prior to the scheduled grease interceptor cleaning.

3.    Once the grease interceptor is cleaned properly and refilled with water from the establishment, the CLMSD will conduct a visual inspection of the grease interceptor and verify that all components of the device are in place and in proper working order. If a grease interceptor fails the visual inspection, the user shall correct all inadequacies at the user’s expense. The user shall notify the CLMSD in writing of all corrected measures upon completion. Such notification shall be mailed to the address set forth in subsection G of this section.

4.    Two weeks after initial pumping, the CLMSD will measure the grease cap and sludge pocket to obtain data to determine grease interceptor performance.

5.    Four weeks after the initial pumping, the CLMSD will remeasure the grease cap and sludge pocket to further evaluate grease interceptor performance.

6.    This process will continue on a biweekly frequency until the accumulated grease cap and sludge pocket reach twenty-five percent of the total depth of the grease interceptor. Variance studies shall not exceed a period of one hundred eighty days.

7.    The CLMSD will review all data obtained and submit in writing the results of the variance to the user. The result will only be furnished to the user requesting the variance.

8.    The CLMSD will not be responsible for any grease discharge, odor, or blockage during or after the variance study. At no time during the variance study shall the grease interceptor be pumped, except by direct approval of the director.

C.    Variance Revocation. A variance to deviate from the interval requirement for scheduled maintenance may be revoked by the CLMSD, at its discretion, if at any time after a variance is granted one or more of the following occur:

1.    Grease interceptor discharge adversely affects the CLMSD as determined by the director.

2.    Grease and solids accumulation is greater than twenty-five percent of the total depth from grease interceptor’s interior floor to the static or working water level, at any point within the grease interceptor.

3.    A user increases food service production by more than thirty-three percent.

4.    A user increases seating capacity by more than twenty-five percent.

5.    A user enacts a menu change that increases grease-laden waste to an amount no longer applicable to the original variance.

6.    A user causes or contributes to a sanitary sewer blockage or overflow.

D.    Reconsideration Petition.

1.    Any user may petition the director to reconsider the terms of any enforcement action within thirty calendar days of issuance.

2.    Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal process.

3.    The petition shall indicate the terms objected to, the reasons for the objection and any additional information that should be considered.

4.    If the director fails to act within fifteen days of receipt, the request for reconsideration shall be deemed as denied.

E.    Final Appeal Hearing with the CLMSD.

1.    Any user whose reconsideration petition to the director has been denied shall have the right to a final hearing before the CLMSD board upon making written demand to the director within thirty days of receipt of the reconsideration petition denial. The written demand shall identify the specific enforcement action issues to be contested and any additional information that should be considered.

2.    Unless such written demand is made within the time specified herein, the action of the director shall be final and binding.

3.    The CLMSD board shall conduct the hearing and make a final decision on the enforcement action within fifteen days of the hearing. The user shall be notified of the decision by certified mail.

4.    The decision of the CLMSD board shall be considered the final administrative action for purposes of judicial review.

F.    Appeal of FOG Article. Any user may appeal a fine that has been assessed for failure to comply with this article. The user must submit a written request, identifying the specific issues to be contested, to the director within thirty days following receipt of the bill, assessment of fine, or notice of violation. Unless such written request is made within the time frame specified, the fine subject to appeal shall be final and binding. The director shall evaluate the information and shall make a written decision within fifteen days of receipt of the appeal request. Failure to make a written demand within the specified time herein shall bar further appeal. The director shall make a decision on the appeal within ninety days of the date that the appeal was filed.

G.    Mailing Address for All FOG Appeals.

1.    Address the letter according to the type of appeal and body. For example: "Attn: Variance for Cause Request, to CLMSD Director."

2.    After addressing your letter and envelope, mail all correspondence to:

City of Lakeport Corporation Yard

591 Martin Street

Lakeport, CA

95453

(Ord. 872 §9.6, 2008)

ARTICLE IX. SPECIAL PURPOSE DISCHARGE PERMIT

13.20.660 Special purpose discharge permit application.
Special purpose discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other regulations, charges for use, and fees established by the CLMSD. The conditions of special purpose discharge permits will be enforced by the CLMSD in accordance with this chapter and applicable state and federal regulations, sludge management criteria, or the reuse potential of the water by the CLMSD.

A.    Users seeking a special purpose discharge permit shall complete and file with the CLMSD, prior to commencing discharge, an application in the form prescribed by the CLMSD. This application shall be accompanied by any applicable fees, plumbing plans, a detailed analysis of the alternatives for water disposal, or other data as needed by the CLMSD for review.

B.    After evaluation of the data furnished, the CLMSD may issue a special purpose discharge permit when no alternative method of disposal is reasonably available, or to mitigate an environmental risk or health hazard.

C.    The permit application may be denied when the applicant has failed to establish to the CLMSD’s satisfaction that adequate pretreatment equipment is included within the applicant’s plans to ensure that the discharge limits will be met or if the applicant has, in the past, demonstrated an inability to comply with applicable discharge limits. (Ord. 872 §10.1, 2008)

13.20.670 Conditions and limitations.
A.    Monitoring requirements resulting from a special purpose discharge permit shall be for those noncompatible pollutants known to exist in the discharge. At least one analysis prior to sewer discharge shall be performed for all constituents contained in the most current Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) priority pollutant list.

B.    The CLMSD may specify and make part of each special purpose discharge permit specific pretreatment requirements or other terms and conditions determined by the CLMSD director to be appropriate to protect the CLMSD facilities, to comply with regulatory agencies’ requirements, to ensure compliance with this chapter, and to assess user charges. (Ord. 872 §10.2, 2008)

13.20.680 Permit fee.
The special purpose discharge permit fee shall be paid by the applicant in an amount adopted by resolution of the CLMSD board. Payment of permit fees must be received by the CLMSD prior to issuance of either a new permit or a renewed permit. Each permittee shall also pay delinquent invoices in full prior to permit renewal. See Appendix B to the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 872 §10.3, 2008)

13.20.690 Permit modifications of terms and conditions.
A.    The terms and conditions of an issued special purpose discharge permit may be subject to modification and change in the sole determination by the CLMSD during the life of the permit based on:

1.    The user’s current or anticipated operating data;

2.    The CLMSD’s current or anticipated operating data;

3.    Changes in the requirements of regulatory agencies;

4.    A determination by the CLMSD director that such modification is appropriate to further the objectives of this chapter.

B.    A permittee may request a modification to the terms and conditions of an issued permit. The request shall be in writing stating the requested change, and the reasons for the change. The CLMSD will review the request, make a determination on the request, and respond in writing.

C.    A permittee will be informed of any changes in the permit at least forty-five days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. (Ord. 872 §10.4, 2008)

13.20.700 Permit duration.
Special purpose discharge permits will be issued for a period not to exceed one year, but may be renewed as determined by the CLMSD director. Users seeking permit renewal shall comply with all provisions of this article. (Ord. 872 §10.5, 2008)

13.20.710 Discharge fees.
A charge for use to cover all costs of the CLMSD for providing sewerage service and monitoring will be established by the CLMSD director. A deposit determined by the CLMSD director to be sufficient to pay the estimated charges for use shall accompany the special purpose discharge permit application, and said deposit shall be applied to the charges for use. (Ord. 872 §10.6, 2008)

Chapter 13.22
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
Sections:

13.22.010    Drainage into sanitary sewers prohibited.

13.22.020    Types of wastes prohibited.

13.22.030    Determination of specific waste quantities.

13.22.040    Hospital wastes.

13.22.050    Interceptors required.

13.22.060    Maintenance of interceptors.

13.22.070    Preliminary treatment of wastes.

13.22.080    Maintenance of pretreatment facilities.

13.22.090    Control manholes.

13.22.100    Measurements and tests.

13.22.110    Special agreements.

13.22.010 Drainage into sanitary sewers prohibited.
No leaders from roofs and no surface drains for rain water shall be connected to any sanitary sewer. No surface or sub-surface drainage, rain water, storm water, seepage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters shall be permitted to enter any sanitary sewer by any device or method whatsoever. (Ord. 525 (A), 1976)

13.22.020 Types of wastes prohibited.
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer:

1.    Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150º F.;

2.    Any water or waste which may contain more than one hundred parts per million, by weight, of fat, oil or grease;

3.    Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas;

4.    Any garbage that has not been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension;

5.    Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works;

6.    Any wastes with a pH high enough to cause alkaline incrustation on sewer walls;

7.    Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to human or animals, create any a hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, or cause a public nuisance;

8.    Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance;

9.    Waste not conforming to Section 13.22.070;

10.    Any solids or viscous substances of such size or in such quantity that they may cause obstruction to flow in the sewer or be detrimental to proper wastewater treatment plant operations. These objectionable substances include, but are not limited to, asphalt, dead animals, offal, ashes, sand, mud, straw, industrial process shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch manure, bones, hair and fleshings, entrails, paper dishes, paper cups, milk containers, or other similar paper products, either whole or ground;

11.    Any rain water, storm water, groundwater, street drainage, sub-surface drainage, roof drainage, yard drainage, water from yard fountains, ponds or lawn sprays or any other uncontaminated water;

12.    Any water added for the purpose of diluting wastes which would otherwise exceed applicable maximum concentration limitations;

13.    Any nonbiodegradable cutting oils, commonly called soluble oil, which form persistent water emulsions;

14.    Any excessive concentrations of nonbiodegradable oil, petroleum oil or refined petroleum products;

15.    Any waste with an excessively high concentration of cyanide;

16.    Any unreasonably large amounts of undissolved or dissolved solids;

17.    Any wastes containing over 0.1 milligram/liter of dissolved sulfides;

18.    Any substance promoting or causing the promotion of toxic gases;

19.    Any wastes requiring an excessive quantity of chlorine or other chemical compound used for disinfection purposes;

20.    Any excessive amounts of chlorinated hydrocarbon or organic phosphorus type compounds;

21.    Any excessive amounts of deionized water, steam condensate or distilled water;

22.    Any waste containing substances that may precipitate, solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 50º F. and 100º F.;

23.    Any wastes containing excessive quantities of iron, boron, chromium, phenols, plastic resins, copper, nickel, zinc, lead, mercury, cadmium, selenium arsenic or any other objectionable materials toxic to humans, animals, the local environment or to biological or other wastewater treatment processes;

24.    Any blow-down or bleed water from cooling towers or other evaporative coolers exceeding one-third of the makeup water;

25.    Any single pass cooling water;

26.    Any excessive quantities of radioactive material wastes;

27.    Recognizable portions of the human anatomy;

28.    Discharge from salt (sodium chloride) regenerated water softeners;

29.    Swimming pool contents. (Ord. 525 (B), 1976)

13.22.030 Determination of specific waste quantities.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any public sewer which directly or indirectly connects to the district’s sewerage system any wastes, if in the opinion of the council such wastes may have an adverse or harmful effect on sewers, maintenance personnel, wastewater treatment plant personnel or equipment, treatment plant effluent quality, public or private property, or may otherwise endanger the public, the local environment or create a public nuisance. The council, in determining the acceptability of specific wastes, shall consider the nature of the waste and the adequacy and nature of the collection, treatment and disposal system available to accept the waste.

The council shall from time to time prepare a list of the maximum permissible quantities or concentrations of certain constituents in industrial wastewater flows and otherwise issue detailed directions for meeting the requirements of this section. (Ord. 525 (C), 1976)

13.22.040 Hospital wastes.
A.    Hospitals, clinics, offices of medical doctors, and convalescent homes:

1.    May discharge, through a district approved grinder installation with inlet size and design features suitable for its intended use and so constructed that all particles pass through a maximum three-eighths inch opening, wastes of the following categories:

a.    Wet organic kitchen wastes from food preparation and disposal but excluding all paper and plastic items,

b.    Disposable hypodermic needles, syringes and associated articles following their use,

c.    Infectious wastes, defined as:

i.    Laboratory and surgical operating room wastes except as excluded in subsection (A)(2)(b) of this section,

ii.    Wastes from outpatient areas and emergency rooms similar to those included in subsection (A)(1) of this section,

iii.    Equipment, instruments, utensils and other materials of a disposable nature that may harbor or transmit pathogenic organisms and that are used in the rooms of patients having a suspected or diagnosed communicable disease which by the nature of the disease is required to be isolated by public health agencies;

2.    Shall not discharge to the sewer by any means:

a.    Solid wastes generated in the rooms of patients who are not isolated because of a suspected or diagnosed communicable disease,

b.    Recognizable portions of the human anatomy,

c.    Wastes excluded by other provisions of this chapter except as specifically permitted in subsection (A)(1) of this section above,

d.    All solid wastes not included in subsection (A)(1) of this section.

B.    Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the health officer of Lake County to defined wastes as being infectious and, with the concurrence of the council, to require that they be discharged to the sewer. (Ord. 525 (D), 1976)

13.22.050 Interceptors required.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when in the opinion of the council, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for buildings used for residential purposes. All interceptors shall be a type and capacity approved by the council, and shall be so located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. (Ord. 525 (E), 1976)

13.22.060 Maintenance of interceptors.
All grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. (Ord. 525 (F), 1976)

13.22.070 Preliminary treatment of wastes.
The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having (a) five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than three hundred parts per million by weight, or (b) containing more than three fifty parts per million by weight of suspended solids, or (c) containing any quantity of substance having the characteristics described in Section 13.22.020, or (d) having an average daily flow greater than two percent of the average daily sewage flow of the district, shall be subject to the review and approval of the council.

Where necessary in the opinion of the council, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to, (a) reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to three hundred parts per million and the suspended solids to three hundred fifty parts per million by weight, or (b) reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in Section 13.22.020, or (c) control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes.

Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the council and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing. (Ord. 525 (G), 1976)

13.22.080 Maintenance of pretreatment facilities.
Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. (Ord. 525 (H), 1976)

13.22.090 Control manholes.
When required by the council, the owner of any property served by a side sewer carrying industrial wastes, shall install a suitable control manhole in the side sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the district. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. (Ord. 525 (I), 1976)

13.22.100 Measurements and tests.
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in Sections 13.22.020 and 13.22.070 shall be determined in accordance with standard methods and shall be determined at the control manhole provided for in Section 13.22.090, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the side sewer is connected. (Ord. 525 (J), 1976)

13.22.110 Special agreements.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the district and any industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the district for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern and subject to such terms and conditions as might be required by district. (Ord. 525 (K), 1976)

Chapter 13.30
WATER SYSTEM CONNECTIONS
Sections:

13.30.010    Official policy.

13.30.020    Official list of new entitlement.

13.30.030    Information sheets.

13.30.040    Database and report.

13.30.050    Improvement schedule.

13.30.060    Written determination on capacity.

13.30.070    Domestic water system connection entitlement.

13.30.080    Mitigation program.

13.30.090    Exclusions.

13.30.100    Policies.

13.30.010 Official policy.
This chapter shall serve as the official policy of the city in assuring that the city will approve or authorize only those projects, developments, requests for connection (entitlement) that can be adequately served by the city’s domestic water system. (Ord. 699 (part), 1990)

13.30.020 Official list of new entitlement.
All proposals for new domestic water system connection entitlement shall be made in writing and logged on an official list which shall be presented to the city council and the city planning commission on a regular basis. (Ord. 699 (part), 1990)

13.30.030 Information sheets.
All applications for new domestic water connection entitlement shall be required to file an information sheet indicating the number of fixture units and residential equivalent units (RUE), estimated seasonal demands, the estimated and the total domestic water demand that will result from the project for the purpose of defining the residential equivalent unit (RUE). This information shall be required prior to approval of an entitlement. (Ord. 699 (part), 1990)

13.30.040 Database and report.
The city staff shall develop and maintain an up-to-date and reliable database on the current and future capacity of the city’s domestic water system. The report and database shall be prepared by the planning, engineering/public works departments and shall be updated and presented to the city council and city planning commission on a regular basis. The capacity report shall be measured in seasonal and total water production flow. Upon receipt of the domestic water report, the city council will consider it at it’s regular meeting and shall order any additional action deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Every reasonable effort shall be made to expedite the council’s findings. (Ord. 699 (part), 1990)

13.30.050 Improvement schedule.
The city shall maintain a schedule and timeframe for specific improvements/actions that are necessary for planning, designing, financing, constructing, expanding, completing, and operating the city’s domestic water system to accommodate reasonable and expected growth for the next ten years. The schedule and timeframe shall identify major tasks, expected completion dates, and actual completion dates, current status and estimated costs. The timeframe and schedule shall be continually reviewed and updated and presented to the city council and city planning commission, and the State Department of Health Services, Santa Rosa District Office for the duration of the compliance order on a regular basis. Any deviation, amendment, change, delay, postponement, or other related action shall be noted as an attachment to the timeframe and schedule. (Ord. 699 (part), 1990)

13.30.060 Written determination on capacity.
Prior to the city authorization of an entitlement for any new domestic water connection entitlement that requires the city to commit to or reserve capacity for domestic water connection, the public works/engineering department shall file a written statement with the city council, the building and planning department and the planning commission with a determination that the proposed entitlement can be adequately accommodated without overloading the present system. (Ord. 699 (part), 1990)

13.30.070 Domestic water system connection entitlement.
A domestic water system connection entitlement shall mean the city approval of an issuance of a new building permit; approval of an architectural and design review application for new commercial, industrial, and residential development, approval of a use permit for new commercial, industrial and residential construction, and conversion committee approval of new commercial development. (Ord. 699 (part), 1990)

13.30.080 Mitigation program.
It is recognized that demand for connection entitlement to the city’s domestic water system varies from year to year, season to season and from project to project. Due to the constraints in the capacity of the domestic water system, significant attention must be given to the number of connections that will or can be allowed to connect to the system. Projects that create substantial demand may require outright connection ban or the development of mitigation plans and implementation programs that will allow the demand to be adequately provided for by the city’s domestic water system under the present circumstances. Development of the mitigation and implementation programs shall be done in accordance with the normal review process/environmental review process as defined by this code. (Ord. 699 (part), 1990)

13.30.090 Exclusions.
The criteria, conditions and prohibitions identified in this chapter shall not apply to:

A.    Construction authorized by a valid and unexpired building permit or planning commission action which was issued by the city on or before the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

B.    Remodeling, repair or construction which does not increase the occupancy load or change the intended use of a structure.

C.    Construction of public works projects other than buildings that increase the occupancy load or change the intended use of the structure. (Ord. 699 (part), 1990)

13.30.100 Policies.
The city council may adopt by resolution, the criteria, standards and policies for departmental use in clarifying the provisions contained in this chapter. The resolution shall be adopted at a regularly scheduled city council meeting after publication of a notice of the meeting. (Ord. 699 (part), 1990)

Title 14
(RESERVED)
Title 15
BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Chapters:

15.04    Construction Codes

15.05    Potentially Hazardous Masonry Buildings

15.08    Senior Housing

15.12    Relocation of Buildings

15.13    Reimbursement Agreements Within the City of Lakeport

15.16    Floodplain Management

15.20    Condominium Conversions

15.24    Small Residential Rooftop Solar Energy System Review Process

Chapter 15.04
CONSTRUCTION CODES
Sections:

15.04.010    Adopted.

15.04.020    Building permit and plan check fees.

15.04.040    Violation--Penalty.

15.04.010 Adopted.
The following codes are hereby adopted by reference and shall apply in the city of Lakeport: 2001 Building Standards Administrative Code; 2001 California Building Code, Volumes I and II; 2001 California Electrical Code; 2001 California Mechanical Code; 2001 California Plumbing Code; 2001 California Energy Code; 2001 California Elevator Safety Construction Code; 2001 California Historical Building Code; 2001 California Fire Code; 2001 California Code for Building Conservation; 2001 California Reference Standards Code all of which were copyrighted in 2002 by the California Building Standards Commission; and the 1997 Uniform Sign Code; 1997 Uniform Housing Code; 1997 Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings; and the 1997 Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa, and Hot Tub Code. (Ord. 819 §1, 2002)

15.04.020 Building permit and plan check fees.
Building permit and plan check fees shall be charged in accordance with a building permit fee resolution adopted by the city council. (Ord. 777 §3, 1996)

15.04.040 Violation--Penalty.
Violation of any of the provisions of the codes adopted by reference in Section 15.04.010 shall constitute an infraction punishable by a fine as set forth in Chapter 1.08 of this code. Each additional violation of the codes adopted herein shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1.08 of the code. (Ord. 819 §3, 2002)

Chapter 15.05
POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS MASONRY BUILDINGS
Sections:

15.05.010    Adoption of Appendix Chapter 1 of the Uniform Code for Building Conservation.

15.05.011    Modification of Conservation Code.

15.05.020    Building code.

15.05.030    Seismic zones.

15.05.040    Definitions.

15.05.050    Mandatory measures.

15.05.060    Noncompliance.

15.05.070    Appeals.

15.05.080    Violation--Penalty.

15.05.010 Adoption of Appendix Chapter 1 of the Uniform Code for Building Conservation.
The certain Appendix chapter 1 of the Uniform Code for Building Conservation, referred to in this chapter as the Conservation Code, is adopted and enacted as the standard for strengthening unreinforced or inadequately reinforced masonry buildings and is made a part of this chapter by reference with the same force and effect as if fully set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 696 (part), 1990)

15.05.011 Modification of Conservation Code.
The Appendix Chapter 1 of the conservation code is modified as follows:

A.    Section A102 is deleted;

B.    Section A105 is deleted;

C.    Subsection (a) of Section A106 is amended to read as follows:

Analysis and Design. Every structure required to be analyzed, either by ordinance or voluntarily, shall be analyzed and measures shall be specified which will allow the structure to resist minimum total lateral seismic forces assumed to act nonconcurrently in the direction of each of the main axes of the structure in accordance with the following equation:

V=Z(I)(KCS) W    

(A1-1)

The value of KCS need not exceed the values set forth in Table No. Al-A based on the seismic zone as determined by the Building Code. The value of Z shall be the value specified in Table No. Al-B. The I factor shall be as specified in Table No. Al-C. The value of W shall be as set forth in the Building Code.

(Ord. 696 (part), 1990)

15.05.020 Building code.
All references to the building code shall mean the 1985 Edition of the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the city. (Ord. 696 (part), 1990)

15.05.030 Seismic zones.
The city shall be considered in its entirety to be located in Seismic Zone 4. (Ord. 696 (part), 1990)

15.05.040 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings set out in this section:

A.    "Exempt buildings" means buildings exempted from this chapter and shall include the following:

1.    Warehouses;

2.    Dwellings with five or fewer living units;

3.    State and federal buildings;

4.    Historical qualified historical buildings shall comply with the State Historical Building Code established under Part 8, Title 24 of the California Administrative Code.

B.    “Potentially hazardous buildings” means only buildings constructed of unreinforced or inadequately reinforced masonry, regardless of the time of construction and whether or not they have been identified by the building official. (Ord. 696 (part), 1990)

15.05.050 Mandatory measures.
A.    Every legal owner of a building identified as a potentially hazardous building shall be notified by certified mail that the building is considered to be one of a general type of structures that historically has exhibited little resistance to earthquake motion.

B.    Every legal owner of an identified potentially hazardous building, within thirty days of receipt of notification pursuant to subsection A may provide evidence to the building official that would exempt or eliminate the building from being classified as a potentially hazardous building. Upon receipt of satisfactory evidence, the building official shall make a determination that the building is not a potentially hazardous building.

C.    Every legal owner of an identified potentially hazardous building, within sixty days of receipt of notification pursuant to subsection A shall deliver to any tenants or occupants of the building a copy of the notification, attached as Exhibit A to this ordinance and on file in the office of the city clerk, and file with the building official the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the tenants or occupants. The owner shall identify the total square footage of floor area of the building and the existing uses of those areas. In those cases where a building or a portion of the building is not presently occupied, the owner shall identify the unoccupied area(s) and state the most recent use. Information regarding the use(s) and area(s) shall be provided on the form marked as Exhibit B, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and on file in the office of the city clerk, and returned to the city within sixty days of receipt of notification pursuant to subsection A.

D.    Every legal owner of an identified potentially hazardous building, within sixty days of receipt of notification pursuant to subsection A, shall post a copy of the potentially hazardous building notice, attached as Exhibit C to the ordinance codified in this chapter and on file in the office of the city clerk, in the building. The posted notice shall be highly visible to all tenants, occupants and users of the building and shall be located at each entrance/exit forty-eight inches above the floor. The notice shall remain posted until the identified building is no longer considered a potentially hazardous building. The location of the notification posting shall be as approved by the city building official or his/her designee.

E.    At the expiration of the sixty day period following receipt of notification pursuant to subsection A, the building official shall record a copy of the notification at the county recorder’s office, unless the building has been classified as exempt or unless satisfactory evidence has been provided which has enabled the building official to determine that the building is not a potentially dangerous building.

F.    Every legal owner of an identified potentially hazardous building shall do the following by January 1, 1995. If the building has unreinforced masonry parapets, cornices, and/or brick veneer adjacent to a public right-of-way as defined in the Uniform Building Code, the owner shall:

1.    Remove or secure all parapets;

2.    Remove or secure all cornices;

3.    Remove or secure all masonry veneer extending higher than four feet above grade.

Plans and specifications for the removal and/or securing of unreinforced masonry parapets, cornices and veneers shall be prepared by a state licensed structural engineer or a civil engineer who is experienced in structural design. No removal of parapets shall occur unless permitted by the Uniform Building Code or Uniform Fire Code. Permits for the removal of parapets, cornices and veneer may be issued without the requirements for plans being signed by a registered engineer provided that all health and safety issues as set forth in the Uniform Building Code are addressed.

G.    Every legal owner of a building identified as a potentially hazardous building shall strengthen that building in compliance with the conservation code or the building code when any of the following events or actions take place:

1.    At the time of major remodeling and/or major damage repair. Major remodeling and/or major damage repair shall be considered as construction for which the total cost is equal to or more than fifty percent of the valuation of the building as determined by the building official based on the current building valuation data and regional modifiers published periodically by the International Conference of Building Officials (ICBO). All new construction shall comply with the building code.

2.    At the time of a major change in the occupancy classification as identified in the building code which increases the risk to human health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 747, 1993; Ord. 743, 1993; Ord. 696 (part), 1990)

15.05.060 Noncompliance.
Any building or structure or part thereof maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance. (Ord. 696 (part), 1990)

15.05.070 Appeals.
Any legal owner of a building identified as a potentially hazardous building may appeal a decision of the building official pursuant to this chapter in writing to the city council within five days after the decision is received. The city council shall render its decision within forty-five days after the filing of such appeal. (Ord. 696 (part), 1990)

15.05.080 Violation--Penalty.
Any person failing to comply with any of the mandatory measures specified in this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and is subject to the penalties prescribed in Chapter 1.08 of this code. (Ord. 696 (part), 1990)

Chapter 15.08
SENIOR HOUSING
Sections:

15.08.010    Elevator installation.

15.08.010 Elevator installation.
A.    Elevators shall be installed in exclusive senior housing which is multistory and contains more than thirty units of housing.

B.    The construction of the elevators shall meet the requirements of the Uniform Building Code.

C.    This requirement shall apply only to structures constructed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. (Ord. 663 §1, 1986)

Chapter 15.12
RELOCATION OF BUILDINGS
Sections:

15.12.010    Definitions.

15.12.020    Permit--Required.

15.12.030    Permit--Application.

15.12.040    Inspection of building.

15.12.050    Permit--Issuance conditions.

15.12.060    Bond requirements.

15.12.070    Notice to affected parties.

15.12.080    Duties of permittee.

15.12.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

A.    “Building” is a structure designed, built or occupied as a shelter or roofed enclosure for persons, animals or property and used for residential, business, mercantile, storage, commercial, industrial, institutional, assembly, educational or recreation purposes. A structure smaller than the following dimensions shall not fall within this definition: One hundred fifty feet.

B.    “Building inspector” is the building inspector of the city or his designated representative.

C.    “Person” is any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. (Ord. 573 §1, 1979)

15.12.020 Permit--Required.
No person shall move any building over, along or across any highway, street or alley in the city without first obtaining a permit from the building inspector. (Ord. 573 §2, 1979)

15.12.030 Permit--Application.
A.    A person seeking issuance of a permit under this chapter shall file an application for such permit with the building inspector.

B.    The application shall be made in writing and shall set forth:

1.    A description of the building proposed to be moved, giving street number, construction materials, dimensions, number of rooms;

2.    A legal description of the lot from which the building is to be moved giving the lot, block and tract number, if any, and the assessor’s parcel number;

3.    A legal description of the lot to which it is proposed the building be removed giving lot, block and tract number, if any, and assessor’s parcel number;

4.    The highways, streets and alleys over, along or across which the building is proposed to be moved together with the names and addresses of the persons living along the proposed route;

5.    Proposed moving date and hours;

6.    Any additional information which the building inspector finds necessary to a fair determination of whether the permit should issue.

B.    Accompanying Papers.

1.    Tax Certificate. The owner of the building to be moved shall file with the application sufficient evidence that the building and lot from which it is to be removed are free of any taxes, assessments or other charges of the city or the city municipal sanitation district.

2.    Fee. The application shall be accompanied by an amount to be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 573 §3, 1979)

15.12.040 Inspection of building.
The building inspector shall inspect the building and the applicant’s equipment to determine whether the standards for issuance of a permit are met. (Ord. 573 §6.1, 1979)

15.12.050 Permit--Issuance conditions.
The building inspector shall refuse to issue a permit if he finds that:

A.    Any application requirement or any fee or deposit requirement has not been complied with;

B.    The building is too large to move without endangering persons or property in the city;

C.    The building is in such a state of deterioration or disrepair or is otherwise so structurally unsafe that it could not be moved without endangering persons and property in the city;

D.    The building is structurally unsafe or unfit for the purpose for which moved, if the removal is in the city;

E.    The applicant’s equipment is unsafe and that persons and property would be endangered by its use;

F.    Zoning or other ordinances would be violated by the building in its new location. (Ord. 573 §6.2, 1979)

15.12.060 Bond requirements.
Any person filing an application under this chapter shall file with the building inspector a bond, certificate of deposit or general cash deposits in the sum of ten thousand dollars. Such bond shall run to the city for the use and benefit of any person or persons intended to be protected thereby and shall be conditioned on the payment of any damage to public or private property and the payment for any damages or losses resulting from any of the activities or conditions upon which the permit applied for is granted. (Ord. 573 §4, 1979)

15.12.070 Notice to affected parties.
The city shall give forty-eight hours’ notice to all residents living along the proposed route over which the building is to be moved. Such notice shall be by first class mail and shall state the date, time and route that the building is to be moved.

15.12.080 Duties of permittee.
Every permittee under this chapter shall:

A.    Use Designated Streets. Move a building only over streets designated for such use in a written permit;

B.    Notify of Revised Moving Time. Notify the building inspector in writing of a desired change in moving date and hour, in sufficient time to permit renotification of residents along the proposed route;

C.    Arrange for and pay the expenses of a traffic officer to accompany the movement of the building to protect the public from injury;

D.    Clear Old Premises. Remove all rubbish and materials and fill all excavations to existing grade at the original building site so that the premises are left in a safe and sanitary condition;

E.    Remove Service Connection. See that the sewer line is properly plugged and the water shut off. (Ord. 573 §7, 1979)

Chapter 15.13
REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENTS WITHIN THE CITY OF LAKEPORT
Sections:

15.13.010    Supplemental sizing of improvements.

15.13.020    Public improvement reimbursement agreement and procedure.

15.13.030    Action by city council.

15.13.040    Contents of public improvement reimbursement agreements.

15.13.050    Payment by benefited property owner.

15.13.060    Reimbursement for projects within major projects financing plan.

15.13.010 Supplemental sizing of improvements.
Improvements to be installed by the subdivider or land developer for any parcel or parcels of property for the benefit of the subdivision or single parcel to be developed shall contain supplemental size, capacity, number and length for the benefit of property not within the subdivision or single parcel to be developed as determined to be necessary by the city engineer. Such improvements shall be dedicated to the public. (Ord. 831 (part), 2004)

15.13.020 Public improvement reimbursement agreement and procedure.
A.    General. If a property owner is required to construct public improvements as a condition of approval of a proposed development and the required public improvements have the capacity and capability of serving and are designed to serve additional properties not within the proposed development and to directly benefit other properties in the vicinity, the property owner may apply to the city for a reimbursement agreement as provided in this chapter. For the purpose of this chapter, the geographical area which benefits by a privately financed public improvement shall constitute the “benefit district.”

B.    Application. A person requesting a reimbursement agreement shall submit an application on a form provided by the city and shall provide information as required by the city engineer, including the area of the proposed benefit district. A person may not request, and the city council may not approve, a public improvement reimbursement agreement after the date construction begins on a public improvement.

C.    Notice and Hearing. The city council shall hold a public hearing on the application. At least ten days before the hearing the city shall notify each affected property owner in writing, advising of the hearing and providing a copy of the proposed reimbursement agreement and staff report which will be submitted to the council.

D.    1. In this subsection, “affected property owner” means: (1) the record owner (as shown on the latest county assessor’s secured real property assessment roll) of each property within the proposed benefit district; and (2) the property owner or developer who installs or pays for installation of public improvements within a benefit district.

2.    An affected property owner may file written or oral comments or objections to the application before or at the hearing. No property may be added to a benefit district unless the notice is sent to the affected property owner. Failure to receive the notice required by this section shall not invalidate the reimbursement agreement. (Ord. 831 (part), 2004)

15.13.030 Action by city council.
A.    After the public hearing, the city council may by resolution grant, grant with modifications, or deny approval of a reimbursement agreement. Before granting approval, the city council shall make each of these findings:

1.    The improvement for which reimbursement is sought is a public improvement which will, upon completion, be accepted by the city;

2.    The improvement is not located within the boundaries of the proposed development;

3.    The public improvement has the capacity and capability of serving and is designed to serve additional properties not within the proposed development due to the supplemental size, capacity, number or length of the improvement;

4.    The proposed benefit district represents a geographical area of property which will benefit directly and substantially by the public improvement;

5.    The method of determining contribution and the amount of contribution is fair and reasonable to both the financing party and the benefited property owner and fairly distributes the charge among all subject parcels in proportion to the estimated benefit each will receive from the proposed improvement;

6.    Upon approval by the city council, the approved public improvement reimbursement agreement, including a list of benefited properties, shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder. (Ord. 831 (part), 2004)

15.13.040 Contents of public improvement reimbursement agreements.
A public improvement reimbursement agreement shall include, but is not limited to, the following provisions:

A.    A statement of the total construction cost, the applicant’s equitable share of the cost, and the amount of the total cost eligible for reimbursement;

B.    A map approved by the city engineer showing each property included within the benefit district and a list of each property by county assessor parcel number and address;

C.    The method of spreading the eligible reimbursement cost to be charged under the agreement to properties within the benefit district and the rate of interest or appreciation to be added to initial charges during the period of the agreement;

D.    A provision indicating who the financing party is for the purpose of receiving reimbursement, i.e., whether the developer or the property owner of record at the time the reimbursement is made. (This may depend upon whether the public improvement is financed by the developer or by individual property owners through an assessment district);

E.    The date on which the reimbursement agreement takes effect and benefited property owners begin contributions;

F.    A statement that no reimbursement charges collected by the city may be distributed to a financing party until the public improvement is completed and accepted by the city;

G.    A list of the administrative costs, if any, to be charged by the city to administer the agreement. These costs may be shown as a percentage of the charges collected by the city;

H.    A provision that reimbursement to the financing party shall be paid only from charges collected by the city under the agreement from the benefited properties listed in the agreement as such properties receive a land use entitlement. Reimbursement to the financing party shall be paid only from such charges collected within ten years from the date the agreement becomes effective, unless a different time period is approved by the city council; and

I.    A provision that the city is not liable to the financing party for failure of the city to collect a reimbursement charge due from a property or because of legal inability of the city to collect the charge from a property. (Ord. 831 (part), 2004)

15.13.050 Payment by benefited property owner.
For the purposes of this chapter, “benefited property” means a property within a benefit district for which no contribution to the cost of public improvement was made at the time of its construction. Benefited property includes property owned by a public agency. Payment by benefited property owner(s) shall be as set forth below:

A.    A benefited property owner shall pay to the city the applicable contribution charge set forth in the agreement whenever that person obtains a land use entitlement. The charge is payable at the time the entitlement is granted. A land use entitlement includes a permit or approval granted by the city for the development of property, including a subdivision map approval, land use permit, development plan approval, or building permit.

B.    The contribution charge applies only:

1.    After the reimbursement agreement is recorded;

2.    During the period a reimbursement agreement is in effect; and

3.    If the city engineer determines that the land use entitlement involves the scope and type of development contemplated by the agreement. Payment of the contribution charge is not required as a condition of issuing a land use entitlement for the alteration or enlargement of an existing building or structure (or the erection of an accessory building or structure) if the work:

a.    Is on the same parcel of land,

b.    Does not create an additional dwelling unit,

c.    Will not change the potential for traffic generation, and

d.    In any three-year period will not exceed one-half the value of all existing improvements on that parcel of land.

C.    No property may be assessed a double fee under this chapter.

D.    A benefited property owner has no obligation to pay a contribution charge if the owner does not develop the property during the effective period of the reimbursement agreement. (Ord. 831 (part), 2004)

15.13.060 Reimbursement for projects within major projects financing plan.
If a property owner is required to construct supplemental improvements and those supplemental improvements are listed as a project in the city’s major projects financing plan, the property owner shall be eligible for reimbursement by the city as set forth in the administrative guidelines for implementing the major projects financing plan. (Ord. 831 (part), 2004)

Chapter 15.16
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Sections:

ARTICLE I. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS

15.16.010    Statutory authorization.

15.16.020    Findings of fact.

15.16.030    Statement of purpose.

15.16.040    Methods of reducing flood losses.

ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS

15.16.050    Definitions.

ARTICLE III. GENERAL PROVISIONS

15.16.060    Lands to which this chapter applies.

15.16.070    Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.

15.16.080    Compliance.

15.16.090    Abrogation and greater restrictions.

15.16.100    Interpretation.

15.16.110    Warning and disclaimer of liability.

15.16.120    Severability.

ARTICLE IV. ADMINISTRATION

15.16.130    Establishment of development permit.

15.16.140    Designation of the floodplain administrator.

15.16.150    Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.

15.16.160    Appeals.

ARTICLE V. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION

15.16.170    Standards of construction.

15.16.180    Standards for utilities.

15.16.190    Standards for subdivisions.

15.16.200    Standards for manufactured homes.

15.16.210    Standards for recreational vehicles.

15.16.220    Floodways.

15.16.230    Nature of variances.

15.16.240    Variance procedure.

15.16.250    Conditions for variances.

ARTICLE I. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS

15.16.010 Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the state of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560 and 65800 conferred upon local government units authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council does adopt the following floodplain management regulations. (Ord. 780 (part), 1995)

15.16.020 Findings of fact.
A.    The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.

B.    These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities also contribute to the flood loss. (Ord. 780 (part), 1995)

15.16.030 Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:

A.    Protect human life and health;

B.    Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

C.    Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

D.    Minimize prolonged business interruptions;

E.    Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

F.    Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage;

G.    Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

H.    Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 780 (part), 1995)

15.16.040 Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions to:

A.    Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;

B.    Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction or subsequent construction;

C.    Control the alteration of natural Lakeport, stream channels and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;

D.    Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and

E.    Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. (Ord. 780 (part), 1995)

ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS

15.16.050 Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

“Accessory use” means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located.

“Appeal” means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this chapter.

“Area of shallow flooding” means a designated AO or AH zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.

Area of Special Flood Hazard. See “special flood hazard area.”

“Base flood” means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “one-hundred-year flood”). “Base flood” is the term used throughout this chapter.

“Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (i.e., below ground level) on all sides. Building. See “structure.”

“City” means city of Lakeport.

“Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.

“Development permit” means a building permit, official document or certificate issued by the city authorizing construction activities on private property or an encroachment permit for work done in the public right-of-way.

“Encroachment” means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.

“Existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.

“Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).

“Flood, flooding or floodwater” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.

“Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway.

“Flood Hazard Boundary Map” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of flood hazards.

“Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

“Flood Insurance Study” means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

“Floodplain or flood-prone area” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See “flooding.”

“Floodplain administrator” is the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.

“Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations and open space plans.

“Floodplain management regulations” means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.

“Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.

“Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge floodwaters without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.3 foot except that there shall be no increase in the water surface elevation during the base flood. Also referred to as “regulatory floodway.”

“Floodway fringe” is that area of the floodplain on either side of the regulatory floodway where encroachment may be permitted.

“Fraud and victimization” as related to Article VI, Variances, of this chapter, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the city council will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty to one hundred years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates.

“Functionally dependent use” means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.

“Governing body” is the local governing unit, i.e., county or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.

“Hardship” as related to Article VI, Variances, of this chapter, means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The city council requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not always exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.

“Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

“Historic structure” means any structure that is

1.    Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

2.    Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

3.    Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or

4.    Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states with approved programs.

“Improvement value” means the value of any reconstruction, rehabilitation, repair, addition or the proposed new development of a structure. Improvement value shall be determined by the community development department and shall be based on standard unit costs, or contract amounts as submitted by a California licensed contractor, for construction in the city of Lakeport.

“Levee” means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.

“Levee system” means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices.

“Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access (crawl space) or storage in an area other than a basement area (see “basement”) is not considered a building’s lowest floor, provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.

“Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”

“Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

“Market value” means the value of a structure as determined by one of two methods stated below:

1.    The assessed value of improvements on a parcel having a minimal number of buildings on it as determined by the value shown on the most current Lake County Assessment Roll; or

2.    By an appraisal made by a certified appraiser within ninety days of the date of application for improvements to the structure. Said appraisal shall be based on the current value of the structure alone and shall be for the structure prior to the proposed improvements being made.

“Mean sea level” means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.

“Minor improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, replacement or other improvement of a structure which is less than fifty percent of the market value of the structure.

“New construction,” for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

“New manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community.

“Obstruction” includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.

One-Hundred-Year Flood or 100-Year Flood. See “base flood.”

“Principal structure” means a structure used for the principal use of the property as distinguished from an accessory use.

“Public safety and nuisance” as related to Article VI, Variances, of this chapter means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal or basin.

“Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is

1.    Built on a single chassis;

2.    Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

3.    Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and

4.    Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel or seasonal use.

“Regulatory floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

“Riverine” means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.

Sheet Flow Area. See “area of shallow flooding.”

“Special flood hazard area (SFHA)” means an area having special flood hazards, and: (1) as shown on an FHBM or FIRM as zone A, AO, Al-30, AE, A99 and AH; or (2) as identified by the city floodplain administrator.

“Start of construction” includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building, development or encroachment permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty days from the date of the permit. The “actual start” means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the “actual start of construction” means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

“Structure” means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.

“Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

“Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other proposed new development of a structure, the total cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. If multiple or phased improvements are involved, said total costs shall be cumulative for a five consecutive year period prior to the start of construction. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either

1.    Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

2.    Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure.

“Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.

“Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

“Water surface elevation” means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.

“Watercourse” means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. (Ord. 780 (part), 1995)

ARTICLE III. GENERAL PROVISIONS

15.16.060 Lands to which this chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city. (Ord. 780 (part), 1995)

15.16.070 Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated September 28, 1990 and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFMs), dated September 28, 1990, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city council by the floodplain administrator. The study, FIRMs and FBFMs are on file at City Hall, 225 Park Street, Lakeport, CA 95453, Department of Public Works. (Ord. 780 (part), 1995)

15.16.080 Compliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violations of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 780 (part), 1995)

15.16.090 Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail except that deed restrictions and nonpublic covenants shall not be enforced by the city. (Ord. 780 (part), 1995)

15.16.100 Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be

A.    Considered as minimum requirements;

B.    Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

C.    Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. 780 (part), 1995)

15.16.110 Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, city council, any officer or employee thereof, the state of California, or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 780 (part), 1995)

15.16.120 Severability.
This chapter and the various parts thereof are declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 780 (part), 1995)

ARTICLE IV. ADMINISTRATION

15.16.130 Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 15.16.070. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the city community development department and may include, but not be limited to plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing: the nature, location, dimensions and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials; drainage facilities; foundation details showing openings required in Section 15.16.170(C)(3)(b); and anchoring details. Specifically, the following information is required:

A.    Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures, in zone AO, elevation of highest adjacent grade and proposed elevation of lowest floor of all structures; or

B.    Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure will be floodproofed, if required in Section 15.16.170(C)(3);

C.    All appropriate certifications listed in Section 15.16.150(D); and

D.    Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. (Ord. 780 (part), 1995)

15.16.140 Designation of the floodplain administrator.
The director of public works is appointed to administer, implement and enforce this chapter by reviewing and authorizing permits in accord with its provisions. (Ord. 780 (part), 1995)

15.16.150 Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.
The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following.

A.    Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine that:

1.    Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;

2.    All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;

3.    The site is reasonably safe from flooding; and

4.    The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, “adversely affects” means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.3 foot at any point outside of a floodway.

B.    Review and Use of Any Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 15.16.070, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer Article V of this chapter. Any such information shall be submitted to the city council for adoption.

C.    Notification of Other Agencies. For alteration or relocation of a watercourse:

1.    Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation;

2.    Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; and

3.    Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.

D.    Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following:

1.    Certification required by Section 15.16.170(C)(1) (floor elevations);

2.    Certification required by Section 15.16.170(C)(2) (elevations or floodproofing of nonresidential structures);

3.    Certification required by Section 15.16.170(C)(3) (wet floodproofing standard);

4.    Certification of elevation required by Section 15.16.190(B) (subdivision standards);

5.    Certification required by Section 15.16.220(A) (floodway encroachments).

E.    Map Determinations. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Article VI of this chapter.

F.    Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 15.16.080. (Ord. 780 (part), 1995)

15.16.160 Appeals.
The city council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. (Ord. 780 (part), 1995)

ARTICLE V. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION

15.16.170 Standards of construction.
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:

A.    Anchoring.

1.    All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

2.    All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 15.16.200, however, the California Department of Housing and Community Development shall have authority and responsibility for mobile homes in mobile home parks in the city.

B.    Construction Materials and Methods.

All new construction, substantial improvement and minor improvement shall be constructed:

1.    With materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;

2.    Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;

3.    With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and if within zones AH or AO where new construction or substantial improvement is to occur;

4.    So that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.

C.    Elevation and Floodproofing. (See Article II, Definitions, for “new construction,” “substantial damage” and “substantial improvement.”)

1.    Residential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall have the lowest floor, including basement:

a.    In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height of at least one foot higher than the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified;

b.    In an A zone, elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation, as determined by the city;

c.    In all other zones, elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation.

Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor to be properly elevated. Such certification or verification in the form of a properly completed FEMA elevation certificate shall be provided to the floodplain administrator prior to occupancy of the structure.

2.    Nonresidential construction shall either be elevated to conform with subsection (C)(1) of this section or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:

a.    Be floodproofed below the elevation recommended under subsection (C)(1) of this section so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

b.    Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and

c.    Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification in the form of a properly completed FEMA elevation certificate or in the form of a properly completed FEMA floodproofing certificate shall be provided to the floodplain administrator prior to occupancy of the structure.

3.    All new construction and substantial improvement with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access (crawl space) or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must exceed the following minimum criteria:

a.    Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or

b.    Have a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater.

4.    Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in Section 15.16.200. (Ord. 780 (part), 1995)

15.16.180 Standards for utilities.
A.    All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate:

1.    Infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; and

2.    Discharge from the systems into floodwaters.

B.    On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding.

C.    All new and replacement electrical panels and meters shall be installed a minimum one foot above the base flood elevation. (Ord. 780 (part), 1995)

15.16.190 Standards for subdivisions.
A.    All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood.

B.    All subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pad(s). If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the lowest floor and pad elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator.

C.    All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

D.    All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

E.    All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. (Ord. 780 (part), 1995)

15.16.200 Standards for manufactured homes.
A.    Except for mobile homes in mobile home parks under the jurisdiction of the California Department of Housing and Community Development, all manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map, on sites located:

1.    Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;

2.    In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;

3.    In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or

4.    In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood; shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.

B.    Except for mobile homes in mobile home parks under the jurisdiction of the California Department of Housing and Community Development, all manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map that are not subject to the provisions of subsection A of this section, will be elevated so that either the:

1.    Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation; or

2.    Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than one foot in height above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ord. 780 (part), 1995)

15.16.210 Standards for recreational vehicles.
A.    Except for recreational vehicles in mobile home parks under the jurisdiction of the California Department of Housing and Community Development, all recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map will either:

1.    Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty consecutive days;

2.    Be fully licensed and ready for highway use--a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or

3.    Meet the permit requirements of Article IV of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 15.16.200(A). (Ord. 780 (part), 1995)

15.16.220 Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 15.16.070 are floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply.

A.    Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement and other new development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in the base flood elevation during the occurrence of the base flood discharge;

B.    If subsection A of this section is satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Article V of this chapter. (Ord. 780 (part), 1995)

15.16.230 Nature of variances.
The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on the general principal of law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. Generally, the characteristics should be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic should pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants or the property owners. However, variances which permit the lowest floor of a structure to be constructed below the base flood elevation must have unique characteristics which pertain to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. For structures with the lowest floor below the base flood elevation, the unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners.

It is the duty of the city council to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in the chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. (Ord. 780 (part), 1995)

15.16.240 Variance procedure.
A.    Requests for variances to this chapter shall be heard by the city council in general accordance with the adopted city variance ordinance procedures as set forth in the zoning ordinance. A request for a variance to this chapter shall be a separate and distinct variance, not a part of another issue.

B.    In evaluating requests for variances, the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the following:

1.    Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

2.    Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

3.    Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property;

4.    Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

5.    Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

6.    Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

7.    Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

8.    Relationship of the proposed use to the general plan and floodplain management program for that area;

9.    Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

10.    Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and

11.    Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges.

C.    Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of the floodplain administrator that:

1.    The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars for one hundred dollars of insurance coverage; and

2.    Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the office of the Lake County recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.

D.    The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency. (Ord. 780 (part), 1995)

15.16.250 Conditions for variances.
A.    Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot on one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Articles IV and V of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

B.    Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of “historic structures’ (as defined in Article II of this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.

C.    Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

D.    Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. “Minimum necessary” means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the city council need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the city council believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local chapter.

E.    Variances shall only be issued upon a:

1.    Showing of good and sufficient cause;

2.    Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional “hardship” (as defined in Article II of this chapter) to the applicant; and

3.    Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, creation of a nuisance (as defined in Article II, see “public safety and nuisance”), cause fraud or victimization (as defined in Article II) of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

F.    Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of Sections 15.16.240(A) through (E) are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance.

G.    Upon consideration of the factors of Section 15.16.240(B) and the purposes of this chapter, the planning commission and the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 780 (part), 1995)

Chapter 15.20
CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS
Sections:

ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS

15.20.010    Plan adoption--Purpose.

15.20.020    Short title.

15.20.030    Definitions.

15.20.040    Zoning compliance requirements.

ARTICLE II. GENERAL STANDARDS

15.20.050    Plan approval considerations.

15.20.060    Compliance with zoning development standards required.

15.20.070    Separation of facilities.

ARTICLE III. TENTATIVE MAPS

15.20.080    Application--Contents.

15.20.090    Housing goals.

15.20.100    Low-income or moderate-income units.

15.20.110    Findings necessary for approval--Condominium conversions or community apartment projects.

15.20.120    Findings necessary for approval--Mobile home park conversions.

15.20.130    Mobile home park conversion--Assumption of costs.

15.20.140    Provision of tenant assistance.

ARTICLE IV. PUBLIC REPORTS AND FEES

15.20.150    Notice to tenants.

15.20.160    Review fees.

ARTICLE V. FINAL AND PARCEL MAPS

15.20.170    Filing requirements.

15.20.180    Improvement security.

ARTICLE VI. VARIANCES

15.20.190    Application--Conditions.

15.20.200    Hearing procedures.

15.20.210    Appeal stays issuance.

15.20.220    Acknowledgment and acceptance required.

15.20.230    Appeal procedure.

15.20.240    Expiration.

15.20.250    Revocation.

ARTICLE VII. APPEALS

15.20.260    Authority.

15.20.270    Further appeal.

ARTICLE VIII. INTERPRETATION

15.20.280    Abrogation and greater restrictions.

ARTICLE IX. AMENDMENTS

15.20.290    Generally.

ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS

15.20.010 Plan adoption--Purpose.
A.    There is adopted a conversion ordinance for the city.

B.    This chapter is adopted to promote and ensure proper growth and the provisions of adequate availability of rentals. (Ord. 607 §S1.1, 1.2, 1982)

15.20.020 Short title.
This chapter shall be known by the following short title: “City of Lakeport Conversion Ordinance.” (Ord. 607 §1.3, 1982)

15.20.030 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms are defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; words used in the singular shall include plural; the word “shall” is mandatory, the word “may” is permissive.

A.    “Condominium” is defined as an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial or commercial building on such real property, such as an apartment, office or store. A “condominium” may include in addition a separate interest in other portions of such real property (Civil Code Section 783). “Condominium,” as used in this title, includes “community apartment.”

B.    “Community apartment” is defined as a development in which there is an undivided interest in the land coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of an apartment located therein. Community apartments shall be subject to the same restrictions and conditions set forth in this chapter for condominiums.

C.    “Condominium conversion” is defined as the development or use of the land and existing structures as a condominium project regardless of the present or prior use of such lands and structures, and regardless of whether substantial improvements have been made to such structure(s).

D.    “Condominium project” is defined as the entire parcel of real property, including all structures thereon, to be divided into two or more units for the purpose of constructing or converting existing structures to condominium units.

E.    “Conversion” is defined as the act of changing the use or ownership of a structure or air space therein, or area of land from rental to individual ownership.

F.    “Moderate income” is defined as the most recent standard as set forth by the Department of Housing and Urban Development.

G.    “Housing policy statements” are those statements or ordinances so entitled which have been or will be adopted by the city council.

H.    “Mobile home park” is any area or tract of land where two or more mobile home lots are rented or leased or held out for rent or lease to accommodate mobile homes used for human habitation.

I.    “Stock cooperative” is a corporation which is formed or availed of primarily of for purpose of holding title to, either in fee simple or for a term of years, improved real property, if all or substantially all of the shareholders of such corporation receive a right of exclusive occupancy in a portion of the real property, title to which is held by the corporation, which right of occupancy is transferable only concurrently with the transfer of the share or shares of stock or membership certificate in the corporation held by the person having such right of occupancy. The term “stock cooperative” does not include a limited-equity housing cooperative, as defined in Section 11003.4 of the Business and Professions Code.

J.    “Unit” shall mean that area of real property within a condominium or conversion project to be held in private ownership. (Ord. 607 §2, 1982)

15.20.040 Zoning compliance requirements.
A.    There are recognized established zoning districts into which the city is divided. These districts are set forth in detail in Title 17 of this code.

B.    All condominium projects and conversions shall comply with the development site requirements and development standards as set forth in Title 17 of this code, unless exempted in this chapter. (Ord. 607 §3, 1982)

ARTICLE II. GENERAL STANDARDS

15.20.050 Plan approval considerations.
Among the factors to be considered in the approval of condominium or conversion projects shall be:

A.    Provision of adequate protected storage space for each residential until in addition to closet space normal to all units. Said space shall be covered and enclosed and shall be a minimum of fifty square feet in area;

B.    Provision of laundry facilities or areas for same in each residential unit or adequate common facilities;

C.    Provision of minimum one hundred twenty-five square feet for each residential dwelling unit for the purpose of boat, trailer or RV storage. Boats and trailers shall be stored only within areas specifically designated or within enclosed garages, if available. The area shall be screened by solid fencing. (Ord. 607 §4.1, 1982)

15.20.060 Compliance with zoning development standards required.
Requirements of condominium projects and conversions to unit ownership shall meet all development standards as set forth for condominiums within Title 17 of this code so as to more fully meet the needs of condominium occupants which in the opinion of the city more closely parallel needs of single-family dwelling unit occupants than those of apartment dwellers. Needs of specific concern are parking spaces, laundry facilities, storage and RV parking areas, access points to public streets, private roads and project utilities. (Ord. 607 §4.2, 1982)

15.20.070 Separation of facilities.
Utilities shall be brought to conformance to current standards particularly to the separation of facilities for each unit. (Ord. 607 §4.3, 1982)

ARTICLE III. TENTATIVE MAPS

15.20.080 Application--Contents.
Application for a tentative map for a condominium or conversion project shall include:

A.    A map showing all common areas and usages of the building(s) and grounds, and plans for the interior division of the building(s), if applicable, showing horizontal and vertical boundaries of all units within the building(s) or upon the ground;

B.    Proposed improvements within the project to bring into or closer to conformity with standards;

C.    A copy of the bylaws of the homeowner’s association, including the following:

1.    A maintenance plan which clearly specifies methods and standards for performance of common responsibilities and maintenance for all common areas and equipment and fees to be assessed for such purposes. The maintenance plan shall include a sinking fund for major repairs and extraordinary expenses. (See the appendix, sample form, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter, on file in the office of the city clerk);

2.    A provision that an individual owner cannot avoid liability for his prorated share of the expenses for the common areas by renouncing his rights in the common area.

D.    A preliminary conversion report from the department of building inspection on the condition of the building, listing all housing code violations and related violations which are detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the public, the owners and the occupants of the building. The applicant shall provide copies of the above report to prospective purchasers.

E.    A report on the proposed conversion from the department of engineering on the condition of public improvements, specifically streets, sewer and water mains, laterals and appurtenances, storm drainage facilities, traffic control and direction, fire hydrants, sidewalks and walkways, and other items deemed necessary by the department of engineering for improvement.

F.    A report on the existing rental conditions which shall include, but not be limited to, the following information, when applicable:

1.    Length of occupancy of present tenants;

2.    Household composition;

3.    Current rents; whether rents include or exclude utilities; date and amount of last two increases;

4.    Nature of lease agreements;

5.    Approximate sale price of units and financing arrangements to tenants opting to purchase; and

6.    Unit occupancy or vacancy status.

G.    Plans and descriptions, showing how the following will be performed:

1.    All site work shall be brought up to current city standards. The city may require the provision of additional parking spaces to meet requirements of owners and guests. The building(s) or units shall be brought up to code in accordance with any applicable Uniform Building Code or this title;

2.    The proposed time schedule, plans and specifications on the correction of all deficiencies set forth in the reports prepared in accordance with subsections D and E of this section;

3.    Condominium projects shall meet current Uniform Building Code requirements for products-of-combustion detection devices and systems;

4.    Condominium projects shall meet current Uniform Building Code requirements for handicapped access; and

5.    Plans and specifications for the individual metering to each unit for public utilities.

H.    At the time of filing a tentative map for a subdivision to be created from the conversion of a mobile home park to another use, the subdivider shall also file a report on the impact of the conversion upon the displaced residents of the mobile home park to be converted. In determining the impact of the conversion on displaced mobile home park residents, the report shall address the availability of adequate replacement space in mobile home parks. The subdivider shall make a copy of the report available to each resident of the mobile home park at least fifteen days prior to the hearing on the map by the planning commission.

The planning commission and the city council may require the subdivider to take steps to mitigate any adverse impact of the conversion on the ability of displaced mobile home park residents to find adequate space in a mobile home park. This section shall also apply to a mobile home park conversion to private ownership of the lots.

I.    A list of names and addresses of mobile home owners and/or tenants.

J.    A detailed plan that describes the relocation and moving assistance information to be given to each tenant, and the steps the applicant will take to ensure the successful relocation of each tenant. The plan shall include additional measures, including assistance in locating comparable housing, assistance in locating a moving company, and payment to cover estimated moving costs, to assist special needs tenants, including senior citizens over the age of sixty-two, households with a handicapped person, and lower income households living with one or more minor children. Limited equity residential cooperatives which provide long term affordability for the units proposed for conversion are exempt from this requirement.

K.    The applicant shall offer for dedication all common areas as public utility easements (PUEs), and the city shall accept the offer on behalf of the public utilities involved. (Ord. 893 §2(1), 2014; Ord. 607 §5.1, 1982)

15.20.090 Housing goals.
The planning commission shall consider whether the proposed conversion is consistent with the following housing goals, if applicable:

A.    To encourage continuation of social and economic diversity within Lakeport through the provision of a variety of housing types;

B.    To expand the supply of decent housing for low and moderate income families;

C.    To minimize the adverse impact to the availability of residential rentals. (Ord. 607 S5.2, 1982)

15.20.100 Low-income or moderate-income units.
The planning commission may establish reasonable requirements to ensure that a percentage of the converted units will be reserved for persons of low or moderate income, particularly if low and moderate income persons are rental tenants. The planning commission may deny the tentative map upon findings any of the following:

A.    Based on the information required by Section 15.20.080(F) and on the existing vacancy rate for rental housing, that existing tenants will have substantial difficulty in obtaining comparably priced rental housing;

B.    The ratio of multiple-family rental units would be reduced to less than four percent of the total number of dwelling units in the city, with no replacement rental being provided;

C.    The unavailability of comparable mobile home rental spaces. (Ord. 607 §5.3, 1982)

15.20.110 Findings necessary for approval--Condominium conversions or community apartment projects.
The planning commission shall make the following specific findings prior to approving a condominium conversion or community apartment project, at a tentative map stage:

A.    Each of the tenants of the proposed condominium project has been, or will be, given one hundred eighty days’ written notice of intention to convert prior to termination of tenancy due to conversion or proposed conversion;

B.    Each of the tenants of the proposed condominium project has been or will be given notice of an exclusive right to contract for the purchase of their respective units upon the same terms and conditions that such units will be initially offered to the general public or upon terms more favorable to the tenant. The right shall run for a period of not less than ninety days from the date of issuance of the subdivision public report pursuant to Section 11018.2 of the California Business and Professions Code and Sections 15.20.150 and 15.20.160 of this chapter, unless the tenant gives prior written notice of his intention not to exercise the right;

C.    That at least sixty percent of the residents within the residential complex are in favor of the condominium conversion;

D.    That residents sixty-two years of age or older or permanently disabled would receive lifetime leases at current rental rates, amended by a cost-of-living escalator, not to exceed the National Consumer Price Index figure; this shall include a surviving spouse;

E.    That low and moderate income tenants would receive two-year leases at current rental rates, amended by a cost-of-living escalator, not to exceed the National Consumer Price Index figure;

F.    Commencing at a date not less than sixty days prior to the filing of a tentative map, the subdivider has given notice of such proposed filing to each person applying after such date for rental of a unit of the subject property immediately prior to the acceptance of any rent or deposit from the prospective tenant by the subdivider. The notice shall be as set forth in Section 66452.8(b) of the California Government Code. Failure by a subdivider to give the notice required in this subsection shall not be grounds to deny the conversion; however, if the subdivider fails to give notice pursuant to this section, he or she shall pay to each prospective tenant who becomes a tenant and who is entitled to such notice, and who does not purchase his or her unit pursuant to subsection B of this section, an amount equal to the following:

1.    Actual moving expenses incurred when moving from the subject property; and

2.    The first month’s rent on the tenant’s new rental unit, if any, immediately after moving from the subject property.

G.    The subdivider has given notice sixty days prior to the filing of a tentative map to each tenant of the subject property.    The notice shall be as set forth in Section 66452.9(b) of the California Government Code. The written notices required by this section shall be deemed satisfied if such notices comply with the legal requirements for service by mail. (Ord. 893 §2(2), 2014; Ord. 607 §5.4, 1982)

15.20.120 Findings necessary for approval--Mobile home park conversions.
The planning commission shall make the following specific findings prior to approving a conversion of a mobile home park at a tentative map stage:

A.    That the management has given the tenants at least fifteen days’ written notice that the management will be appearing before the planning commission to request permits for a change of use of the mobile home park;

B.    Each of the mobile home owners has been or will be given notice of an exclusive right to contract for the purchase of their respective units upon the same terms and conditions that such lots will be initially offered to the general public, or upon terms more favorable to the tenant, taking into account improvements made by that tenant (i.e., landscaping, decks, pads, etc.). The right shall run for a period of not less than ninety days from the date of issuance of the subdivision public report pursuant to Section 11018.2 of the California Business and Professions Code and Sections 15.20.150 and 15.20.160 of this chapter, unless the tenant gives prior written notice of his intention not to exercise the right;

C.    That the management shall be required to give the tenant twelve months or more written notice of the proposed change after the management has made initial application to the planning commission requesting a change of use;

D.    That all requirements for tenant notification have been or shall be complied with pursuant to Section 798.55, 798.56 and 798.57 of the California Civil Code;

E.    That at least sixty percent of the residents within the mobile home park are in favor of conversion;

F.    That residents sixty-two years of age or older or permanently disabled would receive lifetime leases at current rental rates, amended by a cost-of-living escalator, not to exceed the National Consumer Price Index figure; this shall include a surviving spouse;

G.    That low and moderate income tenants would receive two-year leases at current rental rates, amended by a cost-of-living escalator, not to exceed the National Consumer Price Index figure;

H.    That the project site has been rezoned to appropriate P-C zoning. (Ord. 607 §5.5, 1982)

15.20.130 Mobile home park conversion--Assumption of costs.
If the planning commission finds that the original owner of a project has done any of the following, then as a condition of the approval of the project, the present

owner/applicant shall assume all costs of moving the mobile home within fifty miles, if the mobile home has to be moved:

A.    Removed the wheels and/or axles from a mobile home sold in place in the park; and

B.    Sold a mobile home in place in the park which has been physically located by the park owner in such a manner that it cannot practicably be moved; or

C.    Restricted the park by rule or regulation that a tenant was required to perform the provisions of subsections (A) or (B) of this section. (Ord. 607 §5.6, 1982)

15.20.140 Provision of tenant assistance.
The planning commission may incorporate the following conditions into the approval of a conversion project to assist and ease the displaced tenants:

A.    The tenant’s rent shall not be increased from the time the tenant is notified of intention to convert until relocation takes place;

B.    Tenants will receive moving expenses of two times the monthly rent. (Ord. 607 §5.7, 1982)

ARTICLE IV. PUBLIC REPORTS AND FEES

15.20.150 Notice to tenants.
A.    No later than five days after issuance of the tentative public report by the California State Department of Real Estate, the applicant shall notify tenants of the proposed conversion, supplying a copy of the public report to each unit tenant if so requested; and report to the planning department of the city within thirty days thereafter the approximate number of tenants desiring to convert to condominium ownership.

B.    All report procedures shall conform to Section 11000 of the state Business and Professions Code. (Ord. 607 §6.1, 1982)

15.20.160 Review fees.
Fees associated with the review process of a proposed condominium or conversion project shall be set by the city council by resolution to reflect actual incurred costs. (Ord. 607 §6.2, 1982)

ARTICLE V. FINAL AND PARCEL MAPS

15.20.170 Filing requirements.
Final and parcel map filing for conversions shall be filed in the same manner as specified in the Title 16 of this code, except that concurrently filed shall be the following:

A.    Condominium bylaws;

B.    A condominium/conversion report from the department of building inspection stating that the condominium structures and units are in conformance with the applicable housing code, as adopted by the city, and those improvements as set forth in Section 15.20.080(D) of this chapter have been completed.

C.    A condominium or conversion report from the department of engineering stating that the public improvements as set forth in Section 15.20.080(E) of this chapter have been improved to an acceptable standard or that agreements have been entered into with the city council pursuant to Section 15.20.180 of this chapter.

D.    The city council shall not approve the filing of a final map until it finds all of the following:

1.    Each of the tenants of the proposed condominium or conversion project have received, pursuant to Section 66452.9 of the California Government Code, written notification of intention to convert at least sixty days prior to the filing of a tentative map pursuant to Section 66452 of the California Government Code. There shall be a further finding that each such tenant, and each person applying for the rental of a unit in such residential real property, has, or will have, received all applicable notices and rights now or hereafter required by the Subdivision Map Act or Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 66451 of the California Government Code). In addition, a finding shall be made that each tenant has received ten days’ written notification that an application for a public report will be, or has been, submitted to the Department of Real Estate, and that such report will be available upon request. The written notices to tenants required by this section shall be deemed satisfied if such notices are deposited in the U.S. mail, first class, postage prepaid.

2.    Each of the tenants of the proposed condominium, community apartment project to stock cooperative project has been, or will be, given written notification within ten days of approval of a final map for the proposed condominium, or conversion.

3.    Each of the tenants of the proposed condominium, community apartment project or stock cooperative project has been, or will be, given one hundred eighty days’ written notice of intention to convert prior to termination of tenancy due to the conversion or proposed conversion. The provisions of this section shall not alter or abridge the rights or obligations of the parties in performance of their covenants, including, but not limited to, the provision of services, payment of rent or the obligations imposed by Sections 1941, 1941.1 and 1941.2 of the Civil Code.

4.    Each of the tenants of the proposed condominium, community apartment project, or stock cooperative project has been, or will be, given notice of the exclusive right to contract for the purchase of his or her respective unit upon the same terms and conditions that such unit will be initially offered to the general public or terms more favorable to the tenant. The right shall run for a period of not less than ninety days from the date of issuance of the subdivision public report pursuant to Section 11018.2 of the Business and Professions Code, unless the tenant gives prior written notice of his or her intention not to exercise the right.

E.    This section shall not diminish, limit or expand, other than as provided in herein, the authority of the city to approve or disapprove condominium or conversion projects. (Ord. 607 §7.1, 1982)

15.20.180 Improvement security.
If the improvement work required under Section 15.20.080(G) of this chapter cannot be completed to the satisfaction of the city before the final or parcel map is filed, the applicant may enter into an agreement with the city council. “Improvement security,” as used in this section, means one or more of the following:

A.    A cash deposit or deposits made with the city;

B.    A bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties; or

C.    An instrument or instruments of credit from one or more financial institutions subject to regulation by the state or federal government, pledging that the funds necessary to meet the performance are on deposit and guaranteed for payment and agreeing that the funds designated by the instrument shall become trust funds for the purposes set forth in the instrument. (Ord. 607 §7.2, 1982)

ARTICLE VI. VARIANCES

15.20.190 Application--Conditions.
A.    Applications for variances from the strict application of the terms of this chapter may be made and variances granted when the following circumstances are found to apply:

1.    That any variances granted shall be subject to such conditions as will assure that the adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other projects of similar type; and

2.    That because of special circumstances applicable to the subject project, the strict application of this chapter is found to deprive the subject project of privileges enjoyed by other projects under identical conditions.

B.    Applications for variances shall be made in writing by the property owner, lessee, purchaser in escrow, optionee with the consent of the owners, or by a public utility company or other agency with the powers of eminent domain, on a form prescribed by the planning commission. They shall be accompanied by a fee, set by resolution of the city council; a plan of the details of the variance requested; and evidence showing:

1.    That the granting of the variances will not be contrary to the extent of this chapter or to the public safety, health and welfare; and

2.    That due to special conditions or exceptional characteristics of the project, or its location, the strict application of this chapter would result in practical difficulties and unnecessary hardship. (Ord. 607 §§8.1, 8.2, 1982)

15.20.200 Hearing procedures.
A.    A public hearing shall be held on any application for a variance.

B.    Notice of the hearing shall be given not less than ten days prior to such hearing, by posting in three places, and by mailing, postage prepaid, a notice of hearing stating the time and place of such hearing to all persons whose names and addresses appear on the latest tax roll, or as known to the city, as owning property within three hundred feet from the exterior boundaries of the area occupied, or to be occupied, by the use which is the subject of the hearing; and the tenants of the proposed conversion project.

C.    Such notice shall set forth a general description of the property affected, and the nature of the proposed use or variance. (Ord. 607 §8.3, 1982)

15.20.210 Appeal stays issuance.
Variances shall not be issued until five days have elapsed from the granting thereof, and in case an appeal is filed from the planning commission decision thereon shall not be issued until a decision is made by the city council on such appeal. (Ord. 607 S8.4, 1982)

15.20.220 Acknowledgment and acceptance required.
Variances shall not have any force and effect until the permittee acknowledges receipt thereof and acceptance of any conditions thereto. (Ord. 607 §8.5, 1982)

15.20.230 Appeal procedure.
In case the applicant or any other person is not satisfied with the action of the planning commission on any variance application, he may within five days appeal in writing to the city council, accompanied by a fee as set by resolution of the city council.

A.    Upon receipt of the appeal and fee, the city council shall set the matter for public hearing, notice thereof to be given as provided by law. Notice shall also be given to the planning commission which shall submit a report to the city council setting forth the reasons for the action taken by the commission. The report shall be submitted in writing or by a representative at the hearing.

B.    The city council shall render its decision not more than forty-five days after the close of the hearing. (Ord. 607 §8.6, 1982)

15.20.240 Expiration.
Any variance granted in accordance with the terms of this chapter shall, without further action, become null and void if not used within one year from the date of the approval thereof or within any shorter period of time, if so designated by the planning commission. (Ord. 607 S8.7, 1982)

15.20.250 Revocation.
Any variance granted in accordance with the terms of this chapter may be revoked by the city council in the manner hereinafter set forth, if any of the conditions or terms of such variance are violated.

A.    Before the council considers revocation of a variance, the planning commission shall hold a hearing thereon giving notice thereof to the permittee at least ten days in advance of such hearing. Within five days thereafter, the commission shall transmit a report of its findings and recommendations on the he revocation to the city council.

B.    Revocation of a variance can occur when continued relief from the strict application of the terms of this chapter would be contrary to the public interest, safety, health and welfare. (Ord. 607 S8.8, 1982)

ARTICLE VII. APPEALS

15.20.260 Authority.
The planning commission shall have the power to hear and decide appeals on the city staff’s enforcement or interpretation of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 607 §10.2, 1982)

15.20.270 Further appeal.
In case the applicant/developer is not satisfied with the action of the planning commission on his appeal, he may within five days appeal in writing to the city council. The city council shall render its decision within forty-five days after the filing of such appeal. (Ord. 607 §10.3, 1982)

ARTICLE VIII. INTERPRETATION

15.20.280 Abrogation and greater restrictions.
Except as specifically provided in this chapter, this chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way affect any existing provisions of any laws or ordinances or regulations or permits previously adopted or issued, relating to condominium construction; provided, however, in any instances where this chapter imposes greater restrictions required by an existing law, ordinance, regulation or permit, the provisions of this chapter shall control. (Ord. 607 §10.1, 1982)

ARTICLE IX. AMENDMENTS

15.20.290 Generally.
Amendments to the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be initiated and adopted as other ordinances are amended or adopted. (Ord. 607 §9.1, 1982)

Chapter 15.24
SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM REVIEW PROCESS
Sections:

15.24.010    Purpose.

15.24.020    Definitions.

15.24.030    Duties of the building department.

15.24.040    Permit review and inspection requirements.

15.24.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to adopt an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes 2014) to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This chapter encourages the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the city, and expanding the ability of property owners to install solar energy systems. This chapter allows the city to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety. (Ord. 897 §1(part), 2015)

15.24.020 Definitions.
A.    The following words and phrases as used in this chapter are defined as follows:

"Electronic submittal" means the utilization of one or more of the following:

1.    E-mail;

2.    The Internet;

3.    Facsimile.

"Small residential rooftop solar energy system" means all of the following:

1.    A solar energy system that is no larger than ten kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty kilowatts thermal.

2.    A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city and paragraph (3) of subdivision (c) of Section 714 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time.

3.    A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling.

4.    A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the authority having jurisdiction.

"Solar energy system" has the same meaning set forth in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subdivision (a) of Section 801.5 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time. (Ord. 897 §1(part), 2015)

15.24.030 Duties of the building department.
A.    As per Section 65850.5 of the California Government Code, the building department shall develop an expedited permitting process which shall include the adoption of a checklist of all requirements for which a small residential solar energy system may be eligible for expedited review.

B.    All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy system application shall be made available on the city’s website.

C.    An applicant may submit the permit application and associated documentation to the city’s building department in person, by mail, or by electronic submittal along with the permit fee.

D.    In the case of electronic submittal, an applicant’s electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, application and other documents in lieu of a wet signature. For purposes of this section, the city will accept as an electronic signature an electronic copy, such as a facsimile image or an electronic image (such as a PDF), of an applicant’s original signature. (Ord. 897 §1(part), 2015)

15.24.040 Permit review and inspection requirements.
A.    Prior to submitting an application, the applicant shall:

1.    Verify to the applicant’s reasonable satisfaction through the use of standard engineering evaluation techniques that the support structure for the small residential rooftop solar energy system is stable and adequate to transfer all wind, seismic, and dead and live loads associated with the system to the building foundation; and

2.    At the applicant’s cost, verify to the applicant’s reasonable satisfaction using standard electrical inspection techniques that the existing electrical system including existing line, load, ground and bonding wiring as well as main panel and subpanel sizes are adequately sized, based on the existing electrical system’s current use, to carry all new photovoltaic electrical loads.

B.    An application that satisfies the information requirements in the checklist, as determined by the building official, shall be deemed complete. Upon receipt of an incomplete application, the building official shall issue a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance.

C.    For a small residential rooftop solar energy system eligible for expedited review, only one inspection shall be required, which shall be done in a timely manner and may include a consolidated inspection by the building official and fire chief. If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized; however, the subsequent inspection need not conform to the requirements of this subsection.

D.    Upon confirmation by the building official of the application and supporting documentation being complete and meeting the requirements of the checklist, the building official shall administratively approve the application and issue all required permits or authorizations. Such approval does not authorize an applicant to connect the small residential rooftop energy system to the local utility provider’s electricity grid. The applicant is responsible for obtaining such approval or permission from the local utility provider. (Ord. 897 §1(part), 2015)

Title 16
SUBDIVISIONS
Chapters:

16.02    General Provisions

16.04    Definitions and Responsibilities

16.06    Maps Required

16.08    Tentative Subdivision Maps

16.10    Final Subdivision Maps--Five or More Parcels

16.12    Subdivision of Four or Less Parcels--Parcel Maps

16.14    Vesting Tentative Maps

16.16    Dedications, Reservations, and Development Fees

16.17    Design and Improvement Standards

16.18    Improvements

16.20    Reversions to Acreage

16.22    Parcel Mergers

16.23    Lot Line Adjustment

16.24    Correction and Amendment of Maps

16.25    Certificate of Compliance

16.26    Enforcement

Chapter 16.02
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

16.02.010    Citation and authority.

16.02.020    Purpose.

16.02.030    Consistency.

16.02.040    Application.

16.02.050    Exceptions.

16.02.060    Modification of requirements.

16.02.070    Fees and deposits.

16.02.010 Citation and authority.
This title is adopted pursuant to Article XI, Section 6 of the California Constitution and to supplement and implement the California Subdivision Map Act, Section 66410 et seq., of the Government Code, and may be cited as the subdivision ordinance of the city of Lakeport. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.02.020 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this title to regulate and control the division of land within the city and to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act concerning the design, improvement, and survey data of subdivisions, the form and content of all required maps provided by the Subdivision Map Act, and the procedure to be followed in securing the official approval of the city regarding the maps. To accomplish this purpose, the regulations contained in this title are determined to be necessary to preserve the public health, safety, and general welfare; to promote orderly growth and development and to promote open space, conservation, protection, and proper use of land; and to ensure provision for adequate traffic circulation, utilities, and other services in the city. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.02.030 Consistency.
No land shall be subdivided and developed for any purpose which is inconsistent with the Lakeport general plan or any applicable specific plan of the city or which is not permitted by Title 17 or other applicable provisions of this code.

The type and intensity of land use as shown on the general plan and any applicable specific plan shall determine, together with the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this title, the type of streets, roads, highways, utilities, and other public services that shall be provided by the subdivider. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.02.040 Application.
The regulations set forth in this title shall apply to all or parts of subdivisions within the city, to the preparation of subdivision maps, and to other maps provided for by the Subdivision Map Act and this title. All subdivisions and any part thereof lying within the city shall be made, and all subdivision maps shall be prepared and presented for approval, as provided for in this title. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.02.050 Exceptions.
This title shall not apply to:

A.    The financing or leasing of apartments, offices, stores, or similar space within apartment buildings, industrial buildings, commercial buildings, mobile home parks, trailer parks, and RV parks;

B.    Mineral, oil, or gas leases;

C.    Land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the State Health and Safety Code;

D.    Any separate assessment under Section 2188.7 of the State Revenue and Taxation Code;

E.    Subject to the requirements of Sections 66412(g) and 66412(h) of the Subdivision Map Act, the conversion of a community apartment project, or a stock cooperative to a condominium;

F.    The leasing of, or the granting of an easement to, a parcel of land, or any portion or portions thereof, in conjunction with the financing, erection, and sale or lease of a wind powered electrical generation device on the land, if the project is subject to discretionary action by the city;

G.    The financing or leasing of any parcel of land, or any portion thereof, in conjunction with the construction of commercial or industrial buildings on a single parcel, unless the project is not subject to review under other city ordinances regulating design and improvements;

H.    The financing or leasing of existing separate commercial or industrial buildings on a single parcel;

I.    The construction, financing, or leasing of dwelling units pursuant to Section 65852.1 or second units pursuant to Section 65852.2 of the Government Code; but this chapter shall apply to the sale or transfer, but not the leasing of those units;

J.    Leasing for agricultural purposes, cultivation of food or fiber, and grazing or pasturing of livestock;

K.    Subdivision of four parcels or less for construction of removable commercial buildings having a floor area of less than one hundred square feet;

L.    Any other mandatory exceptions to the applicability of the Subdivision Map Act as provided in the Subdivision Map Act (Sections 66412.1, 66412.2, 66412.5). (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.02.060 Modification of requirements.
Whenever, in the opinion of the planning commission or the city council, the land involved in any subdivision is of a size or shape, or is subject to title limitations of record, or is affected by topographical location or environmental conditions, or is to be devoted to a use that is impossible or impractical in the particular case for the subdivider to conform fully to the regulations contained in this chapter, the planning commission or the city council may make modifications as, in its opinion, are reasonably necessary or expedient and in conformity with the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.02.070 Fees and deposits.
All persons submitting applications for the approval of maps or for other approvals as required by this title shall pay fees and/or deposits as provided by this title and by the city council’s resolution(s) establishing applicable fees and deposits. Such resolution(s) are incorporated by reference as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

Chapter 16.04
DEFINITIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Sections:

16.04.010    Definitions.

16.04.020    Responsibilities.

16.04.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this title, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this title are defined in this section as set forth below. All definitions provided in the general provisions chapter of this Code, and all definitions provided in the Subdivision Map Act, shall also be applicable to this title, and such definitions are incorporated by reference as though fully set forth herein.

“Acreage” means any parcel of land which is not a lot, as defined in this section, and those areas where a legal subdivision has not been made previously, or where a legal subdivision has declared such parcel as acreage.

“Block” means the area of land within a subdivision, which area is entirely bounded by streets, highways or ways, except alleys, or the exterior boundary or boundaries of the subdivision.

“Business and Professions Code” means the Business and Professions Code of the state of California.

“City street” means any duly dedicated street, avenue, or the like which the city has accepted and regularly maintains, or which the county duly accepted and regularly maintained prior to the incorporation of the city, or upon which public funds have been expended for improvements or right-of-way used by the public generally.

“Collector street” means a street, intermediate in importance between a local street and either a major or secondary thoroughfare, which has the purpose of collecting local traffic and carrying it to a thoroughfare.

“Community apartment project” is defined as provided in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code.

“Condominium” means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial, or commercial building on the real property, such as an apartment, office, or store. A condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of the real property.

“Conversion” means the creation of separate ownership of existing real property together with a separate interest in space of residential, industrial, or commercial buildings.

“Day” means a calendar day unless otherwise specified.

“Department” means the community development department.

“Design” means:

1.    Street alignments, grades, and widths;

2.    Drainage, water, sewer, and sanitary facilities and utilities, including alignments and grades;

3.    Location and size of all required easements and rights-of-way;

4.    Fire roads and fire breaks;

5.    Lot size and configuration;

6.    Vehicular and bicycle traffic access;

7.    Grading;

8.    Land to be dedicated for park or recreational purposes; and

9.    Such other specific physical requirements in the plan and configuration of the entire subdivision as may be necessary to ensure consistency with, or implementation of, the general plan or any applicable specific plan.

“Development” means the uses to which the land which is the subject of a map shall be put, the buildings to be constructed on it, and all alternations of the land and construction incident thereto.

“Easement” means an easement dedicated to the city, which shall be continuing and irrevocable unless formally abandoned by the city, and any other easement whether owned by a public entity, public utility, or a private party.

“Environmental impact report (EIR)” means a detailed statement prepared pursuant to the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), State Public Resources Code Sections 21000 et seq., and state and city CEQA guidelines promulgated pursuant thereto, describing and analyzing the significant environmental effects of a project and discussing ways to mitigate or avoid the effects.

“Final map” means a map showing a subdivision of five or more parcels for which a tentative and final map are required by the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter and designed to be filed for recordation in the office of the county recorder.

“General plan” means the general plan of the city of Lakeport, adopted July 20, 1992 ((Resolution 1738 (92)), and all amendments thereto.

“Government code” means the government code of the state of California.

“Improvement” means streets, sidewalks, storm drainage facilities, water and sewer facilities, utilities, landscaping to be installed, or agreed to be installed, by the subdivider on the land to be used for public or private streets, highways, ways, and easements, as are necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and acceptance of the final map thereof. “Improvement” shall also mean other specific improvements, the installation of which, either by or by a combination of, the subdivider, public agencies, private utilities, or any other entity approved by the city, is necessary to ensure consistency with, or implementation of, the general plan, or any applicable specific plan. Improvements shall be constructed in accordance with standard engineering specifications, where applicable.

“Lot” or “parcel” means a unit or portion of land separate from other units or portions by description, as on a final map or parcel map, or by such other map approved by the county or by the city under provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and of city ordinances in effect at the time of such approval, for the purpose of sale, lease, or financing.

“Lot line adjustment” means a minor shift or rotation of an existing lot line or other adjustment where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not created.

“Merger” means the joining of two or more contiguous parcels of land under one ownership into one parcel.

“Parcel map” means a map showing subdivision of four or less parcels as required by the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter, prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter, and designed to be filed for recordation in the office of the county recorder.

“Peripheral street” means a street whose right-of-way is contiguous to the exterior boundary of a subdivision.

“Private street” means any street, access way, or the like, lying in whole or in part within a subdivision for which dedication and ownership is privately held and is utilized as access to a development. Private streets shall be constructed in accordance with standard engineering specifications.

“Remainder” means that portion of an existing parcel which is not designated on the required map as part of the subdivision. The remainder shall not be considered as part of the subdivision but shall be shown in the required map as part of the area surrounding the subdivision. A remainder of five acres or more need not be shown on the map and its location need not be indicated as a matter of survey, but only by deed reference to the existing boundaries of the remainder.

“Standard engineering specifications” means those standard subdivision improvement plans and specifications as prepared and/or approved by the public works director.

“Stock cooperative” is defined as provided in Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code.

“Subdivider” means a person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association who proposes to divide, divides, or causes to be divided real property into a subdivision for oneself or for others. Employees and consultants of such persons or entities, acting in such capacity, are not “subdividers.”

“Subdivision” means the division, by any subdivides or any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, or any portion thereof, shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease, or financing, whether immediate or future. Property shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads, streets utility easements or railroad rights-of-way. “Subdivision” includes a condominium project, as defined in Section 1350 of the state Civil Code, a community apartment project, as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code, and the Conversion of five or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative, as defined in Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code. “Subdivision” includes any division of land by gift or inheritance, but excludes a division for probate homestead. Any conveyance of land to a governmental agency, public entity, public utility, or subsidiary of a public utility for rights-of-way shall not be considered a division of land for purposes of computing the number of parcels.

“Subdivision Map Act” means Government Code Sections 66410 et seq., inclusive.

“Tentative map” means a map made for the purpose of showing the design and improvements of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions around it. “Tentative map” shall include a tentative map prepared in connection with a parcel map pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 16.12, Subdivisions of Four or Less Parcels, of this title.

“Vesting tentative map” is defined as provided in Section 16.14.030. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.04.020 Responsibilities.
A.    City Attorney. The city attorney’s responsibilities shall include approving as to form all subdivision improvement agreements and security and all governing documents for a common interest development.

B.    City Council. The city council shall have final jurisdiction in the approval, conditional approval, or denial of final maps. The city council shall also have final jurisdiction in the approval, conditional approval, or denial of reversions to acreage.

The city council shall act as the appeal board for hearing appeals of the planning commission approval, conditional approval, or denial of tentative maps and vesting tentative maps. Acceptance of dedications of land easements or improvements in conjunction with the recordation of subdivision maps.

C.    Planning Commission. The planning commission’s responsibilities shall include:

1.    Approval, conditional approval, or denial of the application for tentative map approval of subdivisions of five or more parcels;

2.    The approval, conditional approval, or denial of tentative maps for subdivisions of four or less parcels;

3.    The approval of lot line adjustments and voluntary mergers;

4.    Determinations of violations of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act of this title.

D.    City Engineering Department. The city engineering department responsibilities shall include:

1.    Establishing design and construction details, standards, and specifications;

2.    Determining if proposed subdivision improvements comply with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title;

3.    The processing and certification of final maps, parcel maps, reversion to acreage maps, and amended maps, and the processing and approval of subdivision improvement plans;

4.    Examining and certifying that final maps and parcel maps are in substantial compliance with the approved tentative map;

5.    The approval as to form of subdivision improvement agreements;

6.    The inspection, approval, and acceptance of subdivision improvements.

E.    Community Development Department. The community development department’s responsibilities shall include:

1.    The intake and processing of land use applications for tentative maps;

2.    Determining compliance with the provisions of this title and California Subdivision Map Act;

3.    Assisting the city engineer in the processing of and certification of final maps and in determining that final maps are in substantial compliance with the approved tentative maps;

4.    Environmental review and the development of mitigation measures and conditions of approval for subdivisions. (Ord. 830 §1(part), 2004; Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

Chapter 16.06
MAPS REQUIRED
Sections:

16.06.010    General.

16.06.020    Division of land--Five or more parcels.

16.06.030    Division of land--Four or less parcels.

16.06.010 General.
For the purpose of this title, the specific requirements for tentative, final, and parcel maps shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.06.020 Division of land--Five or more parcels.
A tentative and final subdivision map shall be required for all divisions of land into five or more parcels, five or more condominiums, a community apartment project containing five or more parcels, or for the conversion of a dwelling to a stock cooperative containing five or more dwelling units, except where:

A.    The land before division contains less than five acres, each parcel created by the division abuts upon an improved and maintained public street or highway, and no dedications or improvements are required by the legislative body; or

B.    Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of twenty acres or more and has an approved access to a maintained public street or highway.; or

C.    The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having approved access to a public street or highway which comprises part of a tract of land zoned for industrial or commercial development, and which has the approval of the governing body as to street alignments and widths; or

D.    Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of not less than forty acres or is not less than a quarter of a quarter section.

E.    A parcel map shall be required for those subdivisions described in subsections (A)--(D), unless waived by the planning commission in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.12.080 of this title. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.06.030 Division of land--Four or less parcels.
A tentative and final parcel map shall be required for all divisions of land into four or less parcels, except that maps shall not be required for:

A.    Subdivisions of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation, defined by Section 230 of the state Public Utilities Code, which are created by short-term leases terminable by either party on not more than thirty days notice in writing;

B.    Land conveyed to or from a governmental agency, public entity, or public utility for conveyance to such public utility for rights-of-way, unless showing is made by the department in individual cases, upon substantial evidence, that public policy necessitates a parcel map;

C.    A lot line adjustment;

D.    Parcel maps waived by the planning commission in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.12.080. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

Chapter 16.08
TENTATIVE SUBDIVISION MAPS
Sections:

16.08.010    General.

16.08.020    Form and contents.

16.08.030    Accompanying data and reports.

16.08.040    Geotechnical reports.

16.08.050    Street names.

16.08.060    Department review.

16.08.070    Planning commission action.

16.08.080    City council review.

16.08.090    Extension of time for planning commission or city council action

16.08.100    Appeals of planning commission action.

16.08.110    Expiration.

16.08.120    Extensions.

16.08.130    Amendments to approved or conditionally approved tentative map.

16.08.010 General.
The form and contents, submittal, and approval of tentative maps for subdivisions shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter.

An application for approval of a tentative map pursuant to this chapter shall not be submitted nor accepted for filing unless the subdivider has previously obtained all other necessary discretionary city approvals for the development that are required pursuant to the city zoning ordinance. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.08.020 Form and contents.
The tentative map pursuant to this chapter shall be prepared in a manner acceptable to the department and shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The tentative map shall be clearly and legibly drawn and shall contain not less than the following:

A.    A title which shall contain the subdivision number, subdivision name, and type of subdivision;

B.    Name and address of legal owner, subdivider, and person preparing the map, including registration or license number;

C.    Sufficient legal description to define the boundary of the proposed subdivision;

D.    The names and numbers of adjacent subdivisions and the names of the owners of adjacent unplatted land;

E.    Date, north arrow, scale, contour interval, and source and date of existing contours;

F.    A statement of present zoning and of existing and proposed uses of the property as well as any proposed zoning changes, whether immediate or future;

G.    A vicinity map showing roads, adjoining subdivisions, towns, creeks, railroads, and other data sufficient to locate the proposed subdivision and show its relation to the community;

H.    Existing topography of the proposed site and at least one hundred feet beyond its boundary, including but not limited to:

1.    Existing contours at two foot intervals if the existing ground slope is less than ten percent and not less than five foot intervals for existing ground slopes equal or greater than ten percent. Contour intervals shall not be spread more than one hundred fifty feet apart. Existing contours shall be represented by dashed lines,

2.    Type, circumference, and dripline of existing trees with a trunk diameter of four inches or more. Any trees proposed to be removed shall be so indicated,

3.    The location and outline of existing structures identified by type. Structures to be removed shall be so indicated,

4.    The approximate location of all areas of potential storm water overflow; the location, width, and direction of flow of each water course; and the flood zone designation as indicated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (“FIRM”),

5.    The location, pavement, and right-of-way width; grade; and name of existing streets or highways,

6.    The widths, location, and identity of all existing easements,

7.    The location and size of existing sanitary sewers, fire hydrants, water mains, and storm drains. The approximate slope of existing sewers and storm drains shall be indicated. The locations of existing sewers and storm drains shall be indicated. The location of all existing overhead and underground utility lines on peripheral streets shall be indicated;

I.    Proposed improvements to be shown shall include but not be limited to:

1.    The location, grade, centerline radius, and arc length of curves, pavement, right-of-way width, and name of all streets. Typical sections of all streets shall be shown. Proposed private streets shall be clearly indicated,

2.    The location and radius of all curb returns and cul-de-sacs,

3.    The location, width, and purpose of all easements,

4.    The angle of intersecting streets if such angle deviates from a right angle by more than four degrees,

5.    The approximate lot layout and the approximate dimensions of each lot and each building site. Engineering data shall show the approximate finished grading of each lot, the preliminary design of all grading, the elevation of proposed building pads, the top and toe of cut and fill slopes to scale, the number of each lot, and the elevation of adjacent parcels,

6.    Proposed contours at two-foot intervals shall be shown if the existing ground slope is less than ten percent and not less than five-foot intervals for existing ground slopes of ten percent or more. A separate grading plan may be submitted,

7.    Proposed recreation sites, trails, and parks for private or public use,

8.    Proposed common areas to be dedicated to public open space,

9.    The location and size of sanitary sewers, fire hydrants, water mains, and storm drains. Proposed slopes and approximate elevations of sanitary sewers and storm drains shall be indicated. The proposed routing of storm water runoff generated by a one hundred year flood shall also be indicated in accordance with the city storm drain master plan,

10.    A statement as to the intention of the subdivider in regard to slope planting and erosion control;

J.    The name or names of any geologist or soils engineer whose services were required in the preparation of the design of the tentative map;

K.    The size of each sheet shall be eighteen inches by twenty-six inches. A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch. The scale of the map shall be not less than one inch to one hundred feet or as may be necessary to show all details clearly, and enough sheets shall be used to accomplish this end. The particular number of the sheet and the total number of sheets, and its relation to each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown. When four or more sheets including the certificate sheet are used, a key sheet shall be included. All printing or lettering on the map shall be one-eighth inch minimum height and of such shape and weight as to be readily legible on prints and other reproductions made from the original drawings;

L.    If the subdivider plans to develop the site in units or phrases, the proposed units or phrases and their proposed sequence of construction shall be shown;

M.    The subdivider shall specify any deviation from the city standards and provide the justification for such deviation;

N.    Upon written request of the subdivides the department may waive any of the above tentative map requirements if the department determines that the type of subdivision does not justify compliance with these requirements, or if the department determines that other circumstances justify a waiver. The department may require other drawings, data, or information as deemed necessary by the department to accomplish the purposes of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.08.030 Accompanying data and reports.
The tentative map shall be accompanied by the following data reports:

A.    Street Names. A list of proposed street names for any unnamed street or alley for review by the department. This subsection shall apply to condominium conversions;

B.    Soils Report. A preliminary soils report prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Building Code (adopted herein by reference) and Section 16.08.040 shall be submitted. If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soil problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, the soils report accompanying the final map shall contain an investigation of each lot within the subdivision;

C.    Title Report. A preliminary title report, acceptable to the department, showing the legal owners at the time of filing the tentative map;

D.    School Site/Facilities. The subdivider shall obtain from the Lakeport Unified School District their intention, in writing, concerning the necessity for a school site and/or temporary and/or permanent school facilities, if any, within the subdivision and shall present this information to the department prior to the consideration of the tentative map by the planning commission;

E.    Environmental Review. Information shall be submitted as required by the department to allow a determination on environmental review to be made in accordance with CEQA. The subdivider shall deposit and pay all fees as may be required for the preparation and processing of environmental review documents;

F.    Preliminary Engineering Calculations. Information shall be submitted as required by the standard engineering specifications to demonstrate the adequacy of the design of the proposed improvements. Such information shall include design parameters and engineering calculations;

G.    Phasing. A written notice indicating if the subdivider plans to file multiple final maps on the tentative map;

H.    Other Reports. Any other data or reports deemed necessary by the department. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.08.040 Geotechnical reports.
A.    Three copies of preliminary engineering soils report and engineering geology report, prepared by a civil engineer and engineering geologist registered in the state and based upon adequate borings, shall be submitted to the community development director for subdivisions of five or more parcels. The community development director may require that such reports be submitted for subdivisions of four or less parcels when there are facts associated with the land to be divided that there are slope, soil stability, historic cut or fill activity, erosion, or other similar factors evident which require a geotechnical analysis.

B.    A preliminary soils and/or geology report may be waived by the community development director provided the community development director finds that, due to the knowledge the city has as to the soil and geologic conditions in the subdivision, no preliminary analysis is necessary. Such knowledge would include the nature, distribution, and strength of the existing soils, the necessary grading procedures and design criteria for corrective measures, and the geology of the site and the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development.

C.    If the city has knowledge of, or the preliminary soils and geology reports indicate, the presence of soil or geologic conditions which, if corrective measures are not taken, could lead to structural defects, a soils and/or geologic investigation shall be done by a civil engineer and/or geologist registered in the state who shall recommend regarding the adequacy of the sites to be developed by the proposed grading and the effect of the soil or geologic conditions on the proposed development. The city may approve the subdivision, or portion thereof, where soils or geologic problems exist if the city determines that the recommended actions provide for procedures and design criteria for corrective measures as necessary covering the structures and adequacy of the sites to be developed by the proposed grading. A condition of the issuance of any building permit may require that the approved recommended action be incorporated in the grading plans and/or specifications and, if necessary, the plans and specifications for the construction of each structure.

D.    Where preliminary soils and/or geology reports are prepared, final reports shall be submitted prior to the acceptance of the improvements or the release of occupancy permits indicating the specific actions taken pursuant to the preliminary report recommendations. Such reports shall have sufficient field data submitted to indicate full compliance with the preliminary or subsequent progress report recommendations as they were applied to specific areas or improvements. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.08.050 Street names.
Each street which is to be dedicated which is a continuation of, or approximately the continuation of, any existing dedicated street shall be shown on the tentative map and shall be given the same name as such existing street. The proposed name of each other street shown on the tentative map shall be submitted to the city for the approval in accordance with current city street-naming policies. The approved street name shall be shown on the tentative map. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.08.060 Department review.
The tentative map application shall be filed with the department. The application shall be determined by the department to be complete only when the form and contents of the tentative map conform to the requirements of Section 16.08.020 and when all accompanying data and reports, as required by Section 16.08.030, and all fees and/or deposits as required by Section 16.02.070, have been submitted and accepted by the department. The subdivider shall file with the department the number of tentative maps the community development director may deem necessary. The department shall forward copies of the tentative map to the affected public agencies and utilities which may, in turn, forward to the Department their findings and recommendations. Public agencies and utilities shall certify that the subdivision can be adequately served. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.08.070 Planning commission action.
A.    Notice of Public Hearing. Upon receipt of a complete tentative map application, the department shall prepare a report with recommendations. The department shall set the matter for public hearing before the planning commission. A copy of the department report shall be forwarded to the subdivider at least three days prior to the public hearing, a notice shall be given of the time, date, and street address, if any, of the property involved. The notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, published and circulated in the city.

In addition to notice by publication, the department shall give notice of the hearing by mail or delivery to the subdivider, the owner of the subject real property, if different from the subdivider, and to all persons, including business, corporations, or other public or private entities, shown on the last equalized assessment roll as owning the subject of the proposed application. The department shall also give notice of the hearing by mail or delivery to each agency expected to provide water, sewage, streets, roads, schools, or other essential facilities or services to the subdivision, whose ability to provide those facilities and services may be significantly affected. A proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium, community apartment, or stock cooperative project shall be noticed in accordance with Section 66451.3 of the Subdivision Map Act.

In the event that the proposed application has been submitted by a person other than the property owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll, the city shall also give notice by mail or delivery to the owner of the property as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. In addition, notice shall be given by mail or personal delivery request to any person who has filed a written request with the city. The request may be submitted at any time during the calendar year and shall apply for the balance of the calendar year.

The department may give such other notice that it deems necessary or advisable.

Substantial compliance with these provisions for notice shall be sufficient, and a technical failure to comply shall not affect the validity of any action taken according to the procedures in this chapter.

B.    Action. The planning commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the tentative map, and the department shall report the decision of the planning commission to the city council and the subdivider within fifty days after the tentative map application has been determined by the department to be complete. If an environmental impact report is prepared, the decision shall be made forty-five days after certification of the environmental impact report.

C.    Approval. The tentative map may be approved or conditionally approved by the planning commission if it finds that the proposed subdivision, together with the provisions for its design and improvement, is consistent with the general plan, any applicable specific plan, and all applicable provisions of this code. The planning commission may require as a condition of its approval that the payment by the subdivider of all development fees required to be paid at the time of application for, or issuance of, a building permit or other similar permit shall be made at the rate for such fees in effect at the time of such application or issuance.

The planning commission may modify or delete any of the conditions of approval recommended in the department’s report. The planning commission may add additional requirements as conditions of its approval in order to protect the public’s health, safety, and welfare.

If no action is taken by the planning commission within the time limits specified in this section, the tentative map, as filed, shall be deemed to be approved if it complies with all other applicable provisions of the subdivision map act, this title, this code, and the general plan.

D.    Denial. The tentative map may be denied by the planning commission on any of the grounds provided by the Subdivision Map Act or this code. The planning commission shall deny approval of the tentative map if it makes any of the following findings:

1.    That the proposed map is inconsistent with the general plan or any applicable specific plan, or other applicable provisions of this code;

2.    That the site is not physically suitable for the type of proposed development;

3.    That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development;

4.    That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantial and avoidable injury to fish or wildlife or their habitat. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the planning commission may approve such a tentative map if an environmental impact report was prepared with respect to the project and a finding was made pursuant to Section 21081(c) of CEQA that specific economic, social, or other considerations make infeasible the mitigation measures or project alternative identified in the environmental impact report;

5.    That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements are likely to cause serious public health problems;

6.    That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. The planning commission may approve a map if it finds that alternate easements, for access or for use, will be provided, and that these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This subsection shall apply only to easements of record or to easements established by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, and no authority is granted to the planning commission to determine that the public at large has acquired easements for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision; or

7.    Subject to Section 66474.4 of the Subdivision Map Act, that the land is subject to a contract entered into pursuant to the California Land Conservation Act of 1965 (commencing with Section 51200 of the Government Code) and that resulting parcels following a subdivision of the land would be too small to sustain their agricultural use. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.08.080 City council review.
If a tentative map is approved or conditionally approved, the department shall forthwith make a written report thereof to the city council. Any member of the city council shall have the right to call up the tentative map for the city council review at a city council meeting or by a request to the community development director, either of which must be within ten days of the final action by the planning commission. If the council, by a majority vote, decides to review the map, it shall conduct a public hearing after giving notice pursuant to Section 16.08.070(A). Such decision to review shall be made within ten days after such request is made. In addition, notice shall be given to the planning commission. The public hearing shall be held within thirty days after the council decides to review the map. The council may add, modify, or delete conditions if the council determines that such changes are necessary to ensure that the tentative map conforms to the Subdivision Map Act and this Code. The city council may deny the tentative map on any grounds contained in Section 16.08.070(D). Within ten days following the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall render its decision. If the city council does not act within the time limits set forth in this section, the tentative map shall be deemed to have been approved or conditionally approved as last approved or conditionally approved by the planning commission insofar as it complies with all other applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, the ordinance codified in this title, and the general plan. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.08.090 Extension of time for planning commission or city council action.
Any applicable time limits for acting on the tentative map application may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the planning commission or the city council. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.08.100 Appeals of planning commission action.
The subdivider or any interested person adversely affected by any planning commission action with respect to the tentative map may, within ten days after the written decision, file an appeal in writing with the city clerk or the community development director. The city council shall consider the appeal within thirty days after the date of filing of the appeal, unless the appellant consents to a continuance. Within ten days following the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall render its decision. The appeal shall be a public hearing after notice has been given according to Section 16.08.070(A). In addition, notice shall be given to the planning commission. The council may sustain, modify, reject, or overrule any recommendations or rulings of the planning commission and may make any findings which are consistent with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, this chapter, the ordinance codified in this title, and the general plan.

If the city council fails to act upon an appeal within the time limits set forth in this section, the tentative map shall be deemed to be approved or conditionally approved as last approved by the planning commission insofar as it complies with all other applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, this chapter, this code, and the general plan. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.08.110 Expiration.
A.    The approval or conditional approval of a tentative map shall expire twenty-four months from its approval by either the planning commission or city council, whichever occurs last. However, if in connection with a tentative map for which the filing of multiple final maps is authorized pursuant to Section 16.10.020, the subdivider is made subject to a requirement of one hundred thousand dollars or more to construct or improve or finance the construction or improvement of public improvements outside the boundaries of the tentative map, or if the tentative map is on property subject to a development agreement authorized by Section 65864 et seq. of the Government Code, then the expiration date shall be extended in accordance with Section 66452.6 (a) of the Subdivision Map Act. An extension to the expiration date may also be approved as provided in Section 16.08.120.

B.    The period of time specified in subsection A of this section shall not include any period of time during which a lawsuit has been filed and is pending in a court of competent jurisdiction involving the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map only if a stay of the time period is approved by the planning commission. After service of the initial petition or complaint upon the city, the subdivider shall, in writing to the community development director, request a stay in the time period of the tentative map. Within forty days after receiving the request, the planning commission shall either stay the time period request for up to five years or deny the requested stay. The request for the stay shall be a hearing with notice to the subdivider and to the appellant, and upon conclusion of the hearing, the planning commission shall, within ten days, render its decision. The subdivider or any interested person may appeal action of the planning commission on the stay to the city council within ten days of such action in accordance with Section 16.08.100.

C.    The period of time specified in subsection A shall not include any period of time during which a development moratorium is in effect according to Section 66452.6 of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.08.120 Extensions.
A.    Request by Subdivider. The subdivider may request an extension of the expiration date of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map by written application to the department. The application shall be filed not less than thirty days before the map is to expire and shall state the reasons for requesting the extension.

B.    Planning Commission Action. The department shall review the request and submit the application for the extension, together with a report, to the planning commission for approval, conditional approval, or denial at the next regularly scheduled planning commission meeting. A copy of the department’s report shall be forwarded to the subdivider prior to the planning commission meeting on the extension. In approving, conditionally approving, or denying the request for extension, the planning commission shall make findings supporting its decision, including findings with respect to the potential impact of any increases on applicable development fees which have occurred since the date of the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map.

C.    Time Limit of Extensions. The time at which the tentative map expires may be extended by the planning commission for a period not exceeding a total of three years.

D.    Appeal of Extension. The subdivider or any interested person adversely affected may appeal any action of the planning commission of the extension to the city council in accordance with Section 16.08.100, except that any such appeal shall be filed within fifteen days after the action by the planning commission. If the council does not act within the time limits set forth in Section 16.08.100, the extension shall be deemed to have been approved or conditionally approved as approved by the planning commission, insofar as the tentative map complies with all other applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, this chapter, this code and the general plan. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.08.130 Amendments to approved or conditionally approved tentative map.
Minor amendments to the approved or conditionally approved tentative map or conditions of approval may be approved by the department upon application by the subdivider or on the department’s own initiative, provided:

A.    No lots, units, or building sites or structures are added;

B.    Changes are consistent with the intent and spirit of the original tentative map approval;

C.    There are no resulting violations of this code or the Subdivision Map Act.

Amendments approved by staff shall be referred to the city planning commission.

The amendment(s) shall be indicated on the approved or conditionally approved tentative map and certified by the community development director. Amendments to the tentative map conditions of approval which, in the opinion of the department, are not minor, shall be presented to the planning commission for its approval. Processing shall be in accordance with the provisions for processing a tentative map as set forth in this chapter. Any approved amendment shall not alter the expiration date of the tentative map. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

Chapter 16.10
FINAL SUBDIVISION MAPS--FIVE OR MORE PARCELS
Sections:

16.10.010    General.

16.10.020    Phasing.

16.10.030    Survey required.

16.10.040    Form.

16.10.050    Contents.

16.10.060    Preliminary submittal for city approval.

16.10.070    Review by city engineer.

16.10.080    Approval by city engineer.

16.10.090    Approval by city council.

16.10.100    Denial by city council.

16.10.110    Filing with the county recorder.

16.10.010 General.
The form, contents, accompanying data, and filing of the final map shall conform to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter.

The final map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.10.020 Phasing.
Multiple final maps relating to an approved or conditionally approved tentative map may be filed prior to the expiration of the tentative map if the subdivider, at the time the tentative map application is filed, notifies the community development director in writing of the subdivider’s intention to file multiple final maps on the tentative map in accordance with Section 16.08.030(G). In providing the notice, the subdivider shall not be required to define the number or configuration of the proposed multiple maps. The planning commission shall approve the sequence of map approvals. After filing of the tentative map application, the community development director, the city engineer and the subdivider shall concur in the filing of multiple final maps.

The filing of a final map on a portion of an approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall not invalidate any part of the tentative map. Each final map which constitutes a part, or unit, of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall have a separate subdivision number. The subdivision improvement agreement executed by the subdivider shall provide for the construction improvements as required to constitute a logical and orderly development of the whole subdivision. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.10.030 Survey required.
An accurate and complete survey of the land to be subdivided shall be made by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. All monuments, property lines, center lines of streets, alleys, and easements adjoining or within the subdivision shall be tied into the survey. The allowable error of closure on any portion of the final map shall not exceed one-ten-thousandth for filed closures and one-twenty-thousandth for calculated closures. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.10.040 Form.
The form of the final map shall conform to the Subdivision Map Act and as follows:

A.    The final map shall be legibly drawn, printed, or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on polyester base film. Certificates, affidavits, and acknowledgements may be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink. If ink is used on polyester base film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility.

B.    The size of each sheet shall be eighteen inches by twenty-six inches. A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch. The scale of the map shall be not less than one inch to one hundred feet or as may be necessary to show all details clearly, and enough sheets shall be used to accomplish this end. The particular number of the sheet and the total number of the sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the map shall be stated on each of the sheets, and its relation to each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown. When four or more sheets including the certificate sheet are used, a key sheet shall be included. All printing or lettering on the map shall by of one-eighth inch minimum height and of such shape and weight as to be readily legible in prints and other reproductions made from the original drawings. The final form of the final map shall be as approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.10.050 Contents.
The contents of the final map shall conform to the Subdivision Map Act and as follows:

A.    Boundary. The boundary of the subdivision shall be designated by heavy black line in such a manner as not to obliterate figures or other data.

B.    Title. Each sheet shall have a title showing the subdivision number and name and the location of the property being subdivided with reference to maps which have been previously recorded, or by reference to the plat of a United States Survey. The following words shall appear in the title: “City of Lakeport, Lake County.”

C.    Certificates and Acknowledgements. All certificates and acknowledgements shall be made as required by Article 2, Chapter 2 (Sections 66433 et seq.) of the Subdivision Map Act and shall appear only once on the cover sheet.

D.    Scale, North Point and Basis of Bearings. There must appear on each map sheet the scale, the north point, and the basis of bearings based on Zone II of the California Coordinates, and the equation of the bearing to true north. The basis of bearings shall be approved by the city engineer.

E.    Linear, Angular, and Radial Data. Sufficient linear, angular, and radial data shall be shown to determine the bearings and lengths of monument lines, street centerlines, the boundary lines of the subdivision, the boundary lines in every lot and parcel which is a part of the subdivision, and ties to existing monuments used to establish the boundary. Arc length radius and total central angle and radial bearings of all curbs shall be shown. Ditto marks shall not be used in the dimensions and data shown on the map.

F.    Monuments. The location and description of all existing and proposed monuments shall be shown. Standard city monuments shall be shown. Standard city monuments shall be set at, or on city engineer approved offsets, the following locations:

1.    The intersection of street centerlines;

2.    Beginning and end of curves of intersection of tangents in centerlines;

3.    At other locations as may be required by the city engineer.

G.    Lot Numbers. Lot numbers shall begin with the number one in each subdivision and shall continue consecutively with no omissions or duplicates except where contiguous lands, under the same ownership, are being subdivided in successive units, in which event lot numbers may begin with the next consecutive number following the last number in the preceding unit. Each lot shall be shown entirely on one sheet of the final map, unless approved by the city engineer.

H.    Adjoining Properties. The adjoining corners of all adjoining subdivisions shall be identified by subdivision number, or name when not identified by official number, and reference to the book and page of the filed map showing such subdivision; and if no subdivision is adjacent, then by the name of the owner and reference to the recorded deed by book and page number for the last record owner.

I.    City Boundaries. City boundaries which cross or join the subdivision shall be clearly designated.

J.    Street Names. The names of all streets, alleys, or highways within or adjoining the subdivision shall be shown.

K.    Easements and Dedications. Easements and dedications for roads or streets, paths, alleys, utilities, local transit facilities, storm water drainage, sanitary sewers, or other public use as may be required, shall be dedicated to the public for acceptance by the city or other public agency, and the use shall be specified on the map.

All easements of record shall be shown on the map, together with the name of the grantee and sufficient recording data to identify the conveyance, e.g., recorder’s serial number and date, or book and a page of official records.

Easements not disclosed by the records in the office of the county recorder and found by the surveyor or engineer to be existing, shall be specifically designated on the map, identifying the apparent dominant tenements for which the easement was created.

The sidelines of all easements of record shall be shown by dashed lines on the final map with widths, lengths, and bearings of record. The width and location of all easements shall be approved by the city engineer.

L.    Greenbelt Areas. Greenbelt areas may be shown, subject to the approval of the city. Public greenbelt areas shall be dedicated in the fee unless otherwise specified in the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map. Private greenbelt areas shall be dedicated as open space easements unless otherwise specified in the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.10.060 Preliminary submittal for city approval.
The subdivider shall submit prints of the final map to the city engineer for checking. The preliminary prints shall be accompanied by the following data, plans, reports, and documents in a form as approved by the city engineer and, where applicable, the city attorney:

A.    Improvement Plans. Improvement plans as required by Section 16.18.060;

B.    Soils Report. A soils report prepared in accordance with the Uniform Building Code;

C.    Title Report. A title report showing the legal owners at the time of submittal of the final map;

D.    Tax Certificate. A certificate from the county tax collector stating that all taxes due have been paid or that a tax bond or other adequate form of security assuring payments of all access which are liens but not yet payable has been filed with the county;

E.    Deeds for Easements or Right-of-Way. Deeds for off-site easements or rights-of-way required for road or drainage purposes which have not been dedicated on the final map. Written evidence acceptable to the city in the form of rights of entry or permitting or granting access to perform necessary construction work and permitting the maintenance of the facility;

F.    Transverse Closures. Transverse closures for the boundary blocks, lots, easements, street centerlines, and monument lines;

G.    Hydrology and Hydraulic Calculations. Complete hydrology and hydraulic calculations of all storm drains and flood flow;

H.    Governing Documents. The submittal of the final map or parcel map for a common interest development within the meaning of Section 1350 et seq. of the state Civil Code shall include the proposed declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions containing the provisions described in Section 1353 of the Civil Code, and all other governing documents for the subdivision as are appropriate pursuant to Section 1363 of the Civil Code. The submittal of the final map or parcel map for all subdivisions other than a common interest development shall include and declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions proposed in connection therewith. All documents shall be subject to review and approval by the city engineer and city attorney;

I.    Guarantee of Title. A guarantee of title, in a form acceptable to the city engineer and city attorney, shall be issued by a competent title company to and for the benefit and protection of the city and shall be considered complete up to the instant of recording of the final map, guaranteeing that the names of all persons whose consent is necessary to pass a clear title to the land being subdivided and all public easements being offered for dedication, and all acknowledgements thereto, appear on the proper certificates are correctly shown on the map, both as to consents as to the making thereof and affidavits of dedication where necessary;

J.    Improvement Agreement. In the event sewer, water, drainage, grading, paving, or other improvements required pursuant to Section 16.18.020 have not been completed prior to the presentation of the final map, an agreement in accordance with the requirements of Section 16.18.070 shall be filed for the improvement thereof. The subdivider shall secure the performance of the agreement in accordance with the requirements of Section 16.18.080;

K.    Liability Agreement and Insurance. A hold-harmless agreement obligating the subdivider to hold the city and its officers, agents, and employees harmless from any liability for damages or claims for damages for personal injury or death which arise from the operations of the subdivider and/or the subdivider’s subcontractors in connection with the subdivision. A certificate of insurance reporting to the city the amount of insurance the subdivider carries for the subdivider’s own liability for damages or claims for damages for personal injury or death which arise from the operations of the subdivider or his subcontractors in connection with the subdivision. The certificate of insurance shall name the city as an additional insured. The agreement and certificates required by this subsection shall be subject to prior review and approval by the city engineer and city attorney;

L.    Any additional data, reports, or information as required by the city engineer or city attorney. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.10.070 Review by city engineer.
The city engineer shall review the subdivision map and any other required information and the subdivider shall make corrections and/or additions until acceptable to the city engineer. Subdivision map checking and review fees shall be charged by the city engineer in accordance with a resolution adopted by the Lakeport city council. (Ord. 830 §1(part), 2004: Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.10.080 Approval by city engineer.
The subdivider shall submit to the city engineer the original tracing of the map and any duplicates per city requirements, corrected to its final form and signed by all parties required to execute the certificates on the map. Original signatures shall appear on the original drawing and on the blueline duplicate. Upon receipt of all required certificates and submittals, the city engineer shall sign the appropriate certificates and transmit the original map to the city clerk. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.10.090 Approval by city council.
The final map approved by the city engineer as complying with the approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall be filed with the city council for approval after all required certificates have been signed. The date the map shall be deemed filed with the city council is the date on which the city clerk receives the map. Before approving the final map, the city council shall consider approval of the subdivision improvement agreement in accordance with the requirements of Section 16.18.070.

If the subdivision improvement agreement and final map are approved by the city council, it shall instruct the city clerk to execute the agreement on behalf of the city. At the time the city council approves the final map, it shall also accept, accept subject to improvement, or reject any offer of dedication. The city clerk shall certify in the final map the action by the city council.

If at the time the final map is approved, any streets, paths, alleys, public utility easements, rights-of-way for local transit facilities, or storm drainage easements are not accepted by the city council, the offer of dedication shall remain open and the city council may, by resolution at any later date, and without further action by the subdivider, rescind its action and accept and open the streets, paths, alleys, rights-of-way for local transit facilities, or storm drainage easements, which acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder.

The city may accept any dedications lying outside the subdivision boundary which require a separate grant deed. The acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder.

If the subdivision improvement agreement and/or final map is unacceptable, the city council shall make its recommended corrections, instruct the city engineer to draft a new agreement and/or revise the final map, and defer approval until an acceptable agreement and/or final map has been resubmitted.

The city council shall not postpone or refuse approval of a final map because the subdivider has failed to meet a tentative map condition requiring construction or installation of off-site improvements on land which neither the subdivider nor the city has sufficient title or interest to permit the improvements to be made. In such a case, the city shall follow the procedure according to Section 16.18.020(J). (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.10.100 Denial by city council.
The city council shall not deny approval of the final map if the city has previously approved a tentative map for the proposed subdivision and if the city council finds that the final map is in compliance with the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, this title, and the tentative map and all conditions thereof. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.10.110 Filing with the county recorder.
Upon approval of the final map by the city council, the city clerk shall execute the appropriate certificate on the certificate sheet and shall, subject to the provisions of Section 66464 of the Subdivision Map Act, transmit the map, or have an authorized agent forward the map, to the county recorder. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

Chapter 16.12
SUBDIVISION OF FOUR OR LESS PARCELS--PARCEL MAPS
Sections:

16.12.010    General.

16.12.020    Form and contents, accompanying data, and reports.

16.12.030    Accompanying data and reports.

16.12.040    Geotechnical reports.

16.12.050    Street names.

16.12.060    Department review.

16.12.070    Action by the planning commission.

16.12.080    Appeals of planning commission action.

16.12.090    Expiration and extensions.

16.12.100    Amendments to approved or conditionally approved tentative map.

16.12.110    Waiver of parcel map requirements and waiver of tentative and final maps for condominium project on single parcel.

16.12.120    Parcel maps.

16.12.010 General.
The form and contents, submittal and approval of applications for the tentative parcel maps for four or less parcels shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter.

An application for approval of a tentative parcel map pursuant to this chapter shall not be submitted nor accepted for filing unless the subdivider has previously obtained all other necessary discretionary city approvals for the development that are required pursuant to the applicable provisions of this code. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.12.020 Form and contents, accompanying data, and reports.
A tentative parcel map shall be prepared in a manner acceptable to the department by a registered civil engineer, a licensed land surveyor, or other property owner agent. The tentative parcel map shall be clearly and legibly drawn and shall contain not less than the following:

A.    A title which shall contain the parcel map number, parcel map name, and type of parcel map;

B.    Name and address of legal owner, subdivider, and person preparing the map, including registration or license number;

C.    Sufficient legal description to define the boundary of the proposed parcel map;

D.    The names and numbers of adjacent subdivisions and the names of the owners of adjacent unplatted land;

E.    Date, north arrow, scale, contour interval, and source and date of existing contours;

F.    A statement of present zoning and of existing and proposed uses of the property as well as any proposed zoning changes, whether immediate or future;

G.    A vicinity map showing roads, adjoining subdivisions, county areas, creeks, and other data sufficient to locate the proposed parcel map and show its relation to the community;

H.    Existing topography of the proposed site and at least fifty feet beyond its boundary, including but not limited to:

1.    Existing contours at two-foot intervals if the existing ground slope is less than ten percent and not less than five-foot intervals for existing ground slopes equal or greater than ten percent. Contour intervals shall not be spread more than one hundred fifty feet apart. Existing contours shall be represented by dashed lines,

2.    Type, circumference, and dripline of existing trees with a trunk diameter of four inches or more. Any trees proposed to be removed shall be so indicated,

3.    The location and outline of existing structures identified by type. Structures to be removed shall be so indicated,

4.    The approximate location of all areas of potential storm water overflow; the location, width, and direction of flow of each water course; and the flood zone designation as indicated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (“FIRM”),

5.    The location, pavement, and right-of-way width; grade; and name of existing streets or highways,

6.    The widths, location, and identity of all existing easements,

7.    The location and size of existing sanitary sewers, fire hydrants, water mains, and storm drains. The approximate slope of existing sewers and storm drains shall be indicated. The locations of existing sewers and storm drains shall be indicated. The location of all existing overhead and underground utility lines on peripheral streets shall be indicated;

I.    Proposed improvements to be shown shall include but not be limited to:

1.    The location, grade, centerline radius, and arc length of curves, pavement, right-of-way width, and name of all streets. Typical sections of all streets shall be shown. Proposed private streets shall be clearly indicated,

2.    The location and radius of all curb returns and cul-de-sacs,

3.    The location, width, and purpose of all easements,

4.    The angle of intersecting streets if such angle deviates from a right angle by more than four degrees,

5.    The approximate lot layout and the approximate dimensions of each lot and each building site. Engineering data shall show the approximate finished grading of each lot, the preliminary design of all grading, the elevation of proposed building pads, the top and toe of cut and fill slopes to scale, the number of each lot, and the elevation of adjacent parcels,

6.    Proposed contours at two-foot intervals shall be shown if the existing ground slope is less than ten percent and not less than five-foot intervals for existing ground slopes of ten percent or more. A separate grading plan may be submitted,

7.    Proposed recreation sites, trails, and parks for private or public use,

8.    Proposed common areas to be dedicated to public open space,

9.    The location and size of sanitary sewers, fire hydrants, water mains, and storm drains. Proposed slopes and approximate elevations of sanitary sewers and storm drains shall be indicated. The proposed routing of storm water runoff generated by a one hundred year flood shall also be indicated in accordance with the city storm drain master plan,

10.    A statement as to the intention of the subdivider in regard to slope planting and erosion control;

J.    The name or names of any geologist or soils engineer whose services were required in the preparation of the design of the tentative map;

K.    The size of the tentative parcel map shall be at least eleven inches by seventeen inches. A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch. The scale of the map shall be not less than one inch to one hundred feet or as may be necessary to show all details clearly, and enough sheets shall be used to accomplish this end. The particular number of the sheet and the total number of sheets, and its relation to each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown. When four or more sheets including the certificate sheet are used, a key sheet shall be included. All printing or lettering on the map shall be one-eighth inch minimum height and of such shape and weight as to be readily legible on prints and other reproductions made from the original drawings;

L.    The subdivider shall specify any deviation from the city standards and provide the justification for such deviation;

M.    Upon written request of the subdivider, the department may waive any of the above tentative parcel map requirements if the department determines that the type of parcel map does not justify compliance with these requirements, or if the department determines that other circumstances justify a waiver. The department may require other drawings, data, or information as deemed necessary by the department to accomplish the purposes of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.12.030 Accompanying data and reports.
The tentative parcel map shall be accompanied by the following data reports:

A.    Street Names. A list of proposed street names for any unnamed street or alley for review by the department;

B.    Soils Report. A preliminary soils report prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Building Code (adopted herein by reference) and Section 16.08.040 may be required to be submitted. If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soil problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, the soils report accompanying the final map shall contain an investigation of each lot within the parcel map;

C.    Title Report. A preliminary title report, acceptable to the department, showing the legal owners at the time of filing the tentative parcel map;

D.    Environmental Review. Information shall be submitted as required by the department to allow a determination on environmental review to be made in accordance with CEQA. The subdivider shall deposit and pay all fees as may be required for the preparation and processing of environmental review documents;

E.    Preliminary Engineering Calculations. Information shall be submitted as required by the standard engineering specifications to demonstrate the adequacy of the design of the proposed improvements. Such information shall include design parameters and engineering calculations;

F.    Other Reports. Any other data or reports deemed necessary by the department. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.12.040 Geotechnical reports.
A.    If determined to be necessary, three copies of preliminary engineering soils report and engineering geology report, prepared by a civil engineer and engineering geologist registered in the state and based upon adequate borings, shall be submitted to the community development director. Such need shall be based on a finding that there are facts associated with the land to be divided that there are slope, soil stability, historic cut or fill activity, erosion, or other similar factors evident which require a geotechnical analysis.

B.    If the city has knowledge of, or the preliminary soils and geology reports indicate, the presence of soil or geologic conditions which, if corrective measures are not taken, could lead to structural defects, a soils and/or geologic investigation shall be done by a civil engineer and/or geologist registered in the state who shall recommend regarding the adequacy of the sites to be developed by the proposed grading and the effect of the soil or geologic conditions on the proposed development. The city may approve the parcel map, or portion thereof, where soils or geologic problems exist if the city determines that the recommended actions provide for procedures and design criteria for corrective measures as necessary covering the structures and adequacy of the sites to be developed by the proposed grading. A condition of the issuance of any building permit may require that the approved recommended action be incorporated in the grading plans and/or specifications and, if necessary, the plans and specifications for the construction of each structure.

C.    Where preliminary soils and/or geology reports are prepared, final reports shall be submitted prior to the acceptance of the improvements or the release of occupancy permits indicating the specific actions taken pursuant to the preliminary report recommendations. Such reports shall have sufficient field data submitted to indicate full compliance with the preliminary or subsequent progress report recommendations as they were applied to specific areas or improvements. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.12.050 Street names.
Each street which is to be dedicated which is a continuation of, or approximately the continuation of, any existing dedicated street shall be shown on the tentative parcel map and shall be given the same name as such existing street. The proposed name of each other street shown on the tentative map shall be submitted to the city for the approval in accordance with current city street-naming policies. The approved street name shall be shown on the tentative map. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.12.060 Department review.
The tentative parcel map application shall be filed with the department for review in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.08.060. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.12.070 Action by the planning commission.
A.    Upon receipt of a tentative parcel map application that is determined by the department to be complete, the department shall prepare a report and set the matter for a public hearing before the planning commission in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.08.070(A), or before the planning commission in accordance with subsection B of this section.

B.    The tentative parcel map may be approved, conditionally approved, or denied by the planning commission, as the case may be, in accordance with the provisions and findings set forth in Section 16.08.070(B), (C) and (D). (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.12.080 Appeals of the planning commission action.
Appeals of the planning commission action with respect to the tentative parcel map shall be made to the city council in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.08.100. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.12.090 Expiration and extensions.
The approval or conditional approval of a tentative parcel map shall expire twenty-four months from its approval by the planning commission or city council whichever occurs last, unless the expiration date is extended in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.08.120, except that the planning commission shall be responsible for the review of the request. The planning commission may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the request for an extension. The subdivider or any interested person adversely affected may appeal the action of the planning commission and then to the city council in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.08.120. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.12.100 Amendments to approved or conditionally approved tentative parcel map.
Amendments to the approved or conditionally approved tentative parcel map or conditions of approval shall be made in accordance with Section 16.08.130; provided that amendments which, in the opinion of the department, are not minor, shall be presented to the planning commission for its approval. Processing shall be in accordance with the provisions for processing a tentative map as set forth in this article. Any approved amendment shall not alter the expiration date of the tentative map. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.12.110 Waiver of parcel map requirements and waiver of tentative and final maps for condominium project on single parcel.
The planning commission may, at its discretion, waive all or part of the requirements for a tentative and parcel map for the following:

A.    Division of real property or interests therein created by probate, eminent domain procedures, partition, or other civil judgments or decrees;

B., Division of real property resulting from the conveyance of land or any interest therein to or from the city, public entity or public utility for a public purpose, such as school sites, public building sites, or rights-of-way or easements for streets, sewers, utilities, drainage, etc.;

C.    Division of real property which has been merged pursuant to this title, the Subdivision Map Act, or any prior ordinance of the city;

D.    Any other division of real property which would otherwise require a parcel map.

The planning commission shall make a finding that the proposed division of land complies with requirements as to area, improvement and design, flood water drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, environmental protection, and other requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, this title, this code and the general plan.

Upon waiver of the parcel map requirement, or the tentative and parcel map requirement, pursuant to this section, the city engineer shall file with the county recorder a certificate of compliance for the land to be divided, in accordance with Section 16.25.020, and a plat map showing the division. The certificate shall include a tax certificate by the county tax collector in accordance with Section 16.10.060(D).

A waiver by the planning commission may be conditioned to provide for, among other things, payment by the subdivider for parkland dedication, drainage, and other fees that are permitted by law by a method approved by the planning commission.

If any waiver is approved or conditionally approved pursuant to this section, the department shall make a written report thereof to the city council. Any member of the city council shall have the right to call up that waiver approval for review by a written request to the community development director within ten days of the final action by the planning commission. If the city council decides to review the waiver and conditions, it shall conduct a public hearing after giving notice pursuant to Section 16.08.070 (A). In addition, notice shall be held within thirty days after the date of the request for review. The city council may add, modify, or delete conditions if the city council determines that such changes are necessary to ensure that the waiver conforms to the Subdivision Map Act and this code. The city council may deny the waiver on any of the grounds contained in this chapter. Within ten days following the conclusion to the hearing, the city council shall render its decision. If the city council does not act within the time limits set forth in this section, the waiver shall be deemed to have been approved or conditionally approved as last approved or conditionally approved by the planning commission insofar as it complies with all other applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, this title, this code and the general plan. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.12.120 Parcel maps.
Upon approval of a tentative parcel map, the subdivider shall prepare a parcel map for city approval and filing. The form and content, submittal, approval, and filing of parcel maps shall conform to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and the following:

A.    Survey Required. An accurate and complete survey of the land to be subdivided shall be made by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. All monuments, property lines, centerlines of streets, alleys, and easements adjoining or within the subdivision shall be tied into the survey. The allowable error of closure on any portion of the parcel map shall not exceed one-ten-thousandth for filed closures and one-twenty-thousandth for calculated closures.

B.    Form and Contents. The form and content of the parcel map shall conform to the final map form and contents requirements of Sections 6.10.040 and 16.10.050.

C.    Preliminary Submittal. The subdivider shall submit prints of the parcel map to the city engineer for checking. The preliminary prints shall be accompanied by copies of the data, plans, reports, and documents as required for final maps by Section 16.10.060.

The city engineer may waive any of the requirements if the location and nature of the proposed subdivision does not justify compliance with the requirements of Section 16.10.060

D.    Review by City Engineer. The city engineer shall review the parcel map and any other required information and the subdivider shall make corrections and/or additions until acceptable to the city engineer. Parcel map checking and review fees shall be charged by the city engineer in accordance with a resolution adopted by the Lakeport city council.

E.    Review and Approval by City Council. The city council shall review the parcel map and the subdivider shall make corrections and/or additions until the map is acceptable to the city council. The subdivider shall submit the original tracing of the map, corrected to its final form and signed by all parties required to execute the certificates on the map, to the city council. The city clerk or authorized agent shall, subject to the provisions of Section 66464 of the Subdivision Map Act, transmit the approved parcel map to the county recorder.

The city council shall approve the parcel map if it complies with the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, this chapter, the tentative map, and all conditions thereof. (Ord. 830 §1(part), 2004; Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

Chapter 16.14
VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
Sections:

16.14.010    Authority and purpose.

16.14.020    Consistency.

16.14.030    Definitions.

16.14.040    Application.

16.14.050    Filing and processing.

16.14.060    Fees.

16.14.070    Expiration.

16.14.080    Rights of a vesting tentative map.

16.14.090    Amendment to approved vesting tentative map.

16.14.100    Applications inconsistent with current policies.

16.14.010 Authority and purpose.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 66498.1) of the Subdivision Map Act (hereinafter referred to as the vesting tentative map ordinance). The purpose of this chapter is to establish appropriate local procedures for the implementation of the vesting tentative map ordinance.

To accomplish this purpose, the regulations contained in this article are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety, and general welfare and for the promotion of orderly growth and development. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.14.020 Consistency.
No land shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to a vesting tentative map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the general plan or any applicable specific plan, codes, ordinances, or resolutions of the city.

An application for approval of a vesting tentative map pursuant to this article shall not be submitted nor accepted for filing unless the subdivider has previously obtained all other discretionary city approvals for the development that are required. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.14.030 Definitions.
A.    A “vesting tentative map” means a “tentative map” for a residential subdivision, as defined in Section 16.04.010, that shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting Tentative Map” at the time it is filed in accordance with Section 16.14.050, and is thereafter processed in accordance with the provisions hereof. For purposes of this article, “vesting tentative map” shall include a vesting tentative map prepared in connection with a parcel map.

B.    All other definitions set forth in this title are applicable. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.14.040 Application.
A.    The ordinance codified in this title shall apply only to residential developments. Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act, as implemented and supplemented by this title, requires the filing of a tentative map for a residential development, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

B.    If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the vesting tentative map ordinance, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.14.050 Filing and processing.
A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the same contents, accompanying data and reports, and shall be processed in the same manner as set forth in this title for a tentative map as hereinafter provided:

At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting Tentative Map.” (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.14.060 Fees.
A.    Upon filing a vesting tentative map, the subdivider shall pay all fees and/or deposits in accordance with Section 16.02.070.

B.    The planning commission or city council, as the case may be, may require as a condition of its approval that the payment by the subdivider of all development fees required to be paid at the time of the application for, or issuance of, a building permit or other similar permit shall be made at the rate for such fees in effect at the time of such application or issuance. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.14.070 Expiration.
The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period, and shall be subject to the same extensions, established by Sections 16.08.110 and 16.12.090 for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.14.080 Rights of a vesting tentative map.
A.    The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards described in Section 66474.2 of the Subdivision Map Act. However, if Section 66474.2 is repealed, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved.

B.    Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a permit, approval, extension, or entitlement may be conditioned or denied if any of the following are determined:

1.    A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both;

2.    The condition or denial is required in order to comply with state or federal law.

C.    The rights referred to herein shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in Section 16.14.070. If the final map is approved, these rights shall last for the following periods of time:

1.    An initial time period of one year beyond the recording of the final map or parcel map. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this one year initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded. All of such final maps or parcel maps must be recorded within the time period set forth in Section 16.14.070 or the vesting tentative map approval shall expire for those parcels for which final maps or parcel maps are not timely recorded;

2.    The one year initial time period set forth in subsection (C)(1) shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit, if one is required, or for any required design or architectural review, if such processing exceeds thirty days from the date a complete application is filed;

3.    A subdivider may apply to the planning commission for a year extension at any time before the initial time period set forth in subsection (C)(1) expires. If the extension is denied, the subdivider may appeal that denial to the city council within fifteen days in accordance with Section 16.08.120(D);

4.    If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in subsections (C)(1) -- (3), the rights referred to herein shall continue until the expiration of that permit, or any extension of that permit.

D.    Consistent with subsection A, an approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall not limit the city from imposing reasonable conditions on subsequent required approvals or permits necessary for the development. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.14.090 Amendment to approved vesting tentative map.
Amendments to the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall be made in accordance with Section 16.12.100. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.14.100 Applications inconsistent with current policies.
Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter to the contrary, a property owner or his or her designee may seek approvals or permits for development which depart from the ordinances, policies, and standards described in Section 16.14.080(A), and the city may grant these approvals or issue these permits to the extent that the departures are authorized under this title, this code, and the general plan and other applicable law. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

Chapter 16.16
DEDICATIONS, RESERVATIONS, AND DEVELOPMENT FEES
Sections:

16.16.010    Dedication of streets, alleys, and other public rights-of-way or easements.

16.16.020    Waiver of direct access rights.

16.16.030    Dedications.

16.16.040    Parkland dedication.

16.16.050    School site dedication.

16.16.060    Reservations.

16.16.070    Local transit facilities.

16.16.080    Bridges and major thoroughfares.

16.16.090    Supplemental improvement capacity.

16.16.100    Drainage fees.

16.16.110    Interim classroom facilities.

16.16.120    Permanent classroom facilities.

16.16.130    Reimbursements to a telephone corporation or cable television system for undergrounding or relocation.

16.16.010 Dedication of streets, alleys, and other Public rights-of-way or easements.
As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the subdivider shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of land within the subdivision that are needed for streets and alleys, including access rights and abutters’ rights, drainage, public greenways, bicycle paths, trails, public utility easements, and other public easements.

Improvements shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.16.020 Waiver of direct access rights.
The city may require as a condition of approval of a tentative map that dedications or offers of dedication of streets include a waiver of direct access rights to any such street from any property within or abutting the subdivision.

Upon acceptance of the dedication, such waiver shall become effective in accordance with its provisions. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.16.030 Dedications.
All dedications of property to the city for public purposes shall be made in fee title, except that, at the city’s discretion, a grant of an easement may be taken for the following purposes: open space easements, scenic easements or public utility easements. All dedications in fee and grants of easements shall be free of liens and encumbrances except for those which the city, at its discretion, determines would not conflict with the intended ownership and use. The city may elect to accept an irrevocable offer of dedication in lieu of dedication of fee title. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.16.040 Parkland dedication.
A.    General. This section is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the Subdivision Map Act and the general police power of the city and is for the purpose of providing such additional park and recreational facilities and open space as appropriate pursuant to the general plan of the city. The park and recreational facilities for which dedication of land and/or payment of a fee is required by this chapter are in accordance with the policies, principles, and standards for park and recreational facilities contained in the general plan.

For purposes of this chapter, park and recreational purposes shall include land and facilities for the activity of “recreational community gardening,” which activity consists of the cultivation by persons other than, or in addition to, the owner of such land, or plant material, not for sale.

B.    Requirements. As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the subdivider shall dedicate land, pay a fee in lieu thereof, or both, at the option of the city, for park or recreational purposes and according to the standards and formula contained in this chapter. The land dedicated or the fees paid, or both, shall be used for community and neighborhood parks and facilities in such a manner that the locations of such parks and facilities bear a reasonable relationship to the use of the park and recreational facilities by the future inhabitants of the subdivision generating such dedication or fees, or both.

C.    General standard. It is found and determined that the public interest, convenience, health, safety, and welfare require that five acres of property for each one thousand persons residing within the city be devoted to local park and recreational purposes.

D.    Standards and Formula for Dedication of Land. Where a park or recreational facility has been designated in the general plan and is to be located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision and is reasonably related to serving the present and future needs of the residents of the subdivision, the subdivider shall dedicate land for park and recreation facilities sufficient in size and topography to meet that purpose. The amount of land to be provided shall be determined pursuant to the following standards and formula:

Formula: The formula for determining the amount of acreage to be dedicated shall be as follows:

Acres of Parkland

=

.005 Acres*

x

Average No. of Persons

Dwelling Unit

Persons

Dwelling Unit

*(Based on five acres of parkland per one thousand population)

The following parkland dedication table, based on the above formula, is to be followed:

Dwelling Type or Land Use

Average No. Persons/Dwelling Unit

Acres per Dwelling Unit

Single-Family or Mobilehome

3.0

.015

Duplex or Multifamily

2.1

.0105

For the purposes of this section, the number of proposed dwelling units shall be determined as follows: In areas zoned for one dwelling unit per lot or parcel, the number of dwelling units shall equal the number of parcels indicated on the tentative map. When all or part of the subdivision is located in an area zoned for multiple dwelling units per parcel, the maximum number of dwelling units allowed under that zone. For residential condominium units indicated on the tentative map. For planned development projects, the number of dwelling units indicated on the approved final development plan. The term “new dwelling unit” does not include dwelling units lawfully in place prior to the date on which the tentative map is approved.

Lands to be dedicated or reserved for park and/or recreational purposes shall be suitable in the opinion of the community development director, the director of public works, and the parks and recreation director on location, topography, environmental characteristics, and development potential as related to the intended use. The primary intent of this section shall be construed to provide the land for functional recreation units of local or neighborhood service, including but not limited to: tot lots, play lots, playgrounds, neighborhood parks, play fields, community or district parks, and other specialized recreational facilities that may serve the family group and also senior citizen and child care activities. Principal consideration shall be given therefor to lands that offer:

1.    A variety of recreational potential for all age groups;

2.    Recreational opportunities within walking distance from residents’ homes;

3.    Possibility for expansion or connection with school grounds;

4.    Integration with hiking, riding, and bicycle trails, natural stream reserves, and other open space;

5.    Coordination with all other park systems; and

6.    Access to at least one existing or proposed public street.

E.    Formula for Fees in Lieu of Land Dedication.

1.    General Formula. If there is no park or recreational facility designated in the general plan to be located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the subdivision, the subdivider shall, in the city’s discretion, either dedicate land on the amount provided in subsection D or pay a fee in lieu of dedication equal to the value of the land prescribed for dedication in subsection D and in an amount determined in accordance with the provisions of subsection G.

2.    Fees in Lieu of Land -- Fifty Parcels or Less. Except as provided in subsection F, if the proposed subdivision contains fifty parcels or less and has no park or recreational facility, the subdivider shall pay a fee equal to the land value of the portion of the park or recreational facilities required to serving the needs of the residents of the proposed subdivision as prescribed in subsection D and in an amount determined in accordance with the provisions of subsection G.

3.    Use of Money. The money collected shall be used, in accordance with the schedule developed pursuant to subsection D, for the purpose of developing new or rehabilitating existing neighborhood or community park or recreational facilities reasonably related to serving the subdivision, including the purchase of necessary land and/or improvement of such land to facilitate the development of park or recreational facilities. The money shall be committed within five years after payment thereof or the issuance of building permits on one-half of the lots created by the subdivision, whichever occurs later. If the money is not committed, it shall be distributed and paid to the then record owners of the subdivision in the same proportion that the size of their lot bears to the total area of all lots in the subdivision.

F.    Criteria for Requiring Both Dedication and Fee. If the proposed subdivision contains more than fifty parcels, or, in the case of a condominium project, stock cooperative or community apartment, if the proposed subdivision contains more than fifty dwelling units although the actual number of parcels may be less than fifty the subdivider shall both dedicate land and pay a fee in lieu of dedication in accordance with the following:

1.    When only a portion of the land to be subdivided is proposed in the general plan as the site for a local park or recreational facility, such portion shall be dedicated for local park purposes and a fee computed pursuant to the provisions of subsection G shall be paid for any additional land that would have been required to be dedicated pursuant to subsection G.

2.    When a major part of the local park or recreational site has already been acquired by the city and only a small portion of land is needed from the subdivision to complete the site, such portion shall be dedicated, and a fee, computed according to subsection G, shall be paid for in an amount equal to the value of the land which would otherwise have been required to be dedicated according to subsection D. The fee shall be used for the improvement of the existing park or recreational facility or for the improvement of other neighborhood or community parks and recreational facilities reasonably related to serving the subdivision.

G.    Amount of Fee in Lieu of Parkland Dedication. When a fee is required to be paid in lieu of parkland dedication, the amount of the fee shall be based upon the estimated fair market value of the land which would otherwise be required to be dedicated according to subsection D.

The fair market value shall be as determined by the department at the time of final map or parcel map approval. If the subdivider objects to the fair market value determination, the subdivider may request the city to obtain an appraisal of the property by a qualified real estate appraiser mutually agreed upon by the city and the subdivider, which appraisal will be considered by the city in determining the fair market value. All costs required to obtain such appraisal shall be borne by the subdivider.

For the purpose of determining fair market value pursuant to this subsection, the department and any appraiser shall consider, among other things:

1.    Conditions of approval of the tentative map;

2.    The general plan and zoning requirements for the area;

3.    The location and site characteristics of the use of the property; and

4.    Off-site and on-site improvements facilitating use of the property.

H.    Determination of Land or Fee. Whether the City accepts land dedication, or elects to require the payment of a fee in lieu of, or a combination of both, shall be determined by consideration of the following:

1.    Policies, standards, and principles for park and recreation facilities in the general plan;

2.    Topography, geology, access, and location of land in the subdivision available for dedication;

3.    Size and shape of the subdivision and land available for dedication;

4.    Feasibility of dedication;

5.    Compatibility of dedication with the general plan;

6.    Availability of previously acquired park property.

The determination by the city as to whether land shall be dedicated, or whether a fee shall be charged, or a combination, shall be final and conclusive.

I.    Credit for Improvements and Private Open Space. If the subdivider provides park and recreational improvements to the dedicated land, the value of the improvements together with any equipment located thereon shall be a credit against the payment of fees or dedication of land required by this section.

Planned developments, real estate developments, stock cooperatives, and community apartment projects, as defined in Sections 11003, 10003.1, 11003.4 and 11004, respectively, of the Business and Professions Code, and condominiums shall be eligible to receive a credit, as determined by the city council, against the amount of land required to be dedicated, or the amount of the fee imposed, pursuant to this section, for the value of private open space within the development which is usable for active recreational uses.

J.    Procedure.

1.    At the time of the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map, the planning commission shall determine, after a report and recommendation from the parks and recreation director, whether land, in-lieu fees, or a combination of land fees, shall be dedicated and/or paid by the subdivider.

2.    The planning commission may approve, modify, or disapprove the recommendation of the parks and recreation director; provided, however any modification of the proposed recommended condition not previously considered by the parks and recreation director for a report and further recommendation. The parks and recreation director shall report back to the planning commission within thirty days. After the receipt and consideration of the report, or after thirty days have passed in the event no report is received, the planning commission may adopt the condition.

3.    The recommendation of the parks and recreation director shall include the following:

a.    The amount of land required; or

b.    That a fee be charged in lieu of land; or

c.    That a combination of land and a fee be required; and

d.    The location of the park land and, where appropriate, the siting and conceptual design of the park facilities appurtenant thereto, to be dedicated or used in lieu of fees; and

e.    The approximate time when the development of the park or recreation facility shall commence.

4.    At the time of the recording of the final map or parcel map, the subdivider shall dedicate the land and/or pay the fees as determined by the city. At the discretion of the city, fees may be paid prior to issuance of any building permit for any structure in the subdivision.

5.    Open space covenants, conditions, and restrictions for private park or recreational facilities shall be submitted to the city prior to approval of the final map or parcel map and, if approved, shall be recorded concurrently with the final map or parcel map.

K.    Schedule of Use. At the time of the approval of the final map or parcel map, the city shall develop a schedule specifying how, when, and where it will use the land or fees, or both, to develop or rehabilitate park or recreational facilities to serve the residents of the subdivision.

L.    Not Applicable to Certain Subdivisions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following:

1.    Subdivisions containing four or less parcels and not used for residential purposes. However, a condition may be placed on the approval of such parcel map that if a building permit is requested for construction of a residential structure or structures on one or more of the parcels within four years, the fee pursuant to this section may be required to be paid by the owner of such parcel as a condition to the issuance of such permit;

2.    Commercial or industrial subdivision;

3.    Condominium projects or stock cooperatives which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than five years old when no new dwelling units are added. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.16.050 School site dedication.
A.    General. As a condition of approval of a tentative map, a subdivider who develops or completes the development of one or more subdivisions within the Lakeport Unified School District shall dedicate to the school district such lands as the city shall deem to be necessary for the purpose of constructing thereon schools necessary to assure the residents of the subdivision adequate public school service.

B.    Procedure. The requirement of dedication shall be imposed at the time of approval of the tentative map. If within thirty days after the requirement of dedication is imposed by the city, the school district does not offer to enter into a binding commitment with the subdivider to accept the dedication, the requirement shall be automatically terminated. The required dedication may be made any time before, concurrently with, or up to sixty days after the filing of the final map or parcel map on any portion of the subdivision.

C.    Payments to Subdivider for School Site Dedication. The school district shall, if it accepts the dedication, repay to the subdivider or his or her successors the fair market value to the subdivider of the dedicated land, plus a sum equal to the total of the following amounts:

1.    The cost of any improvements to the dedicated land since acquisition by the subdivider;

2.    The taxes assessed against the dedicated land from the date of the school district’s offer to enter into the binding commitment to accept the dedication;

3.    Any other costs incurred by the subdivider in maintenance of such dedicated land, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering such land.

D.    Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to a subdivider who has owned the land being subdivided for more than ten years prior to the filing of the tentative map. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.16.060 Reservations.
A.    General. As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the subdivider shall reserve sites, appropriate in area and location, for parks, recreational facilities, fire stations, libraries or other public uses according to the standards and formula contained in this section.

B.    Standards for Reservation of Land. Where a park, recreational facility, fire station, library, or other public use is shown on the general plan or an adopted specific plan, the subdivider may be required by the city to reserve sites as so determined by the city in accordance with the policies and standards contained in the general plan or the adopted specific plan. The reserved area must be of such size and shape as to permit the balance of the property within which the reservation is located to develop in an orderly and efficient development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically infeasible. The reserved area shall be consistent with the general plan or the adopted specific plan and shall be in such multiples of streets and parcels as to permit an efficient division of the reserved area in the event that it is not acquired within the prescribed period.

C.    Procedure. The public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved shall, at the time of approval of the final map or parcel map, enter into a binding agreement to acquire such reserved area within two years after the completion and acceptance of all improvements, unless the period of time is extended by mutual agreement.

D.    Payment to Subdivider. The purchase price to be paid by the city for the reserved area shall be the market value thereof at the time of the filing of the tentative map plus the taxes against the reserved area from the date of the reservation and any other costs incurred by the subdivider in the maintenance of the reserved area, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering the reserved area.

E.    Termination. If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved does not enter into a binding agreement in accordance with this section, the reservation of the area shall automatically terminate. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.16.070 Local transit facilities.
As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the subdivider shall dedicate, or make an irrevocable offer of dedication, of land within the subdivision for local transit facilities such as shelters, benches, bus turnouts, landing pads, park-and-ride facilities, and similar items which directly benefit the residents of the subdivision, if (A) The subdivision as shown on the tentative map has the potential for two hundred dwelling units or more if developed to the maximum density shown on the general plan or contains one hundred acres or more; and (B) If the city finds that transit services are or will, within a reasonable time period, be made available to the subdivision.

The provisions of this section do not apply to condominium projects or stock cooperatives which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than five years old when no new dwelling units are added. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.16.080 Bridges and major thoroughfares.
A.    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to make provision for assessing and collecting fees as a condition of approval of a final map or as a constitution of issuing a building permit for the purpose of defraying the actual or estimated cost of constructing bridges or major thoroughfares pursuant to Section 66484 of the Subdivision Map Act, and in order to implement the transportation element of the general plan and, in the case of bridges, the transportation provisions thereof.

B.    Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:

1.    “Construction” means design, acquisition of right-of-way, administration of construction contracts, actual construction, and inspections.

2.    “Major thoroughfare” means an arterial or collector roadway as shown on the transportation element of the general plan whose primary purpose is to carry through traffic and provide a network connecting to the state highway system.

C.    Payment of Fees Generally.

1.    Prior to filing a final map which includes land within an area of benefit established pursuant to this section, the subdivider shall pay or cause to be paid any fees established and apportioned to such property pursuant to this section for the purpose of defraying the actual or estimated cost of constructing bridges over waterways, railways, freeways, or canyons or constructing major thoroughfares.

2.    Prior to the issuance of a building permit for construction on any property within an area of benefit established pursuant to this section, the applicant for such permit shall pay or cause to be paid any fees established and apportioned pursuant to this section for the purpose of defraying the actual or estimated cost of constructing bridges over waterways, railways, freeways, or canyons or constructing major thoroughfares, unless such fees have been paid pursuant to subsection (C)(1) of this section.

3.    Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (C) (1) and (C) (2) of this section:

a.    Payment of bridge fees shall not be required unless the planned bridge facility is an original bridge serving the area or an addition to any existing bridge facility serving the area at the time of adoption of the boundaries of the area of benefit.

b.    Payment of major thoroughfare fees shall not be required unless the major thoroughfares are in addition to, or a reconstruction of, any existing major thoroughfares serving the area at the time of the adoption of the area of benefit.

D.    Consideration in Lieu of Fees. Upon application by the subdivider or applicant for a building permit, the city council, in the case of subdivisions of five or more parcels, or the planning commission, in the case of subdivisions of four or less parcels, may accept consideration in lieu of the payment of fees required pursuant to this section; provided that the city council or planning commission, as the case may be, first finds, upon recommendation of the city engineer, that the substitute consideration has a value equal to or greater than the fee; and provided further that the substitute consideration is in a form acceptable to the city council or planning commission, as the case, may be.

E.    Public Hearing. Prior to establishing an area of benefit, a public hearing shall be held by the city council at which time the boundaries of the area of benefit, the costs, whether actual or estimated, and a fair method of allocation of costs to the area of benefit and fee apportionment, and the fee to be collected, shall be established. Notice of the public hearing shall be given pursuant to Section 16.08.070(A) and shall include preliminary information related to the boundaries of the area of benefit, estimated cost, and the method of fee apportionment.

F.    Amount. The amount of the fees and the areas of benefit established pursuant to this section may be established by ordinance or resolution.

G.    Exemptions. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (F), payment of such fees shall not be required for:

1.    The use, alteration, or enlargement of an existing building or structure or the erection of one or more buildings or structures accessory thereto, or both, on the same lot or parcel of land; provided that the total value, as determined by the building official, of all such alteration, enlargement, or construction completed within any one year period does not exceed one-half of the current market value, as determined by the community development director, of all existing buildings on such lot or parcel of land, and the alteration or enlargement of the building is not such as to change its classification of occupancy as defined by Section 501 of the Uniform Building Code;

2.    The following accessory buildings and structures: private garages, children’s playhouses, radio and television receiving antennas, windmills, silos, tank houses, shops, barns, coops, and other buildings which are accessory to one-family or two-family dwellings.

H.    Protest.

1.    At any time not later than the hour set for hearing objections to the proposed bridge facility or major thoroughfare, any owner of property to be benefited by the improvement may file a protest against the proposed bridge facility or major thoroughfare or against the extent of the area to be benefited by the improvements or against both of them. Such protests must be in writing and must contain a description of the property in which each signer thereof is interested, sufficient to identify such property, and, if the signers are not shown on the last equalized assessment roll as the owners of such property, must contain or be accompanied by written evidence that such signers are the owners of such property. All such protests shall be delivered to the city clerk and no other protest or objections shall be considered. Any protest may be withdrawn, in writing, by the owners making such protests, at any time prior to the conclusion of the public hearing.

2.    If there is a written protest filed with the city clerk by the owners of more than one-half of the area of the property to be benefited by the improvement, and sufficient protests are not withdrawn so as to reduce the area represented to less than one-half of that to be benefited, then the proposed proceedings shall be abandoned and the city council shall not, for one year from the filing of the written protest, commence or carry on any proceedings for the same improvement, or that portion thereof so protested against under the provisions of this section. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.16.090 Supplemental improvement capacity.
A.    As a condition of approval of a tentative map, there may be imposed a requirement that improvements installed by the subdivider for the benefit of property not within the subdivision and that those improvements be dedicated to the public. However, when such supplemental size, capacity, number, or length is solely for the benefit of property not within the subdivision, the city shall, subject to the provisions of Sections 66486 and 66487 of the Subdivision Map Act, enter into an agreement with the subdivider to reimburse the subdivider for that portion of the cost of such improvements equal to the difference between the amount it would have cost the subdivider to install such improvements to serve the subdivision only and the actual cost of such improvements.

B.    The city council shall determine the method for payment of the costs required by a reimbursement agreement, which method may include, but shall not be limited to, the following:

1.    The collection from other persons, including public agencies, using such improvements for the benefit of real property not within the subdivision, a reasonable charge for such use;

2.    The contribution to the subdivider of that part of the cost of the improvements that is attributable to the benefit of real property outside the subdivision and the levy of a charge upon the real property benefited to reimburse the city for such costs, together with interest thereon, if any, paid to the subdivider;

3.    The establishment and maintenance of local benefit districts for the levy and collection of such charge or costs from the property benefited.

C.    No charge, area of benefit, or local benefit district shall be established unless and until a public hearing is noticed and held thereon by the city council in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.16.080(E) and the city council finds that the charge, area of benefit or local benefit, district is reasonably related to the cost of such supplemental improvements and the actual ultimate beneficiaries thereof.

D.    In addition to the notice required by Section 16.16.080(E), written notice of the hearing shall be given to those who own property within the proposed area of benefit as shown on the last equalized assessment roil, and the potential users of the supplemental improvements insofar as they can be ascertained at the time. Such notices shall be mailed by the city clerk at least ten days prior to the date established for the hearing. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.16.100 Drainage fees.
(Reserved).

16.16.110 Interim classroom facilities.
A.    Authority. Purpose and Intent.

1.    This section is enacted pursuant to the authority of Section 65970 et seq. of the Government Code for the purpose of providing interim school facilities to alleviate conditions of overcrowding caused by new residential development.

2.    The city council finds:

a.    Public education in the primary and secondary grades is provided in the city by the Lakeport Unified School District.

b.    From time to time, new residential development may cause overcrowding in one or more schools in the district.

c.    It is necessary that a method be available to provide the district with interim classroom facilities when conditions of overcrowding exist, in order that education not be adversely affected.

B.    Definition. In addition to the definitions set forth in Sections 65973 and 65980 of the Government Code and Section 16.04.010 of this title, the following definitions shall apply to this section:

1.    “District” means the Lakeport Unified School District.

2.    “Board” means the board of trustees of the district.

3.    “Declaration of impact” means a statement adopted by the board, and forwarded to the city council, declaring the existence of an impacted school or schools, in accordance with the findings and other requirements of Section 65971 of the Government Code. The declaration of impact may include the schedule required by Section 65976 of the Government Code.

C.    Action by Board. The board may, from time to time, adopt a declaration of impact and file the same with the city clerk for consideration by the city council.

D.    Action by City Council. Upon receipt of a declaration of impact from the board and the schedule required by Section 65976 of the Government Code, the city council shall, if it concurs in the findings set forth in the declaration of impact, withhold approval of, or order the appropriate officer, employee, or commission within the city to withhold approval of, new residential development within the attendance area of the impacted school or schools pending compliance with subsection (E)(3).

E.    Mitigation Measures.

1.    The city council shall require, as a condition of approval of new development within the attendance area of an impacted school, either the dedication of land, the payment of fees in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, in accordance with the provisions of Section 65974 of the Government Code.

2.    The decision concerning whether to require the dedication of land, payment of fees or an appropriate combination shall be determined after consultation with the board concerning the needs of the district as they relate to the impacted school or schools.

3.    The amount of any fee shall be in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 4.9 (commencing with Section 66000&file=65995-65998" target="_top">65995) of the Government Code, shall be prescribed by resolution of the city council, and shall be collected at the time of issuance of a building permit.

F.    Use of Fees and Land-Accounting.

1.    The district shall use the land and/or fees solely to alleviate the conditions of overcrowding within the affected attendance area.

2.    The district shall provide to the city council the report required by Section 65978 of the Government Code.

G.    City’s Right to Disapprove Development or Require Other Fees. Nothing is this section shall be construed to limit the right of the city to disapprove new residential development for any lawful reason, including, but not limited to, the impact that such development may have on a school or schools within the district which cannot be alleviated by the provisions of this section. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.16.120 Permanent classroom facilities.
The city may not require, as a condition of approval of a tentative map for a residential subdivision, dedication of land or payment of in-lieu fees or a combination of both in order to provide permanent facilities for school purposes. Nothing in this chapter is intended as a limitation on the district’s authority to directly levy a fee, charge, dedication, or other form of requirement against any development project, pursuant to Section 53080 of the Government Code, in order to provide temporary and permanent facilities for school purposes. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.16.130 Reimbursements to a telephone corporation or cable television system for undergrounding or relocation.
Whenever the city imposes as a condition to its approval of a tentative map or a parcel map a requirement that necessitates replacing, undergoing, or permanently to temporarily relocating existing facilities of a telephone corporation or cable television system, the subdivider shall reimburse the telephone corporation or cable television system for all costs for the replacement, undergrounding, or relocation. All these costs shall be billed to the subdivider directly by the telephone corporation or cable television system after they are incurred, and shall include a credit for any facilities replaced. In no event shall the telephone corporation or cable television system be reimbursed for costs incurred in excess of the cost to replace the facilities with substantially similar facilities. In no event shall the city be obligated for such reimbursement. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

Chapter 16.17
DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
Sections:

16.17.005    Generally.

16.17.010    General lot development requirements.

16.17.020    Blocks.

16.17.030    Easements.

16.17.040    Watercourses.

16.17.050    Monuments.

16.17.060    Setbacks.

16.17.070    Road and streets--Development requirements.

16.17.080    Street grades.

16.17.090    Streets--Side slopes--Right-of-way widths.

16.17.100    Streets--Design specifications.

16.17.005 Generally.
Subdivision design and improvements shall be required as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.17.010 General lot development requirements.
A.    The size and shape of lots shall be such as are proper for the proposed use, locality, and topography in which the subdivision is situated and shall be not less than any applicable zoning ordinance requirements.

B.    Lots without frontage on a street shall not be permitted.

C.    The side lines of lots shall run at right angles to the street upon which the lot faces, as far as practicable.

D.    Lots having double-frontage with depths of less than two hundred feet should be discouraged except where necessitated by topographic or other physical conditions.

E.    Corner lots shall have extra width, sufficient to permit the maintenance of building lines on both front and sides.

F.    All lots shall be suitable for the purposes for which they are intended.

G.    In all cases where sewage is to be handled by individual septic tank drainage, the subdivider shall present a written statement from the country health officer certifying that sewage can be satisfactorily disposed of on each lot by septic tank method.

H.    Where water is proposed to be supplied by individual wells on each lot, and sewage is proposed to be disposed of by individual septic tank method, the subdivider shall present a written statement from the county health department certifying that the functions of water supply and septic tank drainage can be satisfactorily accomplished on each lot. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.17.020 Blocks.
A.    Blocks shall not be longer than one thousand two hundred feet between intersecting street lines, except on major streets and thoroughfares where longer blocks may be required.

B.    Improved walkways (public access easements) not less than ten feet in width may be required to be dedicated through long blocks where necessary to provide access to schools, parks, scenic easements, or lake frontage. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.17.030 Easements.
Easements not less than five feet wide shall be required on each side of all lots and the rear of all lots where necessary for poles, wires, drainage, and water services or other utilities. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.17.040 Watercourses.
Existing natural or proposed relocated watercourses shall be shown as easements, and storm drains shall be placed in easements. The planning commission or city engineer may require watercourses to be placed entirely in underground conduits. Surface drainage facilities shall be adequately fenced or otherwise improved to provide for public safety and an aesthetically pleasing environment. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.17.050 Monuments.
Durable survey monuments approved by the city engineer shall be installed or referenced to the following locations:

A.    Boundary corners;

B.    At intervals of not more than five hundred feet along boundary lines;

C.    At the beginning and end of property line curves or points of intersection, at the discretion of the city engineer;

D.    Lot corners. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.17.060 Setbacks.
Building setbacks shall be required at least as great as the applicable zoning requirement. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.17.070 Road and streets--Development requirements.
A.    Existing streets shall be continued as required by the planning commission in accordance with the Lakeport general plan.

B.    Street stubs shall be required to be extended to adjacent unsubdivided property where, in the opinion of the planning commission, they are necessary.

C.    Streets shall intersect at as near right angles as practicable. Radius of curvature, where the property lines intersect, shall be a minimum of twenty feet.

D.    “T” or three-way intersections are preferable to four-way intersections, but may not be located closer than one hundred fifty feet to any other intersection.

E.    Reserve strips, when required to control access to over certain lot lines or over the ends of street stubs, shall be dedicated to the city.

F.    Alleys may be required to be dedicated and constructed where necessary to control access to thoroughfares and major streets.

G.    Cul-de-sac streets shall have the following limiting dimensions:

1.    Forty feet minimum radius to property line on streets in hillside areas;

2.    Fifty feet minimum radius to property line on all other streets;

3.    Five hundred fifty feet maximum length from the intersecting street line to the center of the cul-de-sac (longer cul-de-sac streets may be allowed when the cul-de-sac serves twelve or less lots or when, or in the opinion of the planning commission, the land contour or subdivision design justifies a greater length).

H.    Names for proposed new streets shall be submitted on the tentative map.

I.    Streets, rights-of-way, and easements shall be offered for dedication and maintenance. The city may, at its option, accept or reject any such offer.

J.    Streets shall conform, as to alignment and width, to the transportation element of the general plan, as required by the planning commission.

K.    Minimum center radius on streets shall be:

1.    Major streets, five hundred feet;

2.    Collector streets, two hundred fifty feet;

3.    Flat and hillside residential, one hundred feet;

4.    Steep hillside residential, seventy-five feet. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.17.080 Street grades.
Grade specifications are as set out in this section:

A.    Maximum permitted, fifteen percent. However, where topography makes it necessary, grades of not more than twenty percent may be allowed for distances not to exceed four hundred feet from point of intersection to point of vertical curve, when approved by city engineer;

B.    Normal minimum permitted, one percent. Absolute minimum permitted, three-tenths percent, when approved by city engineer.

C.    Maximum grade permitted on switchbacks or curves with a radius of less than two hundred feet shall not exceed ten percent. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.17.090 Streets--Side slopes--Right-of-way widths.
A.    Street design shall conform to the city’s engineering standards.

B.    Where side slopes of street embankments extend onto private property, slope easements shall be required.

C.    Minimum right-of-way width for alleys in commercial and industrial areas shall be thirty feet with thirty feet of paving, and in multiple-family areas, right-of-way shall be twenty-four feet and paving width shall be twenty-four feet. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.17.100 Streets--Design specifications.
A.    All rights-of-way shall provide slope easement. Parkways or integral curb and sidewalk are optional on approval of the planning commission.

B.    Right-of-way, construction width, and other street design criteria:

1.    Local streets in flat areas (zero percent to ten percent cross slope) cross-section, any lot:

Right-of-way

50 feet

Improved street

34 feet

Sidewalk, both sides

4 feet

Planting strip, both sides

4 feet

2.    Local streets in hillside areas (ten percent to fifteen percent cross slope) cross-section for lot size eight thousand five hundred square feet and above:

Right-of-way

40--50 feet

Improved street

30--34 feet

Sidewalk, both sides

4 feet

Planting strip, both sides

4 feet

3.    Commercial, industrial, or collector streets in flat areas (zero percent to ten percent cross slope) cross-section, any lot:

Right-of-way

50--60 feet

Improved street

40 feet

Sidewalk, both sides

5 feet

Planting strip, both sides

5 feet

4.    Commercial, industrial, or collector streets in hillside areas (ten percent to fifteen percent cross slope) cross section for lot size eight thousand five hundred square feet and above.

Right-of-way

60 feet

Improved street

34--40 feet

Sidewalk, both sides

5 feet

Planting strip, both sides

5 feet

5.    Arterial streets:

Right-of-way

60--66 feet

Improved street

40--56 feet

Sidewalk, both sides

4--5 feet

Planting strip, both sides

5 feet

(Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

Chapter 16.18
IMPROVEMENTS
Sections:

16.18.010    General.

16.18.020    Required improvements.

16.18.030    Deferred improvement agreements.

16.18.040    Design.

16.18.050    Access.

16.18.060    Improvement plans.

16.18.070    Improvement agreement.

16.18.080    Improvement security.

16.18.090    Construction and inspection.

16.18.100    Completion of improvements.

16.18.110    Acceptance of improvements.

16.18.010 General.
The subdivider shall construct all required improvements, both on-site and off-site, in accordance with the standard engineering specifications and other approved standards as provided by this chapter and by the city council’s resolution(s) establishing such standards.

No final map shall be presented for approval until the subdivider either completes the required improvements or enters into an agreement with the city to do the work. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.18.020 Required improvements.
A.    General. All improvements as may be required as conditions of approval of the tentative map, by city ordinance or resolution, together with, but not limited to, the required improvements set forth below shall be required of all subdivisions. Requirements for construction of on-site and off-site improvements for subdivisions of four or less parcels shall be noted on the parcel map, or waiver of parcel map, or the subdivision improvement agreement recorded prior to or concurrent with the parcel map.

Completion of improvements shall be in accordance with Section 16.18.100.

B.    Right-of-way Improvements. The frontage of each lot shall be improved to its ultimate adopted geometric section, including street structural section, curbs, sidewalks, driveway approaches, and transitions.

C.    Storm Drainage. Stormwater runoff from the subdivision shall be collected and conveyed by an approved storm drain system. The storm drain system shall be designed for ultimate development of the watershed and shall be capable of collecting and conveying runoff generated by a one hundred year flood. The storm drain system shall provide for the protection of abutting and off-site properties that would be adversely affected by any increase in runoff attributable to the development. Off-site storm drain improvements may be required to satisfy this requirement.

D.    Sanitary Sewers. Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be served by an approved sanitary sewer system, in accordance with the provisions of this code.

E.    Water Supply. Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be served by an approved domestic water system, in accordance with the provisions of this code.

F.    Utilities. Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be served by gas, electric, telephone, and cable television facilities.

G.    Underground Utilities. All existing and proposed utilities within the subdivision and along peripheral streets shall be placed underground except those facilities exempted by the public utilities commission regulations. Undergrounding shall be required for overhead lines on either side of peripheral streets.

H.    Fencing. Each parcel or lot within the subdivision that is adjacent to property containing a public facility shall have an approved fence adequate to prevent unauthorized access between the properties. Fencing or sound barriers may be required in areas adjacent to freeways or arterial or collector streets.

I.    Other Improvements. Other improvements including, but not limited to, grading, street lights, fire hydrants, signs, street lines and markings, street trees and landscaping, monuments, bicycle lanes, trails, fences, and smoke detectors, or fees in lieu of any of the foregoing, shall also be required as determined by the city in accordance with this code, the general plan, and city standards and specifications.

J.    Off-site Improvements. If the subdivider is required to construct off-site improvements on land in which neither the subdivider nor the city have sufficient title or interest to allow construction, the city shall, within one hundred twenty days of recording the final map, acquire by negotiation or commence condemnation of the land. If the city fails to meet the one hundred twenty day time limit, the condition for the construction shall be waived. Prior to approval of the final map, the city may require the subdivider to enter into an agreement to complete the off-site improvements at the time the city acquires title or an interest in the land.

The subdivider shall pay the cost of acquiring off-site land or an interest in the land required to construct the off-site improvements. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.18.030 Deferred improvement agreements.
A.    Subdivisions of Four or Less Parcels. Right-of-way street improvements along peripheral streets may be deferred until development of the individual lots. Other required improvements may be deferred by the planning commission after consideration of a request of the subdivider. When other required improvements (except street improvements) are deferred, the subdivider or landowner shall enter into an agreement with the city. The agreement shall provide for the following:

1.    Construction of improvements shall commence within ninety days of the receipt of the notice to proceed from the city and shall be completed within the time specified by Section 16.18.100;

2.    That in the event of a default by the subdivider and/or owner, the city is authorized to cause construction to be done and charge the entire cost and expense to the subdivider and/or owner, including interest from the date of notice of such cost and expense until paid;

3.    That the agreement shall be recorded with the county recorder at the expense of the subdivider and/or owner and shall constitute notice to all successors and assignees of title to the real property of the obligations set forth therein, and shall also constitute a lien in such amount necessary to fully reimburse the city, including interest as provided above, subject to foreclosure in the event of a default in payment;

4.    That in event of litigation occasioned by any default of the subdivider and/or owner, the subdivider and/or owner agree to pay all costs involved, including reasonable attorney’s fees, and that the same shall become a part of the lien against the real property;

5.    That the terms “subdivider” and “owner” shall include, respectively, not only the subdivider and the present owner of the real property but also heirs, successors, executors, administrators and assignees thereof, it being the intent of the parties that the obligations undertaken shall run with the real property and constitute a lien against it;

6.    Any other improvement security as required by Section 16.18.080;

7.    Any other provisions required by the city as reasonably necessary to effectuate the purposes and provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title.

The agreement shall not relieve the subdivider or owner from any other specific requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, this code, or law. The construction of deferred improvements shall conform to the provisions of this title and all applicable chapters of this title in effect at the time of construction.

B.    Remainders. Where a remainder is made part of a final or parcel map, the subdivider may enter into an agreement with the city to construct improvements within the remainder at some future date and prior to the issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for the development of a remainder. The improvements shall be at the subdivider’s expense. In the absence of such an agreement, the city may require fulfillment of the construction requirements within a reasonable time following approval of the final or parcel map and prior to the issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for the development of the remainder, upon a finding that fulfillment of the construction requirements is necessary for reasons of:

1.    The public’s health and safety; or

2.    The required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.18.040 Design.
A.    General. The design and layout of all required improvements, both on-site and off-site, private and public, shall conform to generally accepted engineering standards, standard engineering specifications, the Subdivision Map Act, and applicable provisions of this title.

B.    Energy Conservation. The design of a subdivision for which a tentative map is required shall provide, to the extent feasible, for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the subdivision.

Examples of passive or natural heating opportunities in subdivision design include design of lot size and configuration to permit orientation of a structure in an east-west alignment for southern exposure and to permit orientation of a structure to take advantage of shade or prevailing breezes.

In providing for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the design of a subdivision, consideration shall be given to local climate, contour, configuration of the parcel to be divided, and other design and improvement requirements. The provision shall not result in reducing allowable densities, or the percentage of a lot which may be occupied by a building or structure under applicable planning and zoning in force at the time the tentative map is filed.

The requirements of this subsection do not apply to condominium projects which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing building when no new structures are added.

For the purpose of this subsection, “feasible” means capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social, and technological factors.

C.    Cable Television Service. The design of a subdivision for which a tentative map or parcel map is required shall provide one or more appropriate cable television systems an opportunity to construct, install, and maintain, on land identified on the map as dedicated or to be dedicated to public utility use, any equipment necessary to extend cable television services to each residential parcel in the subdivision.

For the purpose of this subsection, “appropriate cable television systems” means those franchised or licensed to serve the geographical area in which the subdivision is located.

This subsection shall not apply to the conversion of existing dwelling units to condominiums, community apartments, or stock cooperatives. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.18.050 Access.
All proposed lots shall have access to a public street improved to the standards set forth in this section. Private streets shall not normally be permitted. However, if the city council, in the case of subdivision of five or more parcels, or the planning commission, in the case of four or less parcels, determines that the most logical development of the land requires that lots be created with access to private streets, such a development may be approved. The subdivider shall submit a development plan showing the alignment, width, grade, and material specifications of any proposed private street, the topography and means of access to each lot, and the drainage, sewer and water service, and fire protection for the lots served by such private street. The private street shall be constructed in accordance with standard engineering specifications of the city as approved by the city engineer. Construction of the private street shall be completed prior to the completion of the construction and/or occupancy of the lots. The subdivider shall be required to provide a feasible method for the maintenance of such private streets, which method shall be subject to the approval of the Lakeport city council.

“Flag” lots shall be discouraged. However, if flag lots are approved as part of the subdivision, the requirements including the improvements to the stem of the “flag” lots, shall be as described for private streets in the preceding paragraph.

Reserve strips, or non-access at the end of streets or at the boundaries of subdivisions, shall be dedicated unconditionally to the city when required by the city. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.18.060 Improvement plans.
A.    General. Improvement plans shall be prepared under the direction of and signed by a registered civil engineer licensed by the state of California.

Improvement plans shall include, but shall not be limited to, all improvements required pursuant to Section 16.18.020.

B.    Form. Plans, profiles, and details shall be legibly drawn, printed or reproduced on twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch sheets. A border shall be made on each sheet providing one-half inch at top, bottom, and right side and one and one-half inches on the left side.

A suitable title block shall be placed in the lower right corner or along the right edge and provide adequate space for approval by the city engineer and for approval of plan revisions.

Plans and profiles shall be drawn to the scale of one inch equals forty feet or larger unless approved otherwise by the city engineer. Details shall be drawn to such scale that clearly shows the facility being constructed. The scales for various portions of the plans shall be shown on each sheet.

A vicinity map shall be shown on the first sheet of all sets of plans.

A north arrow shall be shown on each sheet when applicable.

Plans shall be laid out to orient north to the top or right edge of the sheet unless approved otherwise by the city engineer.

All lettering shall be one-eighth-inch minimum.

If the plans include three or more sheets, a cover sheet showing the streets, lots, easements, storm drains, index, and vicinity map shall be included.

The form of all plans shall conform to additional requirements as may be established by the city engineer. The final form of all plans shall be approved by the city engineer.

C.    Contents. The improvement plans shall show complete plans, profiles, and details for all required improvements to be constructed, both public and private, including common areas.

Reference may be made to city of Lakeport or state standard plans in lieu of duplicating the drawings.

D.    Supplementary Plans and Calculations. Hydrology, hydraulic plans and calculations, bond or other security estimates, and any structural calculations as may be required, shall be submitted with the improvement plans to the city engineer. All calculations shall be legible, systematic, and signed and dated by a registered civil engineer licensed by the state of California and in a form approved by the city engineer.

E.    Review by the City Engineer. The subdivider shall submit the improvement plans and all computations to the city engineer for review. Upon completion of the review, one set of the preliminary plans, with any required revisions indicated, will be returned to the subdivider.

F.    Approval by the City Engineer. After completing any required revisions, the subdivider shall transmit the originals of the improvement plans to the city engineer for signature.

Upon finding that any required revisions have been made and that the plans conform to all applicable city ordinances and plans, design requirements and conditions of approval of the tentative map, the city engineer shall sign and date the plans. The city engineer may make a reproducible set of the plans for use by the city. The originals will be returned to the subdivider.

Approval of the improvement plans shall not be construed as approval of the gas, electric, telephone, and cable television service construction plans.

Approval by the city engineer shall in no way relieve the subdivider or the subdivider’s engineer from responsibility for the design of the improvements and for any deficiencies resulting from the design or from any required conditions of approval of the tentative map.

G.    Revision to Approved Plans.

1.    By Subdivider. Requests by the subdivider for revisions to the approved improvement plans appearing necessary or desirable during construction shall be submitted in writing to the city engineer or authorized representative and shall be accompanied by revised drawings showing the proposed revision. If the revision is acceptable to the city engineer and consistent with the tentative map, the originals shall be submitted to the city engineer’s office for initialing. The originals shall be returned to the subdivider and the revised plans shall be immediately transmitted to the city engineer. Construction of any proposed revision will not be permitted to commence until revised plans have been received and approved by the city engineer.

2.    By City Engineer. When revisions are deemed necessary by the city engineer to protect the public health and safety, or as field conditions may require, a request in writing shall be made to the subdivider. The subdivider shall revise the plans and transmit the originals to the city engineer for initialing within the time specified by the city engineer.

Upon receipt of the initialized originals, the subdivider shall immediately transmit revised drawings to the city engineer. Construction of all or any portion of the improvements may be stopped by the city engineer until revised drawings have been submitted.

The subdivider may appeal revisions required by the city engineer to the city council by filing an appeal in writing within fifteen days following receipt of the request to revise the plans.

3.    Plan Checking and Inspection Costs for Revisions. Costs incurred by the city for the checking of plans or calculations or inspection as a result of revisions to the approved plans shall be borne by the subdivider at actual cost. A deposit, when required, shall be submitted with the revised plans and applied toward the actual cost. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.18.070 Improvement agreement.
The improvement agreement shall be prepared by the city engineer and approved as to form by the city attorney. The agreement shall provide for:

A.    Construction of all improvements required pursuant to Section 16.18.020, including any required off-site improvements, according to the approved plans and specifications on file with the city engineer;

B.    Completion of improvements within the time specified by Section 16.18.100;

C.    Right of the city to modify plans and specifications and to require the subdivider to pay for modifications;

D.    Warranty by the subdivider that construction will not adversely affect any portion of adjacent properties;

E.    Payment of inspection fees in accordance with the city’s resolution;

F.    Payment of in-lieu fees for undergrounding of utilities on peripheral streets;

G.    Improvement security as required by Section 16.18.080;

H.    Maintenance and repair of any defects or failures and their causes;

I.    Release and indemnification of the city from all liability incurred in connection with the development and payment of all reasonable attorneys’ fees that the city may incur because of any legal action or other proceeding arising from the development,

J.    Any other deposits, reimbursements, fees, or conditions as required by city ordinance or resolution and as may be required by the city engineer;

K.    Any other provisions required by the city as reasonably necessary to effectuate the purposes and provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.18.080 Improvement security.
A.    General. Any improvement agreement, contract, or act required or authorized by the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter, for which security is required, shall be secured in accordance with Section 66499 et seq., of the Subdivision Map Act and as provided in subsections B--G of this section.

No final map or parcel map shall be signed by the city engineer or recorded until all improvement securities required by this section have been received and approved.

B.    Form of Security. The form of security shall be one or the combination of the following at the option and subject to the approval of the city:

1.    Bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties. The form of the bond or bonds shall be in accordance with Sections 66499.1, 66499.2, 66499.3 and 66499.4 of the Subdivision Map Act.

2.    A deposit, either with the city or a responsible escrow agent or trust company, at the option of the city, of money or negotiable bonds of the kind approved for securing deposits of public moneys.

3.    An instrument of credit or letter of credit from one or more financial institutions subject to regulation by the state or federal government and pledging that the funds necessary to carry out the act or agreement are on deposit and guaranteed for payment.

4.    Any other form of security as provided in Section 66499 of the Subdivision Map Act.

C.    Amount of Security. A performance bond or other security in the amount of one hundred percent of the total estimated construction cost to guarantee the construction or installation of all improvements shall be required of all subdivisions. An additional amount of fifty percent of the estimated construction cost shall be required to guarantee payment to subdivider’s contractor, subcontractor, and to persons furnishing labor, materials, or equipment for the construction or installation of improvements. As part of the obligation guaranteed by the security, and in addition to the full amount of the security, there shall be included costs and reasonable expenses and fees, including attorneys’ fees, incurred by the City in enforcing the obligations secured.

1.    Not less than five percent but not more than ten percent of the total construction cost for contingencies;

2.    Increase for projected inflation computed to the estimated midpoint of construction;

3.    All utility installation costs or a certification acceptable to the city engineer from the utility company that adequate security has been deposited to ensure installation.

D.    Cash Bond. The subdivider shall deposit with the city not less than one thousand dollars cash for subdivisions of four or less parcels, and three thousand for other subdivisions, or an additional amount as required by the city engineer, not to exceed one percent of the total estimated construction cost. The deposit may be used at the discretion of the city to correct deficiencies and conditions caused by the subdivides contractor, or subcontractors that may arise during or after the construction of the subdivision. Any unspent amount will be returned to the subdivider at the time all bonds and other security are released.

E.    Warranty Security. Upon acceptance of the subdivision improvements by the city, the subdivider shall provide security in the amount as required by the city engineer to guarantee the improvements against any defective work or labor done or defective materials used in the performance of the improvements throughout the warranty period which shall be the period of one year following completion and shall not be less than ten percent of the cost of the construction of the improvements, including the cash bond which shall be retained for the one year warranty period.

F.    Reduction in Performance Security. The city engineer may authorize in writing the release of a portion of the security in conjunction with the acceptance of the satisfactory completion of a part of the improvements as the work progresses upon application by the subdivider, but in no case shall the security by reduced to less than ten percent of the total improvement security given for faithful performance. The amount of reduction of the security shall be determined by the city engineer; however, in no event shall the city engineer authorize a release of the improvement security which would reduce security to an amount below that required to guarantee the completion of the improvements and any other obligation imposed by the Subdivision Map Act, this title, or the improvement agreement.

G.    Release of Improvement Security.

1.    Performance Security. The performance security shall be released only upon acceptance of the improvements by the city and when an approved warranty security has been filed with the city engineer. If a warranty security is not submitted, performance security shall be released twelve months after acceptance of improvements and correction of all warranty deficiencies.

2.    Material and Labor Security. Security given to secure payment to the contractor, subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials, or equipment may, six months after the completion and acceptance of the improvements by the city, be reduced to an amount equal to the amount of all claims therefore filed and of which notice has been given to the city council. The balance of the security shall be released upon the settlement of all claims and obligations for which the security was given.

3.    Warranty Security. The warranty security shall be released upon satisfactory completion of the warranty period, provided:

a.    All deficiencies appearing on the warranty deficiency list for the subdivision have been corrected;

b.    Not less than twelve months have elapsed since the acceptance of the improvements by the city. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.18.090 Construction and inspection.
The construction methods and materials for all improvements shall conform to the standard engineering specifications and all other standard plans and specifications of the city.

Construction shall not commence until all required improvement plans have been approved by the city engineer. All improvements are subject to inspection by the city engineer or authorized personnel in accordance with the city’s approved specifications. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.18.100 Completion of improvements.
A.    Subdivisions of Five or More Parcels. The improvements for subdivisions of five or more parcels shall be completed by the subdivider within twelve months, or such later time as approved by the city engineer, not to exceed thirty-six months, from the recording of the final map unless an extension is granted by the city council.

Should the subdivider fail to complete the improvements within the specified time, the city may, by resolution of the city council and at its option, cause any or all uncompleted improvements to be completed, and the parties executing the security or securities shall be firmly bound for the payment of all necessary costs.

B.    Subdivisions of Four or Less Parcels. The completion of right-of-way or street improvements for subdivisions of four or less parcels shall not be required until a permit or other grant of approval for the development of any parcel within the subdivision is applied for. The completion of the improvements may be required by a specific date by the city when the completion of the improvements are found to be necessary for public health or safety or for the orderly development of the surrounding area. This finding shall be made by the planning commission. The specified date, when required, shall be stated in the subdivision improvement agreement. Improvements shall be completed prior to final building inspection or occupancy of any unit within the subdivision.

C.    Extensions. The completion date may be extended by the city council, for subdivision of five or more parcels, or by the planning commission, for subdivision of four or less parcels, upon written request by the subdivider and the submittal of adequate evidence to justify the extension. The request shall be made not less than thirty days prior to expiration of the subdivision improvement agreement.

The subdivider shall enter into a subdivision improvement agreement extension with the city. For subdivisions of five or more parcels, the agreement shall be prepared by the city engineer, approved as to form by the city attorney, executed by the subdivider, and surety and transmitted to the city council for its consideration. If approved by the city council, the city clerk shall execute the agreement on behalf of the city.

In consideration of a subdivision improvement agreement extension, the following may be required:

1.    Revision of improvement plans to provide for current design and construction standards when required by the city engineer;

2.    Revised improvement construction estimates to reflect current improvement costs as approved by the city engineer;

3.    Increase of improvement securities in accordance with revised construction estimates;

4.    Inspection fees may be increased to reflect current construction costs but shall not be subject to any decrease or refund.

The city council or planning commission, as the case may be, may impose additional requirements as recommended by the city engineer or as it may deem necessary as a condition to approving any time extension for the completion of improvements.

The costs incurred by the city in processing the agreement shall be paid by the subdivider at actual cost plus twenty-five percent of such cost for overhead expenses

D.    As-Built Plans. Upon completion of the improvements, the subdivider shall submit to the city engineer a reproducible set of as-built improvement plans. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.18.110 Acceptance of improvements.
A.    General. With respect to all subdivisions, when all improvement deficiencies have been corrected and as-built improvement plans submitted, the completed subdivision improvements shall be considered by the city engineer for acceptance.

Acceptance of the improvements shall imply only that the improvements have been completed satisfactory and that public improvements have been accepted for public use.

B.    Acceptance. If the subdivision improvements have been accepted by the city engineer and public improvements have been dedicated on the final map or parcel map, the city clerk shall file an acceptance of public improvement with the county recorder.

C.    Acceptance of a Portion of the Improvements. When requested by the subdivider in writing, the city engineer may consider acceptance of a portion of the improvements. Such improvements will be accepted by the city engineer only if the city engineer finds that it is in the publics interest to do so and such improvements are for the use of the general public.

Acceptance of a portion of the improvements shall not relieve the subdivider from any other requirements imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

Chapter 16.20
REVERSIONS TO ACREAGE
Sections:

16.20.010    General.

16.20.020    Initiation of proceedings.

16.20.030    Contents of petition.

16.20.040    Submittal of petition to the city engineer.

16.20.050    City council approval.

16.20.060    Filing with county recorder.

16.20.010 General.
Subdivided property may be reverted to acreage pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter. This chapter shall apply to final maps and parcel maps.

Subdivisions may also be merged and resubdivided without reverting to acreage pursuant to Section 66499.20 of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.20.020 Initiation of proceedings.
A.    By Owners. Proceedings to revert subdivided property to acreage may be initiated by petition of all the owners of record of the property. The petition shall be in a form prescribed by the community development department. The petition shall contain the information required by Section 16.20.030 and any other information as required.

B.    By City Council. The city council, at the request of any person or on its own motion may, by resolution, initiate proceedings to revert property to acreage. The city council shall direct the department to obtain the necessary information to initiate and conduct the proceedings. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.20.030 Contents of petition.
The petition shall contain, but not be limited to, the following:

A.    Evidence of title to the real property;

B.    Evidence of the consent of all of the owners of an interest in the property;

C.    Evidence that none of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for record, or within the time limit allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later;

D.    Evidence that no lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within five years from the date such final or parcel map was filed for record;

E.    A final or parcel map in the form, and with the contents, prescribed by Sections 16.10.040 and 16.10.050 or Section 16.12.020, as the case may be, which delineates dedications which will not be vacated and dedications required as a condition of the reversion. Final or parcel maps shall be conspicuously designated with the title, “The Purpose of this map is a Reversion to Acreage;”

F.    Fees and/or deposits in accordance with Section 16.02.070. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.20.040 Submittal of petition to the city engineer.
The final or parcel map for the reversion, together with all other data as required by this article, shall be submitted to the city engineer for review.

Upon finding that the petition meets with all the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter, the community development director shall submit the final or parcel map, together with a report and recommendations of approval or conditional approval of the reversion to acreage, to the city council for its consideration. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.20.050 City council approval.
A public hearing shall be held by the city council on all proposed reversions to acreage. Notice of the public hearing shall be given by the city engineer as provided in Section 16.08.070(A). The community development director may give such other notice that the city engineer deems necessary or advisable.

The city council may approve a reversion to acreage only if it finds and records by resolution that:

A.    Dedications or offers of dedication vacated or abandoned by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public purposes; and

B.    Either:

1.    All owners of an interest in the real property within the subdivision have consented to reversion, or

2.    None of the improvements required to be made have been made within years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completions of the improvements, whichever is later, or

3.    No lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within five years from the date such map was filed for record.

The city council may require as conditions of the reversion:

a.    The owners dedicate or offer to dedicate streets, public rights-of-way, or easements;

b.    The retention of all or a portion of previously paid subdivision fees, deposits, or improvement securities if the same are necessary to accomplish any of the purposes or provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter;

c.    Such other conditions of reversion as are necessary to accomplish the purposes or provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter or necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.20.060 Filing with the county recorder.
Upon approval of the reversion to acreage, the city clerk shall transmit the final or parcel map, together with the city council resolution approving the reversion, to the county recorder for recordation. Reversion shall be effective upon the final map being filed for record by the county recorder. Upon filing, all dedications and offers of dedication not shown on the final or parcel map for reversion shall be of no further force and effect. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

Chapter 16.22
PARCEL MERGERS
Sections:

16.22.010    Mergers required.

16.22.020    Notice of intention to determine status.

16.22.030    Hearing on determination of status.

16.22.040    Determination of merger.

16.22.050    Appeals and planning commission review.

16.22.060    Determination when no hearing is requested.

16.22.070    Request to merge by property owner.

16.22.010 Mergers required.
Two or more contiguous parcels or units held by the same owner may be considered as merged if one of the parcels or units does not conform to the minimum parcel or lot size required by this title, and if all of the following requirements are satisfied:

A.    At least one of the affected parcels is undeveloped by any structure for which a building permit was issued, or for which a building permit was not required at the time of construction, or is developed only with an accessory structure or accessory structures, or is developed with a single structure, other than an accessory structure, that is also partially sited on a contiguous parcel or unit;

B.    With respect to any affected parcel, one or more of the following conditions exists:

1.    Comprises less than six thousand square feet in area at the time of the determination of merger,

2.    Was not created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation,

3.    Does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply,

4.    Does not meet slope stability standards,

5.    Has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular safety equipment and maneuverability,

6.    Its development would create health or safety hazards,

7.    Is inconsistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards;

C.    For purposes of determining whether contiguous parcels are held by the same owner, ownership shall be determined as of the date that the notice of intention to determine status is recorded pursuant to this chapter;

D.    Subsection B shall not apply if any of the conditions stated in Section 66451.11(b)(A), (B), (C) or (D) of the Subdivision Map Act exist. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.22.020 Notice of intention to determine status.
Prior to initiating a merger, the department shall mail, by certified mail, a notice of intention to determine status to the current record owner of the property. The notice shall state that the affected parcels may be merged pursuant to this article and that, within thirty days from the date the notice of intention was recorded, the owner may request a hearing before the planning commission to present evidence that the property does not meet the criteria for merger. The notice of intention to determine status shall be filed for record with the county recorder by the department on the same day that the notice is mailed to the property owner. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.22.030 Hearing on determination of status.
The owner of the affected property may file a written request for a hearing with the department within thirty days after recording of the notice of intention to determine status. Upon receipt of the request, the department shall set a time, date, and place for a hearing before the planning commission and notify the owner by certified mail. The hearing shall be conducted within sixty days following the receipt of the owner’s request, or may be postponed or continued by mutual consent of the planning commission and the property owner.

At the hearing, the property owner shall be given the opportunity to present any evidence that the affected property does not meet the requirements for merger specified in this chapter.

At the conclusion of the hearing, the planning commission shall determine whether the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged and shall notify the owner of the determination. The notice of determination shall be mailed to the property owner by the department within five days of the date of, the hearing. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.22.040 Determination of merger.
If the planning commission makes a determination that the parcels are to be merged, a notice of merger shall be filed for record with the county recorder by the department within thirty days of the conclusion of the hearing, unless the decision has been appealed pursuant to Section 16.22.050. The notice of merger shall specify the name of the record owner and a description of the property. The notice of merger under this chapter shall be in a form approved by the city engineer and shall be approved by the city engineer prior to being filed for record with the county recorder.

If the planning commission makes a determination that the parcels shall not be merged, a release of the notice of intention to determine status shall be filed for record with the county recorder by the department within thirty days after the planning commission determination, and a clearance letter shall be mailed to the owner by the department. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.22.050 Appeals and planning commission review.
The determination of the planning commission shall be appealed first to the city council provided that the appeal shall be filed within fifteen days of the date of the notice of determination and the city council shall hear the appeal within sixty days from the date of appeal. If after hearing, the city council grants the appeal and determines that the affected property has not been merged pursuant to this chapter, the department shall, within thirty days after the city council determination, file for record with the county recorder a release of the notice of intention to determine status and mail a clearance letter to the owner. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.22.060 Determination when no hearing is requested.
If the owner does not file a request for a hearing within thirty days after the recording of the notice of intention to determine status, the planning commission may, at any time thereafter, make a determination that the parcels are or are not to be merged. If they are to be merged, a notice of merger shall be filed for record with the county recorder by the department within ninety days after the mailing of the notice of intention to determine status pursuant to Section 16.22.020. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.22.070 Request to merge by property owner.
If the merger of contiguous parcels or units is initiated by the record owner, the owner may waive in writing the right to a hearing before the planning commission and to all notices required by this chapter. Upon receipt of such waiver, the department shall simultaneously file for record with the county recorder a notice of intention to determine status, the waiver of right of hearing and notice, and a notice of merger. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

Chapter 16.23
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT
Sections:

16.23.010    General provisions.

16.23.020    Application procedure.

16.23.030    Procedure by community development department.

16.23.040    Requirements/conditions.

16.23.050    Recordation of lot line adjustment.

16.23.060    Appeals.

16.23.010 General provisions.
A lot line adjustment between two or more existing adjacent parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby created, may be permitted without a subdivision or parcel map provided the lot line adjustment is approved by the city. The city shall limit its review and approval to a determination of whether or not the parcels resulting from the lot line adjustment will conform to local zoning and building ordinances. The city shall not impose conditions or exactions on its approval of a lot line adjustment except to conform to local zoning and building ordinances, to require the prepayment of real property taxes prior to the approval of the lot line adjustment, or to facilitate the relocation of existing utilities, infrastructure, or easements. No tentative map, parcel map, or final map shall be required as a condition to the approval of a lot line adjustment. The lot line adjustment shall be reflected in deeds which shall be recorded. No record of survey shall be required for a lot line adjustment unless required by Section 8762 of the Business and Professions Code. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.23.020 Application procedure.
An applicant proposing a lot line adjustment shall submit an application to the city community development department with the following:

A.    An application form and other pertinent information;

B.    A list of property owners for all the parcels involved;

C.    A general map showing:

1.    All existing and proposed property lines,

2.    The land area(s) to be added to or transferred from each parcel,

3.    The location of all existing structures, all utilities on the property, all public utility easements, all other easements, all public and private streets, roads, and driveways.

The map does not need to be professionally prepared, however, the map must be to scale, neat, clear, accurate, and complete in order to be accepted for review. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.23.030 Procedure by community development department.
Upon receipt of the lot line adjustment application, the community development department shall determine completeness, set a planning commission agenda date, and notice the applicant. The community development department shall prepare a report as to the proposal’s conformance with these provisions. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.23.040 Requirements/conditions.
The lot line adjustment shall conform to the city’s zoning and building code ordinances except where one or more adjacent recorded legal lots are of less area than required by the municipal code. Said adjustments may be considered for approval so long as any reduction in lot size or increase in lot size will not result in any additional parcels.

No tentative map, parcel map, or final map as designated by the California Subdivision Map Act shall be required. The city planning commission may impose conditions on the lot line adjustments relating to conformance with zoning and building codes, payment of property taxes, and relocation of utilities, infrastructure, and easements. (Ord. 830 §1(part), 2004: Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.23.050 Recordation of lot line adjustments.
Lot line adjustments approved pursuant to this chapter shall be reflected in deeds and recorded within a one-year time period from the date of approval. Consents of lienholders shall be recorded with the deeds. The deeds shall be submitted to the city community development department for review and approval prior to being recorded. The deeds shall be accompanied by a lot book guarantee or other title report which identifies lienholders for each parcel. A consent of lienholder shall be provided for the lot line adjustment.

The following deeds/legal descriptions shall be provided to the city for review and approval:

A.    The description of the specific land area(s) to be granted;

B.    The revised description of the parcel(s) to which the adjusted land area has been granted; and

C.    The revised description of the parcel(s) from which the specific land area has been transferred.

All signatures on all deeds and on all consent of lienholder forms shall be notarized. All legal descriptions accompanying deeds to be recorded shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or a licensed land surveyor.

The lot line adjustment shall be deemed completed only after recordation of deeds. If the deeds are not recorded after one year, the approval shall expire and become null and void.

Lot line adjustments involving parcels in different ownership shall convey the requisite interests in the affected parcels to complete the adjustment. If the lot line adjustment affects parcels under one ownership, there may not be a requirement to adjust ownership or security interest. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.23.060 Appeals.
Any decision rendered by the planning commission regarding an approval or denial of a lot line adjustment may be appealed to the city council in accordance with the provisions of the municipal code within five days of the date of the written decision. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

Chapter 16.24
CORRECTION AND AMENDMENT OF MAPS
Sections:

16.24.010    Requirements.

16.24.020    Forms and contents.

16.24.030    Submittal and approval by city engineer.

16.24.040    Filing with the county recorder.

16.24.010 Requirements.
After a final or parcel map is filed in the office of the county recorder, it may by amended by a certificate of correction or an amending map:

A.    To correct an error in any course or distance shown thereon;

B.    To show any course or distance that was omitted therefrom;

C.    To correct an error in the description of the real property shown on the map;

D.    To indicate monuments set after the death, disability, or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor charged with responsibilities for setting monuments;

E.    To show the proper location of any monument which has been changed in location, or character, or originally was shown at the wrong location or incorrectly as to its character;

F.    To correct any other type of map error or omission as approved by the city engineer, which does not affect any property right. Errors and omissions may include, but are not limited to, lot numbers, acreage, street names, and identification of adjacent record maps. Error does not include changes in courses or distances from which an error is not ascertainable from the data shown on the final or parcel map;

G.    To make modifications when there are changes which make any or all conditions of the map no longer appropriate or necessary and that the modifications do not impose any additional burden on the present fee owner of the property, and if the modifications do not alter any right, title, or interest in the real property reflected on the recorded map. The modification shall be set for public hearing by the planning commission in accordance with Section 16.08.070 or Section 16.12.100 of this title. The planning commission shall confine the hearing to consideration of, and action on, the proposed modification. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.24.020 Form and contents.
The amending map or certificate of correction shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The form and contents of the amending map shall conform to the requirements of Sections 16.10.040 and 16.10.050 if a final map, and Section 16.12.120(B) if a parcel map. The certificate of correction shall set forth in detail the corrections made and show the names of the present fee owners of the property affected by the correction. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.24.030 Submittal and approval by city engineer.
The amending map or certificate of correction, complete as to final form, shall be submitted to the city engineer for review and approval.

The city engineer shall examine the amending map or certificate of correction and if the only changes made are those set forth in Section 16.24.010, this fact shall be certified by the city engineer on the amending map or certificate of correction. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.24.040 Filing with the county recorder.
The amending map or certificate of correction certified by the city engineer shall be filed in the office of the county recorder. Upon such filing, the county recorder shall index the names of the fee owners and the appropriate subdivision designation shown on the amending map or certificate of correction in the general index and map index, respectively. Thereupon, the original map shall be deemed to have been conclusively so corrected, and thereafter shall impart constructive notice of all such corrections in the same manner as though set forth upon the original map. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

Chapter 16.25
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
Sections:

16.25.010    General provisions.

16.25.020    Application process.

16.25.030    Other requirements.

16.25.010 General provisions.
Any person owning real property or purchasing real property pursuant to a contract of sale may request that the community development department determine whether the real property complies with the provisions of the California Subdivision Map Act and the Lakeport subdivision ordinance (Municipal Code). The city may require that the owner of property obtain a certificate of compliance (COC) or conditional certificate of compliance (CCOC) under certain situations set forth in the California Government Code. A recorded final subdivision map or parcel map automatically constitutes a certificate of compliance. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.25.020 Application process.
The owner or purchaser of real property shall file a written request with the Lakeport community development department for a certificate of compliance (COC). Upon receipt of the COC application, the community development department in consultation with the Lakeport city attorney shall review the application for compliance with the Map Act and city subdivision ordinance. If the city determines that the land (real property) does comply, a COC identifying the property and stating that it is in accordance with the Map Act and local subdivision ordinance shall be recorded with the county recorder.

If the community development department in consultation with the city attorney determines that the land (real property) does not comply with the provisions of the Map Act and city subdivision ordinance, a conditional certificate of compliance (CCOC) shall be recorded with the county recorder.

The city may, depending on when the person seeking the certificate acquired the property, attach conditions to the CCOC. A CCOC shall serve as notice to the property owner or potential property owner who has applied for the certificate, a grantee of the property, or any subsequent transferee or assignee of the property, that the fulfillment and implementation of such condition(s) shall be required prior to the subsequent issuance of a permit, grant of approval, or entitlement for development of the property. Compliance with said conditions shall not be required until such time as a permit or other grant of approval or entitlement for development of the property is issued by the city. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.25.030 Other requirements.
The city of Lakeport may require the applicant for a COC or CCOC to submit a title report tracing the chain of title and provide other record information in an effort to determine the level of compliance with the California Subdivision Map Act and city subdivision ordinance. Upon determination of the COC or CCOC, the owner or purchaser of the subject property will be required to generate a legal description and file with the COC or CCOC.

Should a decision be unable to be reached by the community development director/city attorney, the matter should be referred to the Lakeport planning commission for determination. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

Chapter 16.26
ENFORCEMENT
Sections:

16.26.010    Prohibition.

16.26.020    Remedies.

16.26.030    Notice of violation.

16.26.040    Violation as a misdemeanor.

16.26.010 Prohibition.
A.    No person shall sell, lease, or finance any parcel or parcels of real property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease, or financing thereon, except for model homes, or allow occupancy thereof, for which a final map is required by the Subdivision Map Act or this title, until such a map, in full compliance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this code, and has been filed for record by the county recorder.

B.    No person shall sell, lease, or finance any parcel or parcels of real property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease, or financing thereon, except for model homes, or allow occupancy thereof, for which a parcel map is required by the Subdivision Map Act or this title, until such a map, in full compliance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title has been filed for record by the county recorder.

C.    Conveyance of any part of a division of real property for which a final or parcel map is required by the Subdivision Map Act or this title shall not be made by parcel or block number, letter or other designation, unless and until such map has been filed for record by the county recorder.

D.    This section does not apply to any parcel or parcels of a subdivision offered for sale or lease, contracted for sale or lease, or sold or leased in compliance with or exempt from any law, including this title, regulating the design and improvement of subdivisions in effect at the time the subdivision was established.

E.    Nothing contained in subsections A and B of this section shall be deemed to prohibit an offer or contract to sell, lease, or finance real property or to construct improvements thereon where such sale, lease, or financing, or the commencement of such construction, is expressly conditioned upon the approval and filing of a final map or parcel map, as required under the Subdivision Map Act or this title. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.26.020 Remedies.
A.    Any deed of conveyance, sale, or contract to sell real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title or is voidable at the sole option of the grantee, buyer, or person contracting to purchase, any heirs, personal representatives, or trustees in insolvency or bankruptcy thereof, within one year after the date of discovery of such violation. The deed of conveyance, sale, or contract to sell is binding upon any successor in interest of the grantee, buyer, or person contracting to purchase, other than those above enumerated, and upon the grantor, vendor, or person contracting to sell, or his or her assignee, heir, or devisee.

B.    Any grantee, or successor in interest thereof, of real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of this title or the Subdivision Map Act may, within one year of the date of discovery of such violation, bring an action in the Superior Court to recover any damages suffered by reason of such division of property. The action may be brought against the person who so divided the property and against any successors in interest who have actual or constructive knowledge of such division of property.

C.    The provisions of this section shall not apply to the conveyance of any parcel of real property identified in a certificate of compliance filed pursuant to Chapter 16.25 or identified in a recorded final map or parcel map, from and after the date of recording.

The provisions of this section shall not limit or affect in any way the rights of a grantee or successor in interest under any other provision of law.

D.    This section does not bar any legal, equitable, or summary remedy to which the city or other public agency, or any person, firm, or corporation may otherwise by entitled, and the city or other public agency, or such person, firm, or corporation may file a suit in the superior court to restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed subdivision of sale, lease, or financing in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or this title.

E.    The city shall not issue a permit or grant any approval necessary to develop any real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title if it finds that development of such real property is contrary to the public health or the public safety. The authority to deny such a permit or approval shall apply whether the applicant therefore was the owner of record at the time of such violation or whether the applicant therefore is either the current owner of record or a vendor thereof with, or without, actual or constructive knowledge of the violation at the time of the acquisition of an interest in such real property.

If the city issues a permit or grants approval for the development of any real property illegally subdivided, the city may impose those additional conditions which would have been applicable to the division of the property at the time the current owner of record acquired the property. If the property has the same owner of record as at the time of the initial violation, the city may impose conditions applicable to a current division of the property. If a conditional certificate of compliance has been filed for record in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16.25, only those conditions stipulated in that certificate shall be applicable. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.26.030 Notice of violation.
If the department has knowledge that real property has been divided in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title, a notice of intention to record a notice of violation shall be mailed by the department by certified mail to the current owner of record. The notice shall describe the violation and state that the owner will be given the opportunity to present evidence. The notice shall also contain an explanation as to why the subject parcel is not lawful under Section 66412.6(A) or (B) of the Subdivision Map Act. The notice shall specify the date, time, and place for a meeting at which the owner may present evidence to the planning commission why a notice of violation should not be recorded.

The meeting shall be held no sooner than thirty days and no later than sixty days from the date of mailing of the notice of intention to record a notice of violation.

If, within fifteen days of receipt of the notice, the owner fails to file with the department a written objection to recording the notice of violation, the department shall file the notice of violation for recording with the county recorder. If, after the owner has presented evidence, the planning commission determines that there has been no violation, the department shall mail a clearance letter to the then current owner of record. If, however, after the owner has presented evidence, the planning commission determines that the property has in fact been illegally divided, the department shall record the notice of violation for recording with the county recorder.

The notice of violation, when recorded, shall be deemed to be constructive notice of the violation to all successors in interest in such property. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

16.26.040 Violation as a misdemeanor.
In addition to the remedies and procedures provided in this chapter, any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the regulatory requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding six months or by fine not exceeding one thousand dollars or by both.

Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by such person and shall be punishable accordingly. (Ord. 808 (part), 2001)

Title 17
LAND USE, ZONING AND SIGNS
Chapters:

17.01    General Provisions

17.02    Establishment of Districts

17.03    Regulations for the Urban Reserve or "UR" District

17.04    Regulations for Low Density Residential or "R-1" District

17.05    Regulations for the Medium Density Residential or "R-2" District

17.06    Regulations for the High Density Residential or "R-3" District

17.07    Regulations for Resort/Residential or "R-5" District

17.08    Regulations for the Professional Office District or "PO" District

17.09    Regulations for the Light Retail or "C-1" Zoning District

17.10    Regulations for the Major Retail or "C-2" Zoning District

17.11    Regulations for the Service Commercial or "C-3" Zoning District

17.12    Regulations for the Central Business Zoning District or "CB" District

17.13    Regulations for Industrial or "I" Zoning District

17.14    Regulations for the Open Space or "OS" District

17.15    Regulations for the Eleventh Street Professional Use or "P" Combining District

17.16    Regulations for Public and Civic Uses or "PCU" Zoning District

17.17    Regulations for the Planned Development Combining District or "PD" Combining District

17.18    Regulations for Clear Lake Shoreline Development (SD) Combining District

17.19    Regulations for Historic Preservation or "HP" Combining Districts

17.20    Regulations for Erosion Control

17.21    Regulations for Tree Preservation

17.22    Regulations for Zoning Permits

17.23    Regulations for Parking, Access, and Loading Facilities

17.24    Use Permits

17.25    Minor Exceptions

17.26    Variances

17.27    Architectural and Design Review

17.28    Performance Standards

17.29    Applications and Fees

17.30    Notice of Public Hearing

17.31    Appeals and City Council Review

17.32    Zoning and General Plan Amendments

17.33    Annexation Procedures

17.34    Development Agreements

17.35    Protect Conditions Agreement and Monitoring Procedures

17.36    Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Lots

17.37    Definitions

17.38    Cannabis Cultivation

17.39    Density Bonuses

17.40    Reasonable Accommodation for Persons with Disabilities

17.41    Wireless Communication Facilities

17.52    Signs

Chapter 17.01
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

17.01.010    Adoption of the zoning ordinance.

17.01.020    Title of the zoning ordinance.

17.01.030    Purpose and effect of the zoning ordinance.

17.01.040    Applicability and exemptions.

17.01.050    Conflicts with other city regulations.

17.01.060    Fees.

17.01.070    Interpretation of provisions--Authority.

17.01.080    Enforcement authority.

17.01.090    Violation--Citation.

17.01.100    Violation--Penalty.

17.01.010 Adoption of the zoning ordinance.
Pursuant to the authority of Section 65800 et seq. of the California Government Code, there is adopted a zoning ordinance for the city of Lakeport, California. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.01.020 Title of the zoning ordinance.
This title shall be known and cited as the “City of Lakeport Zoning Ordinance.” (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.01.030 Purpose and effect of the zoning ordinance.
A.    This title serves to implement the Lakeport general plan. The ordinance codified in this title is adopted to promote and protect the public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience, and general welfare.

B.    This title establishes various zoning districts in the city; establishes setbacks, height limits, parking standards, and open spaces within said districts; specifies the uses of land and of buildings permitted in said districts; prescribes regulations for the erection, construction, alteration, and maintenance of buildings, structures, uses, signs, and other improvements in said districts, including the requirement that permits be secured for certain buildings, structures, uses, and improvements, and for the use of land; defines the terms used herein; specifies the procedure for any amendment hereof; and prescribes penalties for the violation of any of the provisions hereof. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.01.040 Applicability and exemptions.
A.    Applicability.

1.    The provisions of this title shall apply to all development proposed and undertaken in the incorporated city limits of Lakeport including, where applicable, development undertaken by the state, county, or other units of local government.

2.    No building or structure shall be erected, reconstructed, or structurally altered in any manner, nor shall any building or land be used for any purpose, other than as permitted by and in conformance with the provisions of this title and all other laws or maps referred to herein.

B.    Exemptions.

1.    Development by the federal government or an agency of the federal government acting in its governmental capacity.

2.    Development by the state of California or an agency of the state acting in its governmental capacity.

3.    Development by local agencies exempt pursuant to the California Government Code. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.01.050 Conflicts with other city regulations.
If any provision of this title conflicts with any provision of any regulation contained in any previously adopted ordinance of the city, the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.01.060 Fees.
The Lakeport city council shall establish by resolution a schedule of fees for processing the various applications and permits required by this title. All required fees shall be paid at the time of filing the application with the community development department and no processing shall commence until the necessary fees are paid. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.01.070 Interpretation of provisions--Authority.
If any ambiguity arises concerning the intent of the provisions set forth in this title, the planning commission, at a public meeting, shall consider all pertinent facts, discuss the matter, and by resolution set forth its findings and interpretation on said ambiguity. The planning commission’s resolution of interpretation shall be forwarded to the city council and, upon concurrence by the council, shall be considered city policy. The city council, in the event that there is disagreement with respect to the interpretation, shall consider all pertinent facts and by resolution of the council set forth its findings and interpretation. Thereafter, said city council interpretation shall be considered city policy. Resolutions of interpretation shall be incorporated into future updates of the zoning ordinance.

In the interpretation of this title and in its application, the provisions shall be held to be minimum requirements, except where they are expressly stated to be maximum requirements. It is not intended to impair, or interfere with any private restrictions placed upon property by covenant or deed. However, where this title imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings, structures, or premises, or upon the heights of buildings or yard areas, or coverage or other open spaces that are imposed or required by such private restrictions, the provisions of this title shall control. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.01.080 Enforcement authority.
A.    It shall be the duty of the community development director to enforce the provisions of this title pertaining to the use of land or buildings and the erection, construction, reconstruction, moving, alteration, or addition to any buildings or structures.

B.    Any permit shall be subject to revocation if found to be illegal. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.01.090 Violation--Citation.
Any person, company, or corporation that causes any use to be established, any structure to be altered, converted, moved, or commenced contrary to the provisions of this title shall be cited by the community development director, and he shall order all violations corrected immediately. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.01.100 Violation--Penalty.
Any person, whether as principal, agent, employee, or otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for six months or both such fine and imprisonment. Any violation of this title which is committed and continues from day to day, constitutes a separate offense for each and every day during which such violation is committed or continued. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

Chapter 17.02
ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
Sections:

17.02.010    Designation of districts.

17.02.020    Combining districts.

17.02.030    District boundaries.

17.02.040    Establishment of districts.

17.02.050    City of Lakeport zoning map(s).

17.02.060    Effect of establishment of districts except as hereinafter otherwise provided.

17.02.010 Designation of districts.
There are established, and into which the city may be divided, the following zoning districts and symbols used to represent the districts.

A.

UR:

urban reserve district

B.

R-1:

low density residential district

C.

R-2:

medium density residential district

D.

R-3:

high density residential district

E.

R-5:

resort/residential district

F.

PO:

professional office district

G.

C-1:

light retail district

H.

C-2:

major retail district

I.

C-3:

service commercial district

J.

CB:

central business district

K.

I:

industrial district

L.

OS:

open space district

M.

P:

Eleventh street professional use combining district

N.

PCU:

public and civic uses district

O.

PD:

planned development combining district

P.

SD:

shoreline development combining district

Q.

HP:

historic preservation combining district

(Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.02.020 Combining districts.
The regulations of the combining districts shall apply to the land in the same manner as the base zoning district regulations. Combining district regulations shall apply whenever the symbol and the boundaries of the area are shown on the zoning map(s).

When a symbol for a combining district is added to a base zoning district symbol, the regulations of the combining district shall be applicable in addition to the base zoning district regulations. If any of the provisions of the combining district conflict with provisions of the base zoning district regulations, the provisions which are most restrictive shall govern. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.02.030 District boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any of the city zoning districts as described above, or as shown on the zoning map(s), the following rules shall apply:

A.    Where such boundaries are indicated as following streets and alleys, the center lines of such streets and alleys shall be construed to be such boundaries.

B.    Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.

C.    In unsubdivided property, or where a district boundary divides a lot, the location of any such boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions shown upon the zoning map(s), shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on the zoning map(s).

D.    In case further uncertainty exists, the planning commission, upon written application, or upon its own motion, shall determine the exact location of such boundaries. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.02.040 Establishment of districts.
The aforesaid districts, and certain combinations thereof, are established insofar as the designations, locations, and boundaries thereof are set forth and indicated on the city zoning map(s) created pursuant to Section 17.02.050. The zoning map(s) show the designation, locations, and boundaries of each zoning district. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.02.050 City of Lakeport zoning map(s).
A.    There is established the city of Lakeport zoning map(s) which identifies all zoning districts.

B.    Said map(s), and all locations thereon, are made a part of this title by reference thereto to be of such force and effect as if fully set forth herein. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.02.060 Effect of establishment of districts except as hereinafter otherwise provided.
A.    No building or structure shall be erected, and no existing building or structure shall be moved, altered, added to, or enlarged, nor shall any land, building or structure, or premises be used, designed, or intended to be used for any purpose, or in any manner, other than those included among the uses hereinafter listed as permitted in the district in which such building or structure, land, or premises is located.

B.    No building or structure shall be erected, reconstructed, or structurally altered to exceed in height the limit hereinafter designated for the district in which such building or structure is located.

C.    No building or structure shall be erected, nor shall any existing building or structure be altered, enlarged, or rebuilt, except in conformity to the lot area, yard, coverage, and building or structure location regulations hereinafter set forth for the district in which such building or structure is located.

D.    No yard or other space provided around any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this title shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building, and no yard or other open space on one lot shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for a building on any other lot.

E.    No parking area or garage space provided on a lot for the purposes of complying with provisions of this title shall be reduced in area or capacity or be considered as providing parking area or garage space, or yard, court, or other open space required for any building or use on any other lot except as hereinafter provided.

F.    No lot shall be divided, subdivided, or otherwise altered to result in an area less than the minimum lot size specified by this title for the district in which such lot is situated. Any alteration of property made in violation of this provision, or in violation of the provisions of the Lakeport subdivision ordinance or the California Subdivision Map Act, shall not be recognized for the purpose of determining lots or parcels in the application of this title. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

Chapter 17.03
REGULATIONS FOR THE URBAN RESERVE OR "UR" DISTRICT
Sections:

17.03.010    Purpose.

17.03.020    Performance standards.

17.03.030    Uses permitted.

17.03.040    Uses permitted subject to a zoning permit.

17.03.050    Uses permitted subject to a use permit.

17.03.060    Development standards.

17.03.010 Purpose.
To provide for large lot residential development in areas where urban infrastructure such as public water, sewer, and city-maintained roads are not yet available but will ultimately be provided. The following regulations shall apply in all UR districts. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.03.020 Performance standards.
Uses permitted within this district shall be subject to the performance standards set forth in Chapter 17.28. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.03.030 Uses permitted.
A.    One single-family dwelling.

B.    Agricultural and residential accessory uses and accessory structures including barns and private stables.

C.    Small family day care homes licensed for eight or fewer persons.

D.    Greenhouses, hothouses, and incidental structures not exceeding a cumulative total of six thousand square feet in size.

E.    Garage and yard sales.

F.    Private swimming pools, tennis courts, and similar recreational amenities.

G.    One secondary accessory residential unit on a parcel with at least seven thousand five hundred square feet of land area subject to performance standards set forth in Chapter 17.28. (Ord. 887 §1(A), 2013; Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.03.040 Uses permitted subject to a zoning permit.
A.    Home occupations.

B.    Agricultural uses including the keeping of livestock. (Ord. 887 §1(C), 2013; Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.03.050 Uses permitted subject to a use permit.
A.    Commercial stables and riding academies on parcels not less than ten acres.

B.    Wineries with incidental retail sales of wine produced and bottled on the premises.

C.    The keeping of animals in excess of that permitted by Chapter 17.22.

D.    One secondary accessory residential unit on a parcel with less than seven thousand five hundred square feet of land area subject to performance standards set forth in Chapter 17.28. (Ord. 887 §1(B), 2013; Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.03.060 Development standards.
A.    Minimum Lot Size. five acres.

B.    Minimum Average Lot Width. one hundred fifty feet.

C.    Minimum Yards (Setbacks).

1.    Front yard: twenty feet from lot line. Yards abutting streets are front yards.

2.    Rear yard: twenty feet from lot line.

3.    Side yard: five feet from interior lot line or twenty feet from lot line on the street side of a corner lot.

4.    Accessory structures: the above yards apply.

D.    Maximum Height.

1.    Principal structure: thirty-five feet.

2.    Accessory structure: fifteen feet.

E.    Parking. The following minimum parking requirements shall apply:

1.    Residential Use. One covered and one uncovered space per dwelling unit.

F.    Minimum Residential Construction Standards. All single-family dwellings except temporary dwellings and farm labor quarters shall meet the minimum residential construction standards of the R-1 district. (Ord. 796 Att. A (part), 1999)

Chapter 17.04
REGULATIONS FOR LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL OR "R-1" DISTRICT
Sections:

17.04.010    Purpose.

17.04.020    Performance standards.

17.04.030    Uses permitted.

17.04.040    Uses permitted subject to a zoning permit.

17.04.050    Uses permitted subject to a use permit.

17.04.060    Development standards.

17.04.010 Purpose.
To establish areas for individual residential dwelling units at an urban low density where the traditional neighborhood character of single-family units exist. The following regulations shall apply in all R-1 districts. (Ord. 796 Att. A (part), 1999)

17.04.020 Performance standards.
Uses permitted within this district shall be subject to the performance standards set forth in Chapter 17.28. (Ord. 828 §1(part), 2004; Ord. 796 Att. A (part), 1999)

17.04.030 Uses permitted.
A.    One single-family dwelling or modular home.

B.    Residential accessory buildings, including site-built garages and carports.

C.    Private swimming pools, tennis courts, and similar recreational amenities.

D.    Small family nonresidential day care licensed for eight or fewer persons.

E.    Duplexes on a lot of at least twelve thousand square feet of land area.

F.    Garage and yard sales.

G.    One secondary accessory residential unit on a parcel with at least seven thousand five hundred square feet of land area subject to performance standards set forth in Chapter 17.28.

H.    One metal or fabric-covered carport.

I.    Personal cannabis cultivation subject to the regulations as set forth in Chapter 17.38. (Ord. 914 §2, 2017; Ord. 887 §1(D), 2013; Ord. 869 §1(A), (B), 2007; Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003; Ord. 796 Att. A (part), 1999)

17.04.040 Uses permitted subject to a zoning permit.
A.    Home occupations.

B.    Agricultural uses including the keeping of livestock or animals.

C.    Docks, piers, and boat houses.

D.    Guest quarters.

E.    Temporary construction offices. (Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003; Ord. 796 Att. A (part), 1999)

17.04.050 Uses permitted subject to a use permit.
A.    Bed and breakfast inns.

B.    Rooming and boarding houses.

C.    Short-term rental of a residence to transient guests.

D.    Churches.

E.    Large family nonresidential day care centers.

F.    Public and private schools.

G.    Public utility facilities.

H.    Residential care home, large.

I.    Residential care facility.

J.    One secondary accessory residential unit on a parcel with less than seven thousand five hundred square feet of land area subject to performance standards set forth in Chapter 17.28. (Ord. 893 §3(1), 2014; Ord. 887 §1(E), 2013; Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003; Ord. 796 Att. A (part), 1999)

17.04.060 Development standards.
A.    Minimum Lot Size.

1.    Six thousand square feet for an interior lot.

2.    Six thousand five hundred square feet for a corner lot.

B.    Minimum Average Lot Width.

1.    Sixty feet for an interior lot.

2.    Sixty-five feet for a corner lot.

3.    Lots on a cul-de-sac bulb or corner bulb (knuckle) may be thirty-five feet wide and shall be at least sixty feet wide at the midpoint line.

C.    Minimum Lot Length. Eighty feet.

D.    Maximum Length to Width Ratio. Three to one.

E.    Maximum Lot Coverage. Forty percent. An increase in lot coverage of up to sixty percent will be permitted on pre-existing substandard lots.

F.    Minimum Yards (Setbacks).

1.    Front yard:

a.    Fifteen feet from lot line.

b.    Twenty feet from lot line to the carport or garage door opening.

2.    Rear yard: ten feet from lot line.

3.    Side yard: five feet from lot line, except ten feet on the street side on a corner lot.

4.    Accessory structures: less than one hundred twenty square feet without utilities may be within one foot of the side or rear property line.

G.    Maximum Height.

1.    Principal structure: thirty-five feet.

2.    Accessory structure: fifteen feet.

H.    Parking. The following minimum parking requirements shall apply for residential uses:

1.    One covered and one uncovered space per dwelling unit.

2.    Covered spaces may be substituted for uncovered spaces.

I.    Signs. As provided in the sign ordinance.

J.    Minimum Residential Construction Standards. (see Chapter 17.28, Performance Standards).

1.    All dwelling units must be at least fifteen feet in width or diameter (excluding eaves) and at least seven hundred twenty square feet in gross floor area, except for secondary units which shall meet the standards set forth in Chapter 17.28.

2.    Modular homes shall be certified under the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards and shall be no older than ten years old from the time that a permit is issued for placement.

3.    All dwellings shall be attached to a permanent concrete foundation system pursuant to the Uniform Building Code. Dwellings in mobilehome parks/subdivisions may utilize alternative permanent foundation systems.

4.    All dwellings shall be designed so that exterior walls look like wood or masonry or stucco regardless of their actual composition.

5.    Dwelling siding shall extend to the ground level (wood excluded) except that when a solid concrete or masonry perimeter foundation is used, then siding need only extend one and one-half inch below the top of the foundation.

6.    The roofing materials shall be designed to look like composition roofing, tile, shakes, shingles, or tar and gravel; or architectural metal roof sheathing with factory applied color coatings.

7.    The slope of the main roof shall not be less than two inches of vertical rise for twelve inches of horizontal run.

8.    All dwellings shall have a perimeter roof eave not less than one foot measured from the vertical side of the home.

9.    Where any accessory structure is attached to the main structure, the eave requirement at the point of attachment may be waived.

10.    a.   Site-built detached or attached garages or carports shall be designed and constructed of similar design and materials as the main residential unit or structure.

b.    One four-hundred-square-foot metal or one four-hundred-square-foot fabric-covered carport may be permitted per lot. Metal and fabric-covered carports shall comply with property setback (yard) requirements. Metal and fabric-covered carports shall be properly maintained in good condition, cleaned, and repaired as necessary. Metal and fabric-covered carports shall be securely anchored with below grade tie downs. There shall be no electricity or utilities provided to metal and fabric-covered carports. Metal and fabric-covered carports are subject to the issuance of a building permit unless determined to be exempted by the building official. Metal carports shall be painted to match or complement the primary house color. (Ord. 869 §1(C), 2007; Ord. 856 §1(part), 2006; Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003; Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

Chapter 17.05
REGULATIONS FOR THE MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL OR "R-2" DISTRICT
Sections:

17.05.010    Purpose.

17.05.020    Performance standards.

17.05.030    Uses permitted.

17.05.040    Uses permitted subject to a zoning permit.

17.05.050    Uses permitted subject to a use permit.

17.05.060    Development standards.

17.05.010 Purpose.
To establish areas for individual and multifamily residential dwelling units at low to medium densities with the amenities of a residential neighborhood. The following regulations shall apply in all R-2 districts. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.05.020 Performance standards.
Uses permitted within this district shall be subject to the performance standards set forth in Chapter 17.28 and, where required, architectural and design review. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.05.030 Uses permitted.
A.    One single-family dwelling or manufactured home.

B.    Two single-family dwellings subject to general plan density standards.

C.    Duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes, and condominiums in accordance with the development standards listed in Section 17.05.060.

D.    Residential accessory buildings.

E.    Small family nonresidential day care licensed for eight or fewer persons.

F.    Garage and yard sales.

G.    Public parks, playgrounds, and recreational facilities.

H.    One secondary accessory residential unit on a parcel with at least seven thousand five hundred square feet of land area subject to performance standards set forth in Chapter 17.28.

I.    Personal cannabis cultivation subject to the regulations as set forth in Chapter 17.38. (Ord. 914 §3, 2017; Ord. 887 §1(F), 2013; Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003; Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.05.040 Uses permitted subject to a zoning permit.
Those uses permitted in the R-1 district with a zoning permit. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.05.050 Uses permitted subject to a use permit.
A.    Nursing and convalescent homes.

B.    Mobilehome parks.

C.    Building heights in excess of thirty-five feet.

D.    Those uses permitted in the R-1 district subject to a use permit.

E.    Residential care home, large.

F.    Residential care facility.

G.    One secondary accessory residential unit on a parcel with less than seven thousand five hundred square feet of land area subject to performance standards set forth in Chapter 17.28. (Ord. 893 §3(2), 2014; Ord. 887 §1(G), 2013; Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003; Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.05.060 Development standards.
A.    Maximum Permitted Density.

1.    Single-family dwelling: six thousand square feet per dwelling unit.

2.    Duplex, triplex, fourplex, or condominium projects: two thousand two hundred fifty square feet per dwelling unit.

B.    Minimum Lot Size.

1.    Six thousand square feet for an interior lot.

2.    Six thousand five hundred square feet for a corner lot.

C.    Minimum Lot Length. Eighty feet.

D.    Minimum Average Lot Width.

1.    Sixty feet for an interior lot.

2.    Sixty-five feet for a corner lot.

3.    Lots on a cul-de-sac bulb or corner bulb (knuckle) may be thirty-five feet wide and shall be at least sixty feet wide at the midpoint line.

E.    Maximum Length to Width Ratio. Three to one.

F.    Maximum Lot Coverage. Forty percent.

G.    Minimum Yards.

1.    Front yard: fifteen feet from lot line, twenty feet required to carport or garage.

2.    Rear yard: ten feet for single-family dwellings and duplexes, and fifteen feet from the lot line for triplexes, fourplexes, and condominium projects.

3.    Side yard: five feet for single-family dwellings and duplexes, and ten feet for triplexes and fourplexes.

4.    Side yards adjacent to public right-of-way shall not be less than ten feet for all uses.

5.    Accessory structures: less than one hundred twenty feet without utilities may be within one foot of the side or rear property line.

H.    Maximum Height.

1.    Principal structure: thirty-five feet.

2.    Accessory structure: fifteen feet.

I.    Building Separation, Open Space, and Landscaping.

1.    Within the R-2 district, the placement of the principal structure shall conform to the following building separation standards:

a.    When two or more buildings in the same project face each other, or are arranged around an open court, they shall be separated from each other a minimum of twenty feet.

b.    For a building which faces the rear or side of another building, there shall be a separation of twenty feet.

c.    When the rear of the building faces the rear or side of another building, they shall be separated from each other a minimum of ten feet.

d.    When the building’s side faces the side of another building, they shall be separated from each other a minimum of ten feet. No entries shall be permitted between buildings placed side by side unless an additional ten feet of building separation is provided.

2.    Where there are floors or stories in excess of one, the city may increase the building separation by as much as five feet for each story.

3.    For duplex, triplex, fourplex, and condominium, a landscaped, unified, and usable open recreational and leisure area, totaling at least three hundred square feet for each dwelling unit, shall be required in addition to that landscaping generally required of all developments. The areas shall be conveniently located and readily accessible to each dwelling unit.

The following areas shall not be considered as contributing to required recreational and leisure areas:

a.    Any required front or side yard.

b.    Any area used for parking or vehicular circulation.

J.    Signs. As provided for in the sign ordinance.

K.    All dwelling units must be at least fifteen feet in width or diameter (excluding eaves) and, with the exception of single-family dwellings, shall contain the following minimum gross floor area, exclusive of parking areas, open porches, and patios:

1.    Studio: four hundred fifty square feet;

2.    One-bedroom: six hundred fifty square feet;

3.    Two-bedroom: eight hundred square feet;

4.    For each additional bedroom in excess of two: one hundred square feet. (Ord. 856 §1(part), 2006; Ord. 828 §1(part), 2004; Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003; Ord. 796 Att. A (part), 1999)

Chapter 17.06
REGULATIONS FOR THE HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL OR "R-3" DISTRICT
Sections:

17.06.010    Purpose.

17.06.020    Performance standards.

17.06.030    Uses permitted.

17.06.040    Uses permitted subject to a zoning permit.

17.06.050    Uses permitted subject to a use permit.

17.06.060    Development standards.

17.06.010 Purpose.
To establish areas for high density residential development allowing for living accommodations ranging from duplex units to apartment buildings and condominiums. The following regulations shall apply in all R-3 districts. (Ord. 796 Att. A (part), 1999)

17.06.020 Performance standards.
All uses permitted within this district shall be subject to the performance standards set forth in Chapter 17.28 and architectural and design review set forth in Chapter 17.27. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.06.030 Uses permitted.
A.    Duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes, apartment buildings, multifamily dwelling groups, and condominiums.

B.    Residential accessory uses and accessory structures.

C.    Private swimming pools, tennis courts, and similar recreational amenities.

D.    Small family nonresidential day care licensed for eight or fewer persons.

E.    Garage and yard sales.

F.    Public parks, playgrounds, and recreational facilities.

G.    Small scale offices serving the multifamily residential complex.

H.    Personal cannabis cultivation subject to the regulations as set forth in Chapter 17.38. (Ord. 914 §4, 2017; Ord. 893 §3(3), 2014; Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003; Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.06.040 Uses permitted subject to a zoning permit.
Those uses permitted in the R-2 district subject to a zoning permit and the following use:

A.    Residential care home, large. (Ord. 893 §3(4), 2014: Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.06.050 Uses permitted subject to a use permit.
A.    Mobilehome parks.

B.    One single-family dwelling or manufactured home if it is to replace a previously existing dwelling.

C.    Those uses permitted in the R-2 district subject to a use permit.

D.    Bed and breakfast inns with food service and catering.

E.    Residential care facility. (Ord. 893 §3(5), 2014: Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003; Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.06.060 Development standards.
A.    Maximum Permitted Density.

1.    Duplex, triplex, fourplex, apartment, multifamily dwelling groups, and condominiums: one thousand five hundred square feet per dwelling unit.

2.    Senior multifamily dwellings: nine hundred seventy square feet per unit.

B.    Minimum Lot Size.

1.    Six thousand square feet for an interior lot.

2.    Six thousand five hundred square feet for a corner lot.

C.    Minimum Lot Length. Eighty feet.

D.    Minimum Average Lot Width.

1.    Sixty feet for an interior lot.

2.    Sixty-five feet for a corner lot.

3.    Lots on a cul-de-sac bulb or corner bulb (knuckle) may be thirty-five feet wide and shall be at least sixty feet wide at the midpoint line.

E.    Maximum Length to Width Ratio. Three to one.

F.    Maximum Lot Coverage for Multifamily Dwelling Units.

1.    One story dwelling: sixty percent.

2.    Two story dwelling: fifty-five percent.

3.    Three story dwelling: fifty percent.

G.    Minimum Yards.

1.    Front yard: fifteen feet from lot line, twenty feet required to carport/garage.

2.    Rear yard: ten feet from the lot line for a duplex and fifteen feet from the lot line for other dwellings.

3.    Side yard: five feet from the lot line for a duplex and ten feet from the lot line for other dwellings.

4.    Accessory structures: less than one hundred twenty square feet without utilities may be within one foot of the side or rear property line.

H.    Maximum Height.

1.    Principal structure: thirty-five feet.

Height limit may be increased subject to obtaining a use permit.

2.    Accessory structure: fifteen feet.

I.    Building Separation, Open Space, and Landscaping.

1.    The placement of buildings shall conform to the following building separation standards:

a.    When two or more buildings in the same project face each other or are arranged around an open court, they shall be separated from each other a minimum of twenty feet.

b.    For a building which faces the rear or side of another building, there shall be a separation of twenty feet.

c.    When the rear of the building faces the rear or side of another building, they shall be separated from each other a minimum of ten feet.

d.    When the building’s side faces the side of another building, they shall be separated from each other a minimum of ten feet.

i.    No entries shall be permitted between buildings placed side by side, unless an additional ten feet of building separation is provided.

2.    The building separation shall be increased five feet for each story in excess of one.

3.    For residential developments of more than three dwelling units, a landscaped, unified, and usable open recreational and leisure area, totaling at least three hundred square feet for each dwelling unit, shall be required in addition to that landscaping generally required of all developments. The open areas shall be conveniently located and readily accessible to each dwelling unit. The following areas shall not be considered as contributing to required recreational and leisure areas:

a.    Any required front or side yard.

b.    Any area used for parking or vehicle circulation.

J.    Parking. See Chapter 17.23.

K.    Signs. As provided in the sign ordinance.

L.    All dwelling units must be at least fifteen feet in width or diameter (excluding eaves) and shall contain the following minimum gross floor area, exclusive of parking areas, open porches and patios:

1.    Studio: four hundred fifty square feet;

2.    One-bedroom: six hundred fifty square feet;

3.    Two-bedroom: eight hundred square feet;

4.    For each additional bedroom in excess of two: one hundred square feet. (Ord. 856 §1(part), 2006; Ord. 828 §1(part), 2004; Ord. 796 Att. A (part), 1999)

Chapter 17.07
REGULATIONS FOR RESORT/RESIDENTIAL OR "R-5" DISTRICT
Sections:

17.07.010    Purpose.

17.07.020    Performance standards.

17.07.030    Uses permitted.

17.07.040    Uses permitted subject to a zoning permit.

17.07.050    Uses permitted subject to a use permit.

17.07.060    Development standards.

17.07.070    Development criteria for resorts, hotels, motels, or mixed use projects.

17.07.010 Purpose.
To establish areas for a mixture of resort, residential, and lake-associated uses primarily along the shore of Clear Lake and other appropriate locations. This district is intended to allow for resort development including hotels and motels, limited retail uses consistent and compatible with lakefront recreational uses, and residential uses. The following regulations shall apply in all R-5 districts. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.07.020 Performance standards.
Uses permitted within this district shall be subject to the performance standards set forth in Chapter 17.28 and architectural and design review criteria set forth in Chapter 17.27. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.07.030 Uses permitted.
A.    Duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes, apartments, and condominiums.

B.    Resorts.

C.    Hotels and motels.

D.    Private swimming pools, tennis courts, and similar recreational amenities.

E.    Garage and yard sales.

F.    Public parks, playgrounds, and recreational facilities.

G.    Personal cannabis cultivation subject to the regulations as set forth in Chapter 17.38. (Ord. 914 §5, 2017; Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.07.040 Uses permitted subject to a zoning permit.
Those uses permitted in the R-2 and R-3 zoning districts with a zoning permit. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.07.050 Uses permitted subject to a use permit.
A.    Restaurants.

B.    Food and beverage sales.

C.    Retail sales of lake-oriented and recreational merchandise, including limited food and beverage sales.

D.    Rental of lake-oriented recreational equipment.

E.    Mobilehome park, RV park, and campgrounds.

F.    Marinas.

G.    Boat storage facility and boat repair activity within a building.

H.    Those uses permitted in the R-2 and R-3 zoning districts with a use permit.

I.    Bed and breakfast inns with food service and catering.

J.    Residential care facility. (Ord. 893 §3(6), 2014; Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003; Ord. 796 Att. A (part), 1999)

17.07.060 Development standards.
A.    Maximum Permitted Density. Multifamily residential and condominium development: two thousand two hundred fifty square feet per dwelling unit.

B.    Minimum Lot Size.

1.    Six thousand square feet for an interior lot.

2.    Six thousand five hundred square feet for a corner lot.

C.    Minimum Lot Length. Eighty feet.

D.    Minimum Average Lot Width.

1.    Sixty feet for an interior lot.

2.    Sixty-five feet for a corner lot.

3.    Lots on a cul-de-sac bulb or corner bulb (knuckle) may be thirty-five feet wide and shall be at least sixty feet wide at the midpoint line.

E.    Maximum Length to Width Ratio. Three to one.

F.    Maximum Lot Coverage.

1.    One story structure: sixty percent.

2.    Two story structure: fifty-five percent.

3.    Three story structure: fifty percent.

G.    Minimum Yards.

1.    Multifamily dwellings and condominiums.

a.    Front yard: fifteen feet from the front lot line, twenty feet required to garage/carport.

b.    Rear yard: fifteen feet from the lot line.

c.    Side yard: ten feet from the lot line.

d.    Accessory structures: less than one hundred twenty square feet without utilities may be within one foot of the side or rear property lines.

2.    All other uses permitted within the R-5 resort/residential district shall comply with the setbacks as determined through the architectural and design review process.

H.    Maximum Height.

1.    Principal structure: twenty-five feet, however, the structure cannot be higher than twenty-six feet above 12.79 on the Rumsey gauge (one thousand three hundred thirty-one feet above sea level). Height limit may be increased subject to obtaining a use permit.

2.    Accessory structures: fifteen feet in height.

I.    Building Separation, Open Space, and Landscaping. All multifamily residential uses and condominiums shall comply with the building separation, open space, and landscaping requirements set forth in Section 17.06.060(H).

J.    All dwelling units must be at least fifteen feet in width or diameter (excluding eaves) and shall contain the following minimum gross floor area, exclusive of parking areas, open porches and patios:

1.    Studio: four hundred fifty square feet;

2.    One-bedroom: six hundred fifty square feet;

3.    Two-bedroom: eight hundred square feet;

4.    For each additional bedroom in excess of two: one hundred square feet. (Ord. 856 §1(part), 2006; Ord. 796 Att. A (part), 1999)

17.07.070 Development criteria for resorts, hotels, motels, or mixed use projects.
A.    Plans Required. A plan of development shall be required for all uses listed in this section in accordance with the standards below.

B.    Pre-application. Prior to the preparation of an application for a plan of development, the applicant shall attend a pre-application meeting with the community development department staff to explain the purpose of the development plan, to review the project’s consistency with the Lakeport general plan, to review the municipal code requirements, and to provide for a review of the applicant’s conceptual design and development objectives.

C.    Application. An application shall be made on forms provided by the community development department and accompanied by all fees, information, and supplemental plans required.

D.    Plan of Development Criteria. The plan of development shall be a graphic and written representation of the applicant’s intended development project including:

1.    A graphic drawing consisting of:

a.    The entire plan development with drawings and agreed upon scale showing the entire proposed development and site;

b.    The location and sizes of all proposed land uses;

c.    An overlay of the City’s general plan and zoning;

d.    The location and approximate size of all areas to be reserved in open space or setbacks;

e.    The preliminary on-site circulation pattern;

f.    The type and location of proposed buildings and other site improvements;

g.    The type and location of all proposed public facilities;

h.    The existing site conditions showing all topographic features such as natural drainage ways, streams, creeks, shorelines, vernal pools and ponds; significant rock outcroppings; topography; location and types of all on-site trees; areas of historic or archaeological impact or value; and existing development including roadways and structures;

i.    Topography at a contour level determined by the size and complexity of the plan and existing surface conditions; and

j.    Other information on land adjacent to the proposed project which will show the relationship between the proposed development and the areas adjacent to the site including land uses, parcel size, ownership patterns, mineral leaseholds, soil conditions, planning and zoning designations, densities, traffic circulation system, public facilities, major geotechnical features, and physiographic features such as lakes, streams, shorelines, drainage patterns, ridgelines, tree clusters, and other prominent natural features.

2.    A written plan that shall support the graphic representation and shall, at a minimum, include:

a.    Project description including an indication of the present and proposed ownership;

b.    A list and description of all uses shown on the proposed specific plan of development;

c.    A development schedule indicating the approximate date when construction of the project can be expected to begin and be completed for each phase of the project including the permit phase;

d.    A statement of the applicant’s intent with regard to the future segregation and selling and/or leasing of all portions of the project including whether or not there is an intent to subdivide and sell lots either as condominiums or undeveloped lots;

e.    A statement of the applicant’s proposal for utilities and public services including sewer, water, general government, school, solid waste, power, cable TV, telephones, storm water runoff, and others.

f.    Quantitative data about the development including, but not limited to, net and gross acreage, approximate dimension and location of structures, support services required, traffic generation, parking and loading requirements, outdoor storage requirements, and other applicable information; and

g.    Demographic information about the development including, but not limited to, estimates of the number of employees, their ages, skill levels, salaries and annual payroll, number of employees to be relocated, number of school age children, and other information as necessary. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

Chapter 17.08
REGULATIONS FOR THE PROFESSIONAL OFFICE DISTRICT OR "PO" DISTRICT
Sections:

17.08.010    Purpose.

17.08.020    Performance standards.

17.08.030    Uses permitted.

17.08.040    Uses permitted subject to a zoning permit.

17.08.050    Uses permitted subject to a use permit.

17.08.060    Development standards.

17.08.070    Residential development standards.

17.08.080    Performance standards for professional uses.

17.08.010 Purpose.
To establish areas for professional office uses consistent with the intent of the Lakeport general plan. The PO district also provides for multifamily residential uses subject to the issuance of a use permit. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.08.020 Performance standards.
All uses permitted within this district shall be subject to the performance standards as set forth in Chapter 17.28 and architectural and design review guidelines set forth in Chapter 17.27. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.08.030 Uses permitted.
A.    Professional offices and uses.

B.    Governmental administrative offices. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.08.040 Uses permitted subject to a zoning. permit.
A.    Those uses permitted in the R-2 and R-3 districts with a zoning permit.

B.    Temporary offices. (Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003; Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.08.050 Uses permitted subject to a use permit.
A.    Multifamily dwellings and condominiums.

B.    Residential accessory uses and accessory structures.

C.    Private swimming pools, tennis courts, and similar recreation amenities.

D.    Small family day care licensed for eight or fewer persons.

E.    Church and school facilities.

F.    Public parks, playgrounds, and recreational facilities.

G.    Small scale commercial uses ancillary to an office.

H.    Mixed use--residential in conjunction with an office use.

I.    One single-family dwelling or manufactured home if it is to replace a previously existing residence which has suffered damage or destruction which exceeds fifty percent of its market value.

J.    Commercial cannabis testing subject to the regulations set forth in Chapter 5.34. (Ord. 915 §2, 2018; Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003; Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.08.060 Development standards.
A.    Maximum Permitted Density for Residential Uses. One thousand five hundred square feet per dwelling unit.

B.    Minimum Lot Size.

1.    Six thousand square feet for an interior lot.

2.    Six thousand five hundred square feet for a corner lot.

C.    Minimum Lot Length. Eighty feet.

D.    Minimum Average Lot Width.

1.    Interior lot: sixty feet.

2.    Corner lot: sixty-five feet.

E.    Maximum Length to Width Ratio. Three to one.

F.    Maximum Lot Coverage.

1.    One story: sixty percent.

2.    Two story: fifty-five percent.

3.    Three story: fifty percent.

G.    Minimum Yards.

1.    Front yard: fifteen feet from the lot line, twenty feet required to garage/carport.

2.    Rear yard: ten feet from the lot line.

3.    Side yard: five feet from the lot line and ten feet for two-story structures. Additional stories may require additional setback area. See Section 17.08.070.

4.    Accessory uses: the above setback yards shall apply.

H.    Maximum Height.

1.    Principal structure: thirty-five feet. Height limit may be increased subject to obtaining a use permit.

2.    Accessory structures: fifteen feet. (Ord. 796 Att. A (part), 1999)

17.08.070 Residential development standards.
A.    Building Separation, Open Space, and Landscaping.

1.    There shall be a finding made by the planning commission that there is a substantial need for housing in the city which cannot be met by the availability of high density areas.

2.    The placement of multifamily, residential, and condominium buildings in the professional office zone shall conform to the following building standards:

a.    When two or more buildings in the same project face each other or are arranged around an open court, they shall be separated from each other a minimum of twenty feet.

b.    For a building which faces the rear or side of another building, there shall be a separation of twenty feet.

c.    When the rear of the building faces the rear or side of another building, they shall be separated from each other a minimum of ten feet.

d.    When the building’s side faces the side of another building, they shall be separated from each other a minimum of ten feet.

1.    No entries shall be permitted between buildings placed side by side, unless an additional ten feet of building separation is provided.

2.    The building separation shall be increased five feet for each story in excess of one.

3.    For residential developments of more than three dwelling units, a landscaped, unified, and usable open recreational and leisure area, totaling at least three hundred square feet for each dwelling unit, shall be required in addition to that landscaping generally required of all developments. Said open areas shall be conveniently located and readily accessible to each dwelling unit. The following areas shall not be considered as contributing to required recreational and leisure areas:

a.    Any required front or side yard.

b.    Any area used for parking or vehicle circulation.

B.    Parking. See Chapter 17.23.

C.    Signs. As provided in the sign ordinance.

D.    All dwelling units must be at least fifteen feet in width or diameter (excluding eaves) and shall contain the following minimum gross floor area, exclusive of parking areas, open porches and patios:

1.    Studio: four hundred fifty square feet;

2.    One-bedroom: six hundred fifty square feet;

3.    Two-bedroom: eight hundred square feet;

4.    For each additional bedroom in excess of two: one hundred square feet. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.08.080 Performance standards for professional uses.
A.    Development of professional use/office shall fit the building site’s natural conditions including preservation of natural topography and significant vegetation. The site’s components shall be interrelated and located so that there is efficient operation and flow for all uses. Parking shall be located away from public ways and separated by landscaping. Exterior lighting must be subdued and should enhance the building design and landscaping.

B.    Conversion. Exterior alterations related to the conversion of a residential structure to a professional use or office shall be subject to architectural and design review. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

Chapter 17.09
REGULATIONS FOR THE LIGHT RETAIL OR "C-1" ZONING DISTRICT
Sections:

17.09.010    Purpose.

17.09.020    Performance standards.

17.09.030    Uses permitted.

17.09.040    Uses permitted subject to the issuance of a zoning permit.

17.09.050    Uses permitted subject to the issuance of a use permit.

17.09.060    Development standards.

17.09.010 Purpose.
To establish areas for small neighborhood-oriented retail establishments on individual sites or small neighborhood shopping centers. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.09.020 Performance standards.
All uses permitted within the C-1 district shall be subject to the performance standards set forth in Chapter 17.28 and shall be subject to architectural and design review as set forth in Chapter 17.27. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.09.030 Uses permitted.
A.    Retail sales of food, dry goods, pharmaceuticals, flowers, bait and tackle, art and craft supplies, music, gifts, books and magazines, studios.

B.    Personal services such as barber and beauty shops, laundromats and cleaners, health clubs, or dance studios.

C.    Minor repair services such as jewelry, shoe, and small appliance repair shops.

D.    Food services such as cafes, coffee shops, delicatessens, and small restaurants. (Hard liquor sales requires a use permit.)

E.    Professional services such as tax consultants, real estate sales, and law offices.

F.    Medical services such as nurse practitioners, general practitioners, and dentists’ offices.

G.    Other commercial uses similar in character to those uses listed above.

H.    Single-family residential uses in conjunction with a commercial use.

I.    Mixed use--residential uses in conjunction with a commercial or office use. (Ord. 893 §3(7), 2014; Ord. 868 §1(A), 2007; Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.09.040 Uses permitted subject to the issuance of a zoning permit.
A.    Outdoor display.

B.    Outdoor food service/seating.

C.    Short-term promotional events.

D.    Special outdoor events. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.09.050 Uses permitted subject to the issuance of a use permit.
A.    Commercial accessory uses and structures.

B.    Game rooms or amusement arcades.

C.    Garden supply, nurseries, and hardware stores.

D.    Retail fuel sales, minor auto repair, and car washes.

E.    Bars not exceeding two thousand five hundred square feet in gross floor area and not including amplified music or voices.

F.    Churches, schools, and nonresidential day care facilities.

G.    Sale of hard alcohol in conjunction with restaurant or bar use.

H.    Residential care home, large.

I.    Residential care facility. (Ord. 893 §3(8), 2014; Ord. 868 §1(B), 2007; Ord. 828 §1(part), 2004; Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003; Ord. 796 Att. A (part), 1999)

17.09.060 Development standards.
A.    Minimum Lot Sizes.

1.    Six thousand square feet for an interior lot.

2.    Six thousand five hundred square feet for a corner lot.

B.    Minimum Average Lot Width.

1.    Interior lots: sixty feet.

2.    Corner lots: sixty-five feet.

C.    Minimum Lot Length. Eighty feet.

D.    Maximum Length to Width Ratio. Three to one.

E.    Maximum Lot Coverage.

1.    One-story structure: sixty percent.

2.    Two-story structure: fifty percent.

F.    Maximum Floor Area Ratio. .35.

G.    Minimum Yards.

1.    Front yard: ten feet.

2.    Rear yard: ten feet.

3.    Side yard: zero feet, or ten feet from a lot line when contiguous to any residential district.

H.    Maximum Height.

1.    Principal structure: two stories or thirty-five feet.

2.    Accessory structures: fifteen feet.

I.    Parking. See chapter 17.23.

J.    Signs. See sign ordinance.

(Ord. 796 Att. A (part), 1999)

Chapter 17.10
REGULATIONS FOR THE MAJOR RETAIL OR "C-2" ZONING DISTRICT
Sections:

17.10.010    Purpose.

17.10.020    Performance standards/architectural and design review.

17.10.030    Uses permitted.

17.10.040    Uses subject to the issuance of a zoning permit.

17.10.050    Uses permitted subject to the issuance of a use permit.

17.10.060    Development standards.

17.10.010 Purpose.
To provide for the full range of commercial, retail, and service establishments to the community. This is the principal retail designation, the place for regional, local, and commercial establishments. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.10.020 Performance standards/architectural and design review.
All uses permitted within the C-2 district shall be subject to the performance standards set forth in Chapter 17.28 and to architectural and design review guidelines set forth in Chapter 17.27. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.10.030 Uses permitted.
A.    Retail sales of food, appliances, paint, hardware, auto parts, liquor, new and used clothing, furniture, carpet, flowers, books, art, antiques, dry goods, pharmaceuticals, bait and tackle, books, magazines, and similar uses.

B.    Personal service establishments such as barber and beauty shops, tailors, laundromats and cleaners, dance and art studios, photocopying centers, photographic studios, dog grooming, and similar uses.

C.    Repair services such as appliance, radio, television, shoe, and jewelry repair shops.

D.    Food services such as restaurants, cafes, and delicatessens with on and off sale of wine, beer, and liquor.

E.    Banking, finance, loans, law, real estate, general administrative services, professional offices, and services such as blueprinting, duplicating, printing, drafting, engineering, surveying, planning, and architectural services

F.    General health care services such as doctor and dental offices, medical clinics, and veterinarian offices.

G.    Health and fitness clubs.

H.    Entertainment facilities such as indoor theaters.

I.    Retail nurseries, without outdoor storage, sales, and display.

J.    Hotels and motels not exceeding fifty units.

K.    Other retail commercial uses similar in character to those uses listed above. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.10.040 Uses subject to the issuance of a zoning permit.
A.    Outdoor sales, outdoor food service/seating, short-term promotional events, and special outdoor events.

B.    Live entertainment.

C.    Bars, taverns, and cocktail lounges with live entertainment.

D.    Retail fuel sales, minor auto repair, and car washes.

E.    Farm and building supply stores, home improvement centers.

F.    Recreational facilities such as spas, saunas, and hot tub establishments.

G.    Used appliances, second-hand stores, and thrift stores.

H.    Accessory uses and structures.

I.    Temporary offices. (Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003; Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.10.050 Uses permitted subject to the issuance of a use permit.
The following uses are permitted subject to the issuance of a use permit.

A.    Private parking lot (unrelated to specific business/use).

B.    Outdoor sales, leasing, display of bulky merchandise/large equipment, plants, autos, trucks, trailers, boats, recreational vehicles, etc.

C.    Hotels and motels exceeding fifty units.

D.    Major auto repair when conducted within a completely enclosed building but not including body and paint shops.

E.    Funeral homes without crematoriums.

F.    Animal shelters.

G.    Churches, schools, and day care facilities.

H.    Residential uses in conjunction with a commercial business.

I.    Outdoor recreation facilities, bowling alleys, roller rinks, pool halls, arcades, cardrooms, and similar uses.

J.    Light manufacturing assembly, packaging, and processing of products when associated with retail or wholesale uses.

K.    Bed and breakfast inns with food service and catering.

L.    Residential care home, large.

M.    Residential care facility.

N.    Commercial cannabis consisting of testing subject to the regulations set forth in Chapter 5.34. (Ord. 915 §3, 2018; Ord. 893 §3(9), 2014; Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003; Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.10.060 Development standards.
A.    Minimum Lot Size.

1.    Interior lots: six thousand square feet.

2.    Corner lots: six thousand five hundred square feet.

B.    Minimum Average Lot Width.

1.    Interior lots: sixty feet.

2.    Corner lots: sixty-five feet.

C.    Minimum Lot Length. Eighty feet.

D.    Maximum Length to Width Ratio. Three to one.

E.    Maximum Lot Coverage. Eighty percent.

F.    Maximum Floor Area Ratio: .45.

G.    Minimum Yards.

1.    Front yard: as determined by architectural and design review.

2.    Rear yard: zero, or ten feet from a lot line when contiguous to a residential district.

3.    Side yard: zero, or ten feet from a lot line when contiguous to a residential district.

H.    Maximum Height.

1.    Principal structure: thirty-five feet.

2.    Accessory structures: fifteen feet.

I.    Parking. The parking standards set forth in Chapter 17.23 shall apply to all uses listed herein.

J.    Signs. All signs shall conform to the sign ordinance. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

Chapter 17.11
REGULATIONS FOR THE SERVICE COMMERCIAL OR "C-3" ZONING DISTRICT
Sections:

17.11.010    Purpose.

17.11.020    Performance standards/architectural and design review.

17.11.030    Uses permitted.

17.11.040    Uses permitted subject to the issuance of a zoning permit.

17.11.050    Uses permitted subject to the issuance of a use permit.

17.11.060    Development standards.

17.11.010 Purpose.
To provide areas suitable for heavy commercial, light manufacturing, and fabrication uses which do not specialize in pedestrian traffic. The following regulations shall apply in all C-3 districts. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.11.020 Performance standards/architectural and design review.
All uses permitted within the C-3 district shall be subject to the performance standards set forth in

Chapter 17.28 and to architectural and design review as set forth in Chapter 17.27. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.11.030 Uses permitted.
A.    Retail sales of large and bulky household items such as appliances, carpets, floor coverings, furniture, fireplaces, and wood stoves.

B.    Retail fuel sales and the sale and installation of auto parts and accessories such as tires or battery stores, muffler shops, and tune-up shops.

C.    Commercial trade services, with or without incidental retail sales, such as cleaning and dyeing agencies, bottling works, funeral homes without crematoriums, cabinet and carpentry shops, blacksmiths, welding, machine shops, furniture repair, and upholstery shops.

D.    Construction sales and services such as building supply stores with lumber storage yards, general and specialty contractor offices, electrical, plumbing and heating shops, and equipment rental shops.

E.    Warehouse and mini-storage uses.

F.    Farm supply stores, farm implement sales and service shops, and agricultural supply cooperatives.

G.    Professional uses and construction support services such as blueprinting, duplicating, printing, drafting, engineering, surveying, planning, and architectural services.

H.    Laundry, janitorial, and facility maintenance services.

I.    Light manufacturing assembly, packaging, and processing of products when associated with retail or wholesale uses.

J.    General administrative services and professional offices.

K.    Emergency shelters. (Ord. 880 §2(2)(part), 2010; Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003; Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.11.040 Uses permitted subject to the issuance of a zoning permit.
A.    Short term promotional events, and special outdoor events.

B.    Lumber storage yards.

C.    Medical offices and facilities.

D.    Retail and service uses in support of office activities.

E.    Temporary offices. (Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003; Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.11.050 Uses permitted subject to the issuance of a use permit.
A.    Outdoor display, sale, and leasing of automobiles, recreational vehicles, mobilehomes, modular homes, factory built homes, trucks, trailers, swimming pools, and large storage tanks.

B.    Contractor heavy equipment storage yards or heavy equipment rental yards.

C.    Churches, schools, and day care facilities.

D.    Funeral homes with a crematorium.

E.    Animal shelters.

F.    Automobile and truck service/repair shops and garages providing minor and major repair, body work, and painting.

G.    Adult oriented businesses.

H.    Bed and breakfast inns with food service and catering.

I.    Residential care facility.

J.    Emergency shelters which do not meet the location, development, and/or performance standards set forth in Section 17.28.010(EE).

K.    Commercial cannabis consisting of cultivation, manufacturing without volatile solvents, testing, distribution and retailers activities subject to the regulations set forth in Chapter 5.34. (Ord. 915 §4, 2018; Ord. 893 §3(10), 2014; Ord. 880 §2(2)(part), 2010; Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003; Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.11.060 Development standards.
A.    Minimum Lot Size.

1.    Interior lots: twelve thousand square feet.

2.    Corner lots: twelve thousand five hundred square feet.

B.    Minimum Average Lot Width.

1.    Interior lots: one hundred feet.

2.    Corner lots: one hundred twenty feet.

C.    Minimum Lot Length. Eighty feet.

D.    Maximum Length to Width Ratio. Three to one.

E.    Maximum Lot Coverage. Sixty percent.

F.    Maximum Floor Area Ratio. .45.

G.    Minimum Yards.

1.    Front yard: fifteen feet from lot line.

2.    Rear yard: ten feet.

3.    Side yard: zero, or at least ten feet from a residential lot line.

H.    Maximum Allowable Height.

1.    Principal structure: thirty-five feet.

2.    Accessory structure: fifteen feet.

I.    Parking. See Chapter 17.23.

J.    Signs. See sign ordinance. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

Chapter 17.12
REGULATIONS FOR THE CENTRAL BUSINESS ZONING DISTRICT OR “CB” DISTRICT
Sections:

17.12.010    Purpose.

17.12.020    Performance standards/architectural and design review.

17.12.030    Uses permitted.

17.12.040    Uses permitted subject to the issuance of a zoning permit.

17.12.050    Uses permitted subject to the issuance of a use permit.

17.12.060    Development standards.

17.12.070    Storefront and streetscape guidelines.

17.12.080    Performance standards.

17.12.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the central business district is to carry out the policies and programs of the Lakeport general plan community design element (downtown plan). The CB district encompasses the historic center of the community and has a range of land uses which include open space, high density residential/resort, general commercial, and public uses. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.12.020 Performance standards/architectural and design review.
All uses permitted within the CB district shall be subject to the performance standards set forth in Chapter 17.28 and to architectural and design review as set forth in Chapter 17.27. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.12.030 Uses permitted.
A.    Accessory buildings and uses customarily appurtenant to a permitted use.

B.    Retail stores including antique, gift and curio shops, food and grocery, pharmacy, hardware, liquor, appliance, and similar stores.

C.    Bakeries.

D.    Barber and beauty shops.

E.    Bars, cocktail lounges, and taverns without live entertainment.

F.    Cafes, coffee shops, and restaurants.

G.    Financial institutions.

H.    Hotels and motels.

I.    Medical and dental clinics and laboratories.

J.    Professional offices.

K.    Public facilities and buildings.

L.    Open space and park uses.

M.    Similar uses to those listed herein. (Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003; Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.12.040 Uses permitted subject to the issuance of a zoning permit.
A.    Flea markets within a building.

B.    Outdoor sales, outdoor sidewalk food service/seating, short-term promotional events, and special outdoor events.

C.    Live entertainment in conjunction with an existing business activity.

D.    Replacement and reconstruction of existing single-family dwellings.

E.    Temporary offices. (Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003; Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.12.050 Uses permitted subject to the issuance of a use permit.
The following uses are allowed within the CB district subject to the issuance of a use permit:

A.    Commercial recreation facilities.

B.    Auto and truck service stations.

C.    Automobile service and repair.

D.    Dry cleaners, laundry pick-up stations, and laundromats.

E.    Bed and breakfast inns.

F.    Rooming and boarding houses.

G.    Bus depots.

H.    Card rooms, bowling alleys, roller rinks, pool halls, arcades, and similar uses.

I.    Churches, schools, and day care facilities.

J.    Communication and public utility service facilities.

K.    Mixed-use developments.

L.    Residential uses in conjunction with a commercial use.

M.    Medium density residential uses subject to the requirements in the high density residential zoning district.

N.    Private parking lots unrelated to specific business or use.

O.    Funeral homes without crematoriums.

P.    Structures in excess of thirty-five feet in height.

Q.    Other and similar uses in character with those listed herein.

R.    Short term rental of a residence to a transient guest.

S.    One single-family dwelling, if it is to replace a previously-existing single-family dwelling.

T.    Bed and breakfast inns with food service and catering.

U.    Fuel dispensing operations with or without convenience markets. (Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003; Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.12.060 Development standards.
A.    Minimum Lot Size. As appropriate to accommodate the proposed use.

B.    Average Lot Width and Length-to-Width Ratio. As appropriate to accommodate the proposed use.

C.    Maximum Lot Coverage. One hundred percent.

D.    Setbacks. Subject to compliance with the Uniform Building Code, zero setbacks from property lines are allowed. Setbacks shall be as determined by the planning commission or staff in the review of a proposed project.

E.    Maximum Allowable Height.

1.    Principal structure: thirty-five feet.

2.    Accessory structures: fifteen feet.

F.    Parking. See Chapter 17.23.

G.    Signs. Signs shall conform to the provisions of the sign ordinance and the Main Street program storefront guidelines. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.12.070 Storefront and streetscape guidelines.
The CB district contains many historic structures and is a uniquely developed area. In the review of proposed new development or remodel projects, the city will implement the general plan community design element and the Main Street program storefront guidelines in order to maintain and achieve design improvements which are consistent with the historic and cultural character of the area. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.12.080 Performance standards.
A.    The construction or remodel of buildings within the central business district shall be subject to architectural and design review and shall be designed to interrelate with the existing architectural and building styles in the downtown area so as to enhance the small town character and identity of downtown Lakeport. The use of appropriate architectural styles, materials, colors, and improvements shall be consistent with the historic nature of downtown.

B.    The development of new buildings or remodel of existing structures shall take into account the goals and policies set forth in the community design element of the general plan and shall be consistent with the California Main Street Program. Provisions for creating a friendly and safe environment, which is inviting to pedestrians, may include special lighting, new landscaping, street furniture, sidewalk enhancement, provision of pedestrian paths, protection of scenic views, provision of access to the lakefront, and strengthening the relationship between downtown and Clear Lake, along with the provision of other public amenities, will be considered.

C.    In the development of new buildings or remodel of existing structures, pedestrian circulation shall be taken into account. The widening of sidewalks, provision of additional crosswalks, new street signage, and/or new sidewalk surfaces and treatments may be required. As new development proposals are made, pedestrian and bike paths on public and private property may also be required. The resurfacing and landscaping of existing secondary streets, alleys, and pedestrian paths in the downtown area may be required as a condition of approval.

D.    Where possible, the development of public open space areas such as courtyards, pocket parks, and pedestrian paths, separate from the streets through the interior of city blocks or within larger development projects, may be required for the purpose of connecting various parts of downtown and to create interesting interior spaces.

E.    As a condition of approval of new construction or remodel of existing structures within the central business district, landscaping may be required. Landscaping may include the provision of street trees within sidewalk areas adjacent to the project and the provision of irrigation facilities and tree grates. Other landscaping may be required on-site depending upon the project location, design, and impact.

F.    In conjunction with the development of new or remodeled structures, the city may require the installation of landscaping, new lighting, benches, tree grates, bike racks, public telephones, or trash receptacles that are designed to compliment and enhance the aesthetic character of downtown. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

Chapter 17.13
REGULATIONS FOR INDUSTRIAL OR "I" ZONING DISTRICT
Sections:

17.13.010    Purpose.

17.13.020    Performance standards/architectural and design review.

17.13.030    Uses permitted.

17.13.035    Uses permitted subject to the issuance of a zoning permit.

17.13.040    Uses permitted subject to a use permit.

17.13.050    Development standards.

17.13.060    Additional design criteria.

17.13.070    Performance standards.

17.13.010 Purpose.
To provide areas for a wide variety of industrial, manufacturing, research, business park, or related facilities. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.13.020 Performance standards/architectural and design review.
All uses permitted within the "I" district shall be subject to the performance standards as set forth in Chapter 17.28 and to architectural and design review as set forth in Chapter 17.27. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.13.030 Uses permitted.
A.    Light manufacturing, assembly, packaging or processing, incidental sales (within a building) of the following finished products:

1.    Electrical instruments, computers, optical equipment, and similar uses including research and development facilities.

2.    Grains, vegetables, fruits, and other farm products.

3.    Wood, paper, or paper products.

4.    Fabrics, textiles, or similar materials.

5.    Leather products.

6.    Metals and alloy products.

7.    Glass, plastics, pottery, and rubber products.

B.    Indoor sale of large and bulky household items such as appliances, carpet and floor covering, furniture, and fireplaces and wood stoves.

C.    Commercial trade services including cleaning and dying facilities, bottling works, cabinet and carpentry shops, blacksmiths, welding and machine shops, furniture repair and upholstery shops within a building.

D.    Laundry, janitorial, or maintenance services within a building.

E.    Construction related sales and service facilities such as general and specialty contractor offices, electrical, plumbing and heating shops, and equipment rental shops with materials stored in a building.

F.    Commercial warehouses and mini-storage facilities.

G.    Administrative and general business offices and facilities when associated with a permitted or use-permitted facility.

H.    Professional construction support services such as blueprinting, duplicating, printing, drafting, engineering, surveying, planning, or architectural services.

I.    Research, development, and testing facilities within a building.

J.    Wholesale, storage, and distribution facilities within a building.

K.    Vehicle, boat, mechanical, and equipment repair within a building.

L.    Any other heavy commercial or light industrial. use, building, or structure which is of similar character as those listed herein. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.13.035 Uses permitted subject to the issuance of a zoning permit.
A.    Temporary offices. (Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003)

17.13.040 Uses permitted subject to a use permit.
A.    Recycling centers.

B.    Outdoor storage, display, and sales associated with permitted uses.

C.    Boat manufacturing.

D.    Sale of ornamental rock, monuments, or other similar materials.

E.    Industrial or residential accessory uses and accessory structures.

F.    Food services that primarily serve industrial facilities.

G.    Lumber mills or other heavy milling facilities.

H.    Auto wrecking yards, salvage and dismantling yards, and junkyards.

I.    Concrete or asphalt batch plants, rock crushing and stone product yards, sand and gravel plants.

J.    Processing, slaughtering or packaging facilities for meats, fish, or foul such as a cannery, meat packing plant, or slaughterhouse.

K.    Manufacturing, mixing, or processing of chemicals.

L.    Electroplating facilities.

M.    Hazardous or toxic waste transfer operations.

N.    Manufacturing, assembly, packaging, or processing of materials involving the pulverization of clays, use of kilns, or the refining of oils or fats.

O.    Business and industrial parks.

P.    Other heavy industrial uses which are of similar character to those listed in this subsection.

Q.    Adult oriented businesses.

R.    Commercial cannabis consisting of cultivation, manufacturing with and without volatile solvents, testing, distribution and retailers activities subject to the regulations set forth in Chapter 5.34. (Ord. 915 §5, 2018; Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003; Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.13.050 Development standards.
A.    Minimum Lot Size. Twelve thousand square feet minimum or as determined through the parcel or subdivision map process.

B.    Minimum Average Lot Width.

1.    Interior lots: one hundred feet.

2.    Corner lots: one hundred twenty feet.

C.    Minimum Lot Length. Eighty feet.

D.    Maximum Length to Width Ratio. Three to one.

E.    Maximum Lot Coverage. Fifty percent.

F.    Floor Area Ratio: .35.

G.    Minimum Yards.

1.    Front yard: fifteen feet from the front property line.

2.    Rear yard: ten feet, or thirty feet from the lot line when contiguous to any residential or commercial zoning district.

3.    Side lot line: ten feet, or thirty feet from any lot line when contiguous to a residential or commercial zoning district.

H.    Maximum Height of Structures: forty-five feet.

I.    Parking. Parking standards as set forth in Chapter 17.23.

J.    Signs. All signs shall conform to the provisions of the sign ordinance. (Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003; Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.13.060 Additional design criteria.
The following design criteria shall apply to business park or industrial park development.

A.    A master plan of development shall be submitted to the planning commission for approval. The business park or industrial park shall be developed in accordance with the master plan which shall include plans for roads, landscaping, utilities, lighting, service areas, parking, building, and storage areas.

B.    Facades of buildings shall be decorative and architecturally pleasing. At a minimum, all buildings shall be designed so that the exterior walls are of metal, wood, or masonry. Roofing materials shall be composed of composite materials, tile, shake, shingles, tar and gravel, or an architectural metal roof sheeting with factory applied color coating.

C.    Colors, materials, and finishes are to be coordinated on all exterior elevations of the building to achieve a total continuity of design that is visually pleasing and harmonious with adjacent development and/or the surrounding area.

D.    Roof-mounted mechanical equipment or duct work which project vertically more than one foot above the roof or parapet line, and which are visible from adjoining street, shall be screened with an enclosure that is architecturally consistent with the building.

E.    Mechanical equipment, except for emergency equipment or air conditioning equipment, exposed on the wall surface of a building shall be screened by an enclosure which is consistent with the architectural style of the building.

F.    Plans for blowers and tanks, etc., shall be reviewed at the time of development review to determine design integration with the buildings of adjacent areas.

G.    All gutters, downspouts, fences, louvers, exposed metal flashing, or overhead doors shall be painted to blend with or match the surface colors of the buildings to which they are attached. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.13.070 Performance standards.
A.    Landscape, Screening, and Outdoor Storage. All development projects proposed in an industrial zoning district shall be provided with landscaping, screening, or outdoor storage facilities as appropriate in order to minimize the visual impact either from adjoining properties or from the adjoining traveled roadways. Screening shall be completed with solid fencing, chain link fencing with slats, landscaping, or a combination.

B.    Public Safety. All proposed development projects in industrial zones shall comply with the following public safety requirements:

1.    Emergency access to the rear portion of the lot shall be provided when deemed necessary or where required by the Lakeport fire department.

2.    Adequate lighting of parking lot and buildings shall be provided.

3.    Clearly marked street numbers with lighting for night visibility shall be provided.

4.    Required landscaping shall not totally shield a security officer’s view of doors, windows, or entrance areas

5.    Industrial facilities allowed under a use permit are subject to an increased level of review. Uses found to create potentially detrimental impacts as a result of their operation may not be allowed. Consideration will be given to the production of noise, offensive odors, smoke, dust, lighting, vibration, traffic, handling of explosives, or dangerous or toxic materials related to a proposed use. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

Chapter 17.14
REGULATIONS FOR THE OPEN SPACE OR “OS” DISTRICT
Sections:

17.14.010    Purpose.

17.14.020    Applicability.

17.14.030    Uses permitted.

17.14.035    Uses permitted subject to the issuance of a zoning permit.

17.14.040    Uses permitted subject to the issuance of a use permit.

17.14.050    Development standards.

17.14.060    Development criteria.

17.14.010 Purpose.
To preserve, protect, and enhance public and private lands identified by the general plan as having unique natural beauty and containing irreplaceable natural resources. To ensure that there will be sufficient open space for natural resources, agriculture, recreation, and for the protection of public health and safety. To protect and enhance water quality, watercourses, wetland and riparian areas, floodprone areas, and groundwater resources. To regulate development in sensitive areas so that it does not adversely affect aquatic wildlife, plant habitat, hillsides, watersheds, and scenic views of Clear Lake and the surrounding mountainous areas. To preserve natural resources such as riparian corridors and sensitive plant and animal habitats. To provide limited recreational opportunities in areas with scenic and/or interesting natural environments. To provide a visual buffer between developed areas. To preserve resources that have a distinctive community identity. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.14.020 Applicability.
This zoning district may be applied to publicly and privately owned lands designated by the Lakeport general plan as open space. Lands that may be designated open space include: significant plant and animal habitat, forest areas, parks, recreation areas, hazardous areas, watershed areas, lakeshore areas, wetland areas, flood areas, and other areas having similar characteristics. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.14.030 Uses permitted.
A.    Public or private parks and recreation areas.

B.    Natural areas which include: plant and animal habitats, forest lands, watersheds, wetland and riparian areas, lakeshore areas, and floodplains. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.14.035 Uses permitted subject to the issuance of a zoning permit.
A.    Special events, sales, short term promotional events, etc. (Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003)

17.14.040 Uses permitted subject to the issuance of a use permit.
A.    Agricultural uses.

B.    Golf courses excluding commercial putting facilities.

C.    Cemeteries.

D.    Prospecting or preliminary geophysical investigations for natural resources, including oil, gas, geothermal, or mineral resources.

E.    The removal of native vegetation.

F.    Grading.

G.    Recreation facilities of an active nature such as ballfields, tennis courts, recreation centers, swimming pools, beaches, rest rooms, or other similar uses.

H.    Utility facilities including overhead or buried cables, drainage facilities, water or sewer lines, pump stations, and related facilities.

I.    Parking lots related to permitted or use permitted uses.

J.    Boat docks, piers, floats, ramps, and related uses. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.14.050 Development standards.
A.    Minimum Lot Size. Two acres.

B.    Minimum Average Lot Width. Three hundred feet.

C.    Maximum Length to Width Ratio. No limit.

D.    Maximum Lot Coverage. For uses involving the construction of structures or other impervious surfaces, the maximum lot coverage shall be ten percent.

E.    Minimum Yards (Setbacks).

1.    Front yard: thirty feet measured from the lot line. Yards abutting any street are considered front yards.

2.    Rear yard: twenty-five feet measured from the lot line.

3.    Side yard: fifteen feet measured from the lot line.

F.    Maximum Height. Fifteen feet measured from existing natural grade.

17.14.060 Development criteria.
The planning commission shall consider the following criteria in making a decision on an application for a proposed development for which a use permit is required in the “OS” open space district.

A.    The proposed use shall comply with the goals, policies, and programs of the conservation, open space, and parks element of the Lakeport general plan.

B.    The proposed use shall be consistent with all related standards and criteria set forth in the Lakeport zoning ordinance.

C.    The proposed use shall be of the minimum size necessary to achieve the intended purpose while complying with the intent of the Lakeport general plan.

D.    Particularly unique, limited, or sensitive resource areas shall be preserved to a maximum extent.

E.    Mitigation for the loss or degradation of natural resources impacted by a proposed use shall be incorporated into the conditions of approval for the project.

F.    The planning commission may deny an application for a use permit should the following findings be made: that the proposed use is inconsistent with the intent of the Lakeport general plan, or has the potential to reduce the availability of open space land area, or create environmental consequences inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, or is contrary to the public health, safety, and general welfare. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

Chapter 17.15
REGULATIONS FOR THE ELEVENTH STREET PROFESSIONAL USE OR “P” COMBINING DISTRICT
Sections:

17.15.010    Purpose.

17.15.020    Applicability.

17.15.030    Uses permitted.

17.15.040    Uses permitted subject to the issuance of a use permit.

17.15.050    Development standards.

17.15.060    Performance standards for professional uses.

17.15.010 Purpose.
To provide standards for professional uses as shown on the zoning map in the Eleventh Street corridor between Main Street and Highway 29. Professional uses may be developed subject to the requirements set forth herein. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.15.020 Applicability.
The professional use combining district standards will apply in the conversion of existing structures to a professional use or in the development of new structures. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.15.030 Uses permitted.
All professional uses, and those uses allowed within the base zoning district as an outright use, may be developed within the professional use combining district subject to the requirements set forth in the base zoning district and herein. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.15.040 Uses permitted subject to the issuance of a use permit.
Professional uses in combination with those uses permitted within the base zoning district, or those uses permitted subject to a use permit within the base zoning district, may be developed subject to the issuance of a use permit and compliance with the requirements set forth herein. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.15.050 Development standards.
A.    The maximum permitted density for uses within the professional use district shall be those set forth in the base zoning district.

B.    The minimum lot size for parcels within the professional use combining district shall be as set forth within the base zoning district.

C.    Minimum Average Lot Width. As set forth within the base zoning district.

D.    Maximum Length to Width Ratio. As set forth within the base zoning district.

E.    Maximum Lot Coverage. As set forth within the base zoning district.

F.    Minimum Yards.

1.    Front yard: fifteen feet from the property line.

2.    Rear yard: ten feet from the lot line.

3.    Side yard: five feet from the lot lines, except on a corner lot where the street-side setback shall be ten feet.

G.    Maximum Height. As set forth within the base zoning district. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.15.060 Performance standards for professional uses.
Professional uses that are proposed within the professional use combining district shall be subject to the following performance standards:

A.    All proposed professional uses, whether they involve the conversion of an existing structure or the construction of a new building, shall be subject to architectural and design review.

B.    The dedication of land for street right-of-way may be a condition of approval for professional use development projects. Said dedication shall be for the purpose of widening Eleventh Street and providing for proper geometric configuration at intersections to accommodate future anticipated traffic volumes.

C.    Where feasible, access to lots shall be provided on side streets. Where access from Eleventh Street is required, driveways shall be designed so as to accommodate efficient turning movements to facilitate the flow of traffic on Eleventh Street. Driveway spacing shall be the minimum necessary to reduce the turning movements and prevent the slowing of traffic on Eleventh Street.

D.    The construction of frontage improvements to city standard may be a development requirement within the professional use combining district.

E.    The planning commission, in their review of professional uses within the professional use combining district, shall consider: dedication of land for right-of-way purposes; undergrounding of utilities; provision of landscaping; removal of existing vegetation; reconstruction of adjacent streets; provision of storm drainage facilities or easements; and any other on or off site improvements necessary to facilitate the public health, safety, and welfare and to carry out the intent of the Lakeport general plan. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

Chapter 17.16
REGULATIONS FOR PUBLIC AND CIVIC USES OR “PCU” ZONING DISTRICT
Sections:

17.16.010    Purpose.

17.16.020    Uses permitted.

17.16.030    Development standards.

17.16.040    General plan consistency report.

17.16.010 Purpose.
To establish areas for public buildings and facilities. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.16.020 Uses permitted.
A.    Public buildings.

B.    Public libraries.

C.    City, county, and state offices.

D.    Fire and police stations.

E.    Public schools.

F.    Public corporation and maintenance yards.

G.    Other public uses similar in character to those uses listed above.

H.    Courthouses.

I.    Fairgrounds. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.16.030 Development standards.
A.    Minimum Lot Sizes.

1.    Eight thousand square feet for an interior lot.

2.    Eight thousand five hundred square feet for a corner lot.

B.    Minimum Average Lot Width.

1.    Interior lots: eighty feet.

2.    Corner lots: eighty-five feet.

C.    Maximum Length to Width Ratio. Three to one.

D.    Maximum Lot Coverage.

1.    One story structure: sixty percent.

2.    Two story structure: fifty percent.

E.    Maximum Floor Area Ratio: .35.

F.    Minimum Yards.

1.    Front yard: ten feet.

2.    Rear yard: ten feet.

3.    Side yard: zero feet, or ten feet from a lot line when contiguous to any residential district.

G.    Maximum Height.

1.    Principal structure: two stories or thirty-five feet.

2.    Accessory structures: fifteen feet.

H.    Parking. See Chapter 17.23.

I.    Signs. See sign ordinance. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.16.040 General plan consistency report.
Prior to development, all uses allowed in the PCU district shall comply with the general plan consistency report requirements set forth in the California Government Code. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

Chapter 17.17
REGULATIONS FOR THE PLANNED DEVELOPMENT COMBINING DISTRICT OR “PD” COMBINING DISTRICT
Sections:

17.17.010    Purpose.

17.17.020    Applicability.

17.17.030    Permitted uses.

17.17.040    Area, height, lot width, and yard requirements.

17.17.050    Application.

17.17.060    Deviation standards and criteria.

17.17.070    Minor modification to the use permit.

17.17.080    Time limit.

17.17.090    Exception.

17.17.010 Purpose.
To encourage a creative and efficient approach to the use of land and to provide for greater flexibility in the design of development projects that would not be possible through the strict application of the standard zoning regulations. (Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003: Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.17.020 Applicability.
The PD combining district may be applied to appropriate parcels of land of any size in any zoning district which are found to be suitable for the proposed development. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.17.030 Permitted uses.
The permitted uses of land in a PD combining district shall be any use, or combination of uses allowed by the underlying zoning district as depicted on an approved development plan. The arrangement, design, and density of uses must be in conformance with the general plan and consistent with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.17.040 Area, height, lot width, and yard requirements.
All uses within the PD combining district shall conform to the area, height, density, lot width, and yard regulations required by the underlying zoning district except when the total development project will be improved by a deviation from such regulations. Said deviations shall be specified as part of the application expressed in both a proposed development plan and in a written description. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.17.050 Application.
A.    Procedure. A request for the establishment of a PD combining district shall include an application for a use permit for all proposed developments within the district. The use permit application shall be considered concurrently with the rezoning request and may be approved subject to the approval of the rezoning request. The combined application shall be processed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

B.    Development Plan. The use permit application shall include the following information on the proposed planned development:

1.    A detailed site plan showing lot areas, street design, lot design, location of buildings, setbacks, driveways, off-street parking and loading areas, landscaping, on-site drainage; and

2.    Floor plans and elevations of proposed buildings and signs; and

3.    Other information as may be required by the Community Development Department upon preliminary review.

The community development director may waive any of the above requirements if they are unnecessary, premature, or otherwise speculative due to the nature of the project. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.17.060 Deviation standards and criteria.
Deviations from the standards set forth in the underlying zoning district may be approved by the planning commission if the planned development project provides benefits that enhance the design, aesthetics, and livability and result in a public benefit. The following criteria shall be considered by the planning commission in the determination of public benefit.

Residential Projects.

A.    The residential planned development project shall utilize unique or innovative design approaches for lot arrangement, lot size and dimensions, building placement, street configuration and design, open space arrangement, landscaping, or other design factors which will result in a more livable and functional project which satisfies the need for improvements that protect the health, safety, and welfare of future residential property owners.

B.    In the case of single-family residential projects, a substantial percentage of the units are intended to be owner occupied for the first year.

C.    A unique or innovative design approach is proposed that results in the preservation of a unique, sensitive, or important natural, historic, or community resource; provides more public or private open space than is required by the general plan; or provides for more affordable housing units than is required by the general plan’s housing element.

D.    A unique project which is consistent with the regulations and provisions of the Lakeport general plan. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.17.070 Minor modification to the use permit.
After approval of the planned development, the community development director may approve, upon application for a revised plan, minor modifications to an approved PD use permit. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.17.080 Time limit.
Failure to obtain a building permit within twenty-four months after approval of the use permit for a planned development shall cause the approval to become null and void. No renewal of such permit may be granted and a new use permit application and filing fee must be submitted for review if there is a desire at that time to move forward. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.17.090 Exception.
The provisions contained within this chapter do not apply to residential properties that have an approved specific plan pursuant to the provisions of the California Government Code. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

Chapter 17.18
REGULATIONS FOR CLEAR LAKE SHORELINE DEVELOPMENT (SD) COMBINING DISTRICT
Sections:

17.18.010    Purpose.

17.18.020    Applicability.

17.18.030    Uses permitted subject to the issuance of a shoreline development permit.

17.18.040    Exemptions.

17.18.050    Setbacks.

17.18.060    Maximum height of structures.

17.18.070    Shoreline development plan required.

17.18.080    Findings of approval.

17.18.090    Approval notification.

17.18.100    Community development director referral to the planning commission.

17.18.010 Purpose.
To protect and preserve environmentally sensitive areas adjacent to the Clear Lake shoreline and to prevent degradation of wetland and riparian areas, reduce erosion and water quality impacts and enhance the fishery resources and view corridors. Within the SD combining district, all uses shall comply with the regulations of the base zoning district and with the additional regulations set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 903 §1(part), 2016: Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.18.020 Applicability.
The shoreline development district shall be applied in the following areas: those areas designated on the Lakeport zoning map as SD combining district. (Ord. 903 §1(part), 2016: Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.18.030 Uses permitted subject to the issuance of a shoreline development permit.
A.    Any use permitted within the base zoning district that involves grading, dredging, filling, excavation of soil or gravel, or other similar activities that would alter the existing topographic characteristics along the Clear Lake shoreline.

B.    Proposed construction, reconstruction, additions, or modifications of buildings, boat ramps, retaining walls, boat docks, floats, fencing, utility lines, or other similar improvements. (Ord. 903 §1(part), 2016: Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.18.040 Exemptions.
The following activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

Activities of a governmental agency, including:

A.    The rehabilitation or replacement of previously authorized fill; provided, that the fill has not or will not be put to uses differing from the original permit authorizing its initial construction.

B.    Bank stabilization.

C.    Maintenance and operation of existing flood control and drainage facilities.

D.    Emergency filling activities necessary for the protection of human health, safety, and welfare.

E.    Removal of accumulated silt down to original grade. (Ord. 903 §1(part), 2016: Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.18.050 Setbacks.
All proposed construction except for boat ramps, docks, piers, boat lifts, and similar lake-oriented facilities shall be 7.79 above Zero Rumsey (1318.26 A.S.L.). Increased setbacks may be required by the city in order to make the findings set forth in Section 17.18.080. (Ord. 903 §1(part), 2016: Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.18.060 Maximum height of structures.
The maximum height of all structures on parcels along the shore of Clear Lake within the Clear Lake shoreline development combining district shall not exceed twenty-five feet unless a greater height is allowed through the approval of a use permit. (Ord. 903 §1(part), 2016: Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.18.070 Shoreline development plan required.
In conjunction with an application for a land use project or building permit, a shoreline development plan shall be submitted for review and approval. The shoreline development plan shall include:

A.    A plot plan drawn to scale showing all existing vegetation cover and all types of plant materials including tules, cattails, willows, cottonwood, aquatic vegetation, oak trees, and other similar vegetation.

B.    A plot plan depicting the existing property lines and site topography at two-foot intervals, identification of the areas adjacent to Clear Lake, including the Zero Rumsey, 7.79 Rumsey, 11.5 Rumsey, and one thousand three hundred twenty-six feet above sea level.

C.    A vicinity map identifying the wetlands on adjacent properties.

D.    A plot plan showing the intended development including all proposed structures, roads, drainage facilities, fill areas, dredging areas, final topographic contours, and water control facilities such as retaining walls, revetments, levies, dikes, banks, berms, etc.

E.    A plant and wildlife habitat management, protection, and enhancement program including proposed wetland plant materials and other native vegetation. (Ord. 903 §1(part), 2016: Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.18.080 Findings of approval.
The community development department shall review the shoreline development plan. A shoreline development permit shall be deemed complete if it is found that the proposed project will:

A.    Not adversely affect the existing Clear Lake water quality; and

B.    Not negatively affect the long-term preservation of lands along the Clear Lake shoreline area; and

C.    Not affect any rare and endangered plants and animals; and

D.    Be compatible with the natural environment existing along the Clear Lake shoreline in the area; and

E.    Not result in the unnecessary removal of wetland vegetation or riparian environment including tules, cottonwood, willow trees, cattails, and other significant vegetation; and

F.    Result in minimum disruption of soil and bank areas along shoreline parcels; and

G.    Comply with the provisions, policies, and programs of the Lakeport general plan, and other city, county, state, or federal agencies. (Ord. 903 §1(part), 2016: Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.18.090 Approval notification.
Prior to approval of a shoreline development plan, and not less than ten calendar days prior to the proposed issuance, the community development department shall notify owners of contiguous properties immediately adjacent to the said project and/or additional properties as determined by the community development director. Notification shall be given by mail or delivery.

The written notice shall declare that the requested shoreline development plan may be issued without review and decision by the planning commission if no written request for review is filed with the community development department within ten calendar days of the date of mailing.

If no request for review and decision by the planning commission is filed with the community development department, the shoreline development plan may be issued by the community development director.

If a request for review by the planning commission is filed with the community development department pursuant to this section, the community development director shall schedule a public hearing before the planning commission at its next regularly scheduled meeting. Notification of said public hearing shall adhere to the requirements of Chapter 17.30. (Ord. 903 §1(part), 2016: Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003: Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.18.100 Community development director referral to the planning commission.
If the community development department is unable to make the findings necessary to approve the shoreline development permit, the matter shall be referred to the planning commission for review and decision. If it is found that a project does not comply with the findings set forth in Section 17.18.080, then the shoreline development may be denied. Conditions of approval may be imposed on a shoreline development permit/project as necessary to achieve compliance with the purpose section (Section 17.18.010). (Ord. 903 §1(part), 2016)

Chapter 17.19
REGULATIONS FOR HISTORIC PRESERVATION OR “HP” COMBINING DISTRICTS
Sections:

17.19.010    Purpose.

17.19.020    Applicability.

17.19.030    Uses permitted.

17.19.040    Site selection criteria.

17.19.050    Findings required for rezoning.

17.19.060    Incentives.

17.19.010 Purpose.
To provide regulation for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, or use of places, sites, buildings, structures, and other objects having special historical value, and to protect cultural and archeological sites. Such sites may be of local or statewide significance and have anthropological, cultural, military, political, architectural, economic, scientific, religious, or other values.

Within the HP combining district, all uses of land shall comply with the regulations of the base zoning district and with the following regulations. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.19.020 Applicability.
The historic preservation combining district (HP) designation may be considered upon the request of the property owner, planning commission, or city council. Designations may be applied to:

A.    Real property, structures, or districts which have been officially designated as significant by local, state, or federal agencies; or

B.    Other real property, buildings, or structures having a special cultural character or historic value. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.19.030 Uses permitted.
All uses permitted in the base zoning district are permitted. The proposed alteration of any structure or site within an HP combining district shall require a use permit. No feature of any property zoned HP, which gives the property its special historical, archeological, or architectural character, shall be altered or demolished except in accordance with the provisions of the use permit. Minor alterations, which do not impact the site or building character, may be approved by the community development director. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.19.040 Site selection criteria.
A.    A cultural resource is any material remains of past human life or activities which are of historical, archeological, or cultural value or interest, or of special character or special historic interest or value. Such remains are from prehistoric or historic periods and occur either below or above ground. Buildings forty-five years old or older shall be considered historic and may require an historic evaluation.

B.    Historical sites and structures are areas where artifacts, features, or structures can be tied to a particular time period. The types of sites in this category include, but are not limited to, historic structures and buildings representing mining, farming, residential, commercial, and industrial uses; bridges, wagon roads, and other historic transportation routes, and other areas, without structures, which provide evidence of historic cultural use.

C.    Cultural sites include, but are not limited to, Native American village sites; seasonal campsites, hunting or butchering sites; quarries or tool manufacturing sites; various types of rock paintings and carvings; and resource collection sites used today for the gathering of traditional Native American resources.

These sites usually contain some or all of the following characteristics: obsidian and/or chert flakes, evidence of stone tool making; dietary remains such as fish bone, animal bone, and shells; artifacts; darkened soil, stained by charcoal from cooking fires; depressions in the ground which may be ruins of house or ceremonial structures; and Indian burial grounds which can occur by themselves or within village or campsite areas. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.19.050 Findings required for rezoning.
The city council may approve a designation to “HP” when it finds that the registered cultural resource or site has one or more of the following qualities as defined by the U.S. Department of Interior (36 CRF 800.10):

A.    Identification or association with persons, eras, or events that have contributed to local, regional, state, or national history in a distinctive or important way; or

B.    Of an architectural style with historic value, design, or method of construction, or notable architect, engineer, builder, artist or craftsman; or

C.    Has yielded, or is likely to yield, information of value about history, archaeology, or culture or that provides for existing and future generations an example of the physical surroundings in which past generations worked. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.19.060 Incentives.
A.    Tax Preference. The historic preservation (HP) combining district, when used in conjunction with Section 50280 et. seq of the California Government Code and Section 439.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, is designed to preserve significant historic and cultural resources or sites by providing the availability of tax incentives to those landowners in the community who voluntarily agree to preserve such resources on their property by entering into a contract with the county.

B.    Building Code Exemptions. The owners of historic structures, which have obtained the status of “registered cultural site,” may no longer need to conform to the Uniform Building Code (UBC) but may opt instead to meet the requirements of the State Historic Building Code (HBC) in order to maintain the historic character of the structure. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

Chapter 17.20
REGULATIONS FOR EROSION CONTROL
Sections:

17.20.010    Erosion control required.

17.20.020    Land owner responsibility.

17.20.030    Determination of need for erosion control.

17.20.040    Erosion control measures.

17.20.050    Erosion control in development projects.

17.20.010 Erosion control required.
Soil stability and erosion control measures shall be required in areas where it is determined that exposed soils or other conditions have the potential to create water quality impacts, damage to Clear Lake and tributary streams, damage to public or private property, damage to fish and wildlife areas, create flooding hazards, decrease productivity of agricultural lands, or lead to unwanted soil deposits. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.20.020 Land owner responsibility.
The responsibility for implementation of slope stability or erosion control measures shall be the owner(s) of private property on which it is observed and determined by the city that soil degradation is occurring or has the potential to occur. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.20.030 Determination of need for erosion control.
The determination of the need to perform slope stabilization or to implement erosion control measures shall be made by the community development director in consultation with other city, county, state or federal agencies. Evidence of erosion occurring on land including, but not limited to, gullying, slippage, turbid runoff during storm periods, build-up of soils, and other similar situations shall be considered in making a determination that slope stabilization or erosion control measures are necessary. Construction projects involving the movement of soils and/or clearing and grubbing of sites that expose soils to the elements shall also complete erosion control measures. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.20.040 Erosion control measures.
After a determination is made that erosion control is needed, the property owner shall be required to complete some or all of the following measures to stop, reduce, or minimize the erosion problem. The specific extent of erosion control measures shall be determined by the community development director and implemented within a specific time frame as set forth in a written notice to said owner.

A.    General Erosion Control. All property owners within the city shall generally use the following measures to minimize erosion within the city:

1.    Keep soil disturbance to a minimum land area for a minimum length of time.

2.    Maintain low slope angles and short slope lengths.

3.    Revegetate disturbed soil areas with grass seeds and/or plants.

4.    Fertilize and irrigate revegetation areas.

5.    Perform slope stabilization and erosion control measures in areas adjacent to streams, creeks, ponds, and Clear Lake.

6.    Where necessary, use mechanical stabilization techniques to control erosion and sedimentation.

7.    Check erosion control measures periodically to monitor their effectiveness.

8.    Complete grading and erosion control only during the dry season.

9.    Comply with the grading requirements of the California Building Code and associated codes.

B.    Erosion Control on Slopes Less Than 4:1. Property owners shall mulch the erosion areas with soil and place loose straw in a thin layer (one to two inches). The straw shall be pushed in with a shovel or a ring roller. Seeding with a mechanical drill or hand spreader may also be permitted. In certain situations, the planting of trees and shrubs may be required. Slope length should be limited to thirty-three feet by the use of barriers, including straw bales fixed with stakes or rebar; berms; fences; and wattling. In addition, infiltration trenches and channels may be required.

C.    Erosion Control on Moderate Slopes 4:1 to 2:1. Property owners shall mulch erosion areas with soil and loose straw spread in a thin layer (one to two inches). The straw shall be pushed in with a shovel or ring roller. On steeper slopes, the straw shall be required to be held down with chemical tackifiers overlying the straw or with netting made of woven paper, excelsior, or jute. The netting must be close to the surface so that water does not erode underneath. Hydroseeding, hydromulching, or hand broadcasting of seeds shall be employed. Planting of native grasses, shrubbery, and trees shall be required to maintain long-term stability.

For long, steep slopes, the construction of barriers such as straw bales fixed with stakes, rock and soil berms, fences, wattling, infiltration trenches, and cutting horizontal ledges into steep slopes (steeping or serration) shall be required. Additional top soil, seed, and fertilization may be required. The slope length will be a maximum of eighteen feet.

D.    Erosion Control on Steep Slopes Greater Than 2:1. Property owners shall mulch erosion areas with soil and loose straw spread in a thin layer. In these areas, revegetation success may be poor due to slope instability and rapid water runoff. In addition to shortening the slopes as set forth in subsection C of this section, concrete block revetment, piled rock, gabion baskets, or retaining walls may be required. Hydroseeding, hydromulching, and hand broadcasting of seed will be required on the slope above these structures. The addition of topsoil and fertilizer may also be necessary. The revegetation areas may be required to be provided with irrigation facilities and repaired as necessary. The planting of native grasses, shrubbery, and trees to maintain the long-term stability will be required.

E.    Erosion Control Adjacent to Water Bodies. In addition to all of the measures described above, additional measures shall be required for those properties near Clear Lake, creeks, and seasonal streams. For those areas within one hundred feet of a water body, no unprotected fill or stockpiled soil materials shall be allowed. Disturbance of vegetation cover must be kept to a minimum amount. Drainage control and sediment control with appropriate devices such as barriers, channels, infiltration trenches, water energy absorbing devices, and sediment traps may also be required.

For those areas within thirty feet of Clear Lake, creeks, or seasonal streams, the removal of stable mature trees or other vegetation down to bare soil or the grading and constructing of roads, unless required for health and safety purposes, shall be avoided. Extra protection for drainage and sediment control with appropriate devices such as barriers, channels, infiltration trenches, water energy absorbing devices, and sediment traps will also be necessary. (Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003; Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.20.050 Erosion control in development projects.
Development projects constructed in areas with slopes, or that involve significant exposure of bare soils, may be required to prepare and submit an engineered erosion control plan as part of the development review process or prior to the issuance of a building permit for the project. Where cuts and fills exceed fifteen feet in height; where there is a possibility of land slides; where soil erodibility factors are high, such as those with loose, sandy, or silty soils; or where the proposed project is within one hundred feet of Clear Lake, creeks, or seasonal streams, a professionally prepared engineering plan may be required. A determination of the specific type of plan shall be made as part of the environmental review process associated with the development project. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

Chapter 17.21
REGULATIONS FOR TREE PRESERVATION
Sections:

17.21.010    Purpose.

17.21.020    Applicability.

17.21.030    Preservation of native trees.

17.21.040    Land development tree report.

17.21.050    Review and determination.

17.21.060    Tree inventory.

17.21.010 Purpose.
To carry out the provisions of the Lakeport general plan with respect to protecting the natural environment and conserving and enhancing Lakeport’s unique natural beauty and irreplaceable natural resources specifically applicable to the preservation of native trees, including oak, redwood, willow, and cottonwood. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.21.020 Applicability.
The regulations for tree preservation standards shall apply only to proposals to develop land and shall not apply to existing developed sites. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.21.030 Preservation of native trees.
Existing native trees on proposed development sites with a diameter of six inches or more including, but not limited to, oak, willow, cottonwood, and redwood shall not be cut down, removed, or otherwise destroyed except as provided herein. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.21.040 Land development tree report.
Development projects involving applications for building permits and land use projects within the city shall include a tree report where there are existing native trees located on the site. The tree report shall include the following information:

A.    The type and number of native trees existing on the subject property.

B.    The diameter of trunks and main stems measured 4.5 feet above the root crown.

C.    The average canopy spread of each tree.

D.    A statement concerning the health of the trees including the disclosure of any significant disease, insect infestation, fire, mechanical, or wind damage that may be present.

E.    A graphic plan showing the location of the native trees on the property in relationship to lot lines, existing improvements, proposed structures, and other improvements.

The community development director may waive the requirement for a tree report based on a determination that there are no native trees on the land to be developed, or that the project as proposed will not in any way affect the existing trees on the land. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.21.050 Review and determination.
Upon submittal of the tree report, the director shall review the information and make a recommendation as to the necessity to revise the proposed development project in order to retain the trees or mitigate the impact to the trees. The director or the planning commission may require that the project be revised and that proposed improvements be relocated or otherwise modified in order to retain the native trees or mitigate the impact on the trees.

The director or the planning commission may require that trees that are proposed to be removed as a result of development instead be retained through the implementation of specific mitigation measures. Mitigation measures may include limitations on: root cutting, limb cutting, placement of improvements within the canopy drip line, construction of irrigation facilities within the canopy drip line, introduction of non-native plant materials within the canopy drip line, or other techniques as necessary to preserve the trees.

The city recognizes that some trees will have to be removed to facilitate development in accordance with the general plan. For those trees that are to be removed, the director or the commission shall require a 1:1 replacement with a minimum fifteen-gallon tree in the same or similar species as the tree to be removed. If the trees that are removed are mature and healthy, there shall be a 1:1 replacement with a minimum twenty-four-inch root ball specimen in the species that is the same or similar to the tree removed. Trees planted as replacements shall be continually maintained or replaced if they fail to survive. Replacement trees shall be planted on the site where the preexisting tree was removed, or may be planted on a separate site at the discretion of the city.

The director or the commission shall determine the degree of tree impact resulting from the proposed development of the land and shall stipulate those conditions of approval necessary to satisfy the purpose of this chapter and the Lakeport general plan. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.21.060 Tree inventory.
The city shall provide an up-to-date inventory of significant stands or individual native trees. Said inventory shall be consulted in the review of potential tree impact caused by development proposals. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

Chapter 17.22
REGULATIONS FOR ZONING PERMITS
Sections:

17.22.010    Zoning permits.

17.22.020    Zoning permit performance standards.

17.22.010 Zoning permits.
A.    Zoning permits which are revocable, conditional, and/or valid for a term period may be issued for uses authorized in each zoning district. Zoning permits may be issued by the community development director (CDD) in the manner specified herein and shall be subject to compliance with the standards set forth herein or any other conditions necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of city residents. The zoning permit is a ministerial permit subject to periodic review by the CDD or planning commission as necessary to determine compliance with conditions.

B.    Application for a zoning permit shall be made in writing by the owner of the property or lessee of the property, the purchaser in escrow, or the optionee of the property with the written consent of the owner on a form provided by the CDD. The application shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council. Plans and written material detailing the proposed use or operation may be required by the CDD.

C.    Notice of the intent to issue a zoning permit shall be given to those properties that are immediately contiguous to the property on which the subject application is made. The notice shall state the intended use and that the city will consider the issuance of a permit within five days. The intent of said notice is for information purposes only. The community development department may issue zoning permits for one- or two-day special events provided all findings set forth in subsection D of this section are complied with.

D.    The CDD may approve issuance of a zoning permit provided that the performance standards set forth in the following sections are complied with. In addition, the following findings must be made in each case.

1.    The proposed use is located in an appropriate zoning district, is consistent with the Lakeport general plan, and will not create a detrimental impact.

2.    The proposed use complies with the applicable conditions and standards in the municipal code.

3.    The applicant has agreed to conform to all applicable building, health, and public works permits and requirements set forth in the municipal code, to comply with all other required conditions, and to operate the proposed use in conformance with the zoning permit.

E.    Upon application for a zoning permit, and after a determination by the CDD that the requirements of the municipal code have been met, the zoning permit may be issued. The zoning permit is effective upon issuance.

F.    In the event that the CDD determines that the impact of the issuance of the proposed zoning permit is potentially significant or detrimental, or that the use is only marginally in conformance with this section, the permit may be referred to the planning commission for review and action. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.22.020 Zoning permit performance standards.
A.    This subsection intentionally left blank.

B.    This subsection intentionally left blank.

C.    Guest Quarters.

1.    A guest house shall be an accessory structure consisting of a detached living quarter of a permanent type of construction located within two hundred feet of the primary residential unit.

2.    The guest house shall not contain kitchen facilities allowing the preparation and/or storage of any food.

3.    The guest house shall not be leased, subleased, rented, or subrented separately from the primary residential unit and is to be used for guest purposes only.

4.    The minimum gross floor area required for a guest house shall be two hundred square feet and shall not exceed a maximum of one thousand square feet of floor area.

5.    Vehicular access to the guest house shall be by way of the driveway of the main building and in no case shall a separate point of access be created to the adjoining road or highway.

6.    One covered off-street parking space shall be provided for the exclusive use of the guest house in addition to the parking requirements for the primary residential unit.

7.    Guest houses shall comply with the development standards set forth in the zoning district in which it is located.

8.    A guest house shall not be permitted on a lot in addition to a secondary accessory residential unit or similar dwelling. If a guest house has been approved on a lot, a secondary residential unit or similar dwelling shall not be permitted unless the guest house is removed or converted to another authorized use.

9.    The architectural style and construction materials of the guest house shall generally conform to those of the existing single-family residential primary unit in terms of building height, roof style, roof materials, siding, windows, doors, siding and trim colors, and other architectural features.

D.    Temporary Offices.

1.    One commercial coach/mobilehome may be used as a temporary office for a period not to exceed one year during the construction of a commercial building on the same site.

2.    Prior to issuance, applicants for temporary office zoning permits shall:

a.    Obtain a building permit for the principal structure.

b.    Obtain building and health permits for the inspection of the water supply, waste system, and electrical installation for the temporary office.

c.    Define the foundation system and location of waste discharge facilities.

3.    The temporary office shall not be permanently attached to the ground and shall be of a size that is readily removable.

4.    The temporary office shall be removed from the site within forty-five days of issuance of an occupancy permit for the office or commercial building and its presence shall not exceed one year from the date of issuance of the zoning permit.

5.    The applicant shall obtain an inspection of the property upon completion of the principal structure not later than one year after the issuance of the zoning permit to determine compliance with the provisions herein.

6.    An extension of a temporary office zoning permit may be issued on the same site for an additional six-month period upon written application for such an extension. Applications for extension shall be subject to the same procedures and requirements of the original zoning permit. Only one extension may be granted.

7.    Application for an extension shall be accompanied by evidence of a valid building permit and evidence of substantial progress in construction of the primary structure.

E.    Temporary Construction Office.

1.    Temporary construction offices may be used during a construction project pursuant to the requirements of this section.

2.    Applicants for a temporary construction office zoning permit shall obtain building and health permits for the inspection of the water supply, waste system, and electrical installation of the temporary construction office.

3.    The temporary construction office shall not be permanently attached to the ground and shall be of a size that is readily removable.

4.    All office activities shall be conducted within the temporary construction offices and no outdoor storage shall be conducted without prior authorization by the Lakeport community development department.

5.    All signing associated with the temporary construction office shall meet the requirements of the city sign ordinance.

6.    The zoning permit shall expire after either:

a.    The project has been completed.

b.    The contractor has completed the contract for which the office is made necessary.

c.    Two years after the issuance of a permit, whichever is earlier.

7.    The temporary construction office shall be removed from the site within forty-five days after completion of the project, vacation of the occupancy, termination of the contract, or expiration of the permit, whichever is earlier.

F.    Permanent or Semipermanent Accessory Offices.

1.    One permanent or semipermanent accessory office structure may be used in commercial zoning districts, subject to issuance of a zoning permit and architectural and design review, or use permit, if applicable, as an office for the associated commercial activity pursuant to the requirements of this section.

2.    Applicants for accessory offices shall obtain building and health permits for the inspection of the water supply, waste system, and electrical installation of the accessory office.

3.    The accessory office shall be securely attached to the ground, footing or foundation in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Building Code.

4.    The accessory office shall be permitted only in conjunction with an existing or approved commercial use where it is not feasible or practical to construct a building with standard offices, or if the need for a typical office structure is not justified or necessary.

5.    The accessory office shall be of a modular, commercial coach, mobile, or frame construction type and shall conform to the requirements of the Uniform Building Code in terms of access, doorway width, hall width, exits, occupancy load, etc. Provision of restroom facilities, plumbing, and electrical utilities shall also be in conformance with the Uniform Building Code.

6.    The accessory office shall be visually pleasing and architecturally compatible with the commercial use of the site and surrounding area. City staff will review the proposed office in terms of its height, roof style, roof materials, siding, windows, doors, siding and trim colors, and other architectural details and may require improvements as necessary to assure a more visually attractive structure.

7.    The accessory office shall be inspected and occupancy approved prior to its use.

G.    Special Outdoor Events.

1.    Special outdoor events may be allowed upon application and approval of a zoning permit. A special outdoor event shall include, but not be limited to, outdoor activities such as street dances, sporting events, festivals, open air plays, and other similar activities.

2.    Special outdoor events shall not include events held by individuals or nonprofit organizations which occur on land specifically designed for such events including, but not limited to, sporting stadiums, race tracks, and fraternal lodge or club yard areas.

3.    The applicant for an outdoor event shall be responsible for all activities and shall supervise all participants so that the event will be orderly and not result in disruption to neighboring properties or residents.

4.    The hours of operation of special outdoor events shall generally be limited to six a.m. to eleven p.m. not including the setting up and taking down of displays, booths, stages, sound and lighting equipment, etc. Street dances shall be limited to approved hours of operation set forth in the zoning permit.

5.    Special outdoor events shall not obstruct traffic or reduce sight distance at any driveway or intersection unless approved and authorized by the city.

6.    The applicant for a special outdoor event shall submit for each event the following plans for review prior to the issuance of a special event permit:

a.    Project description including estimated number of participants and spectators.

b.    Parking and traffic control plan which provides for sufficient parking, circulation, and access to the event.

c.    Solid and liquid waste disposal plan which provides adequate means for solid and liquid waste removal.

d.    Public safety, noise, crowd control emergency contingency plans.

e.    List of responsible parties and emergency contacts.

7.    The site of the outdoor event shall be maintained in a litter-free condition and shall be returned to its original condition upon completion of the event unless alternative measures have been approved by the community development director.

8.    A special event shall not reduce the number or usability of parking spaces or other uses on the lot to a point where public safety is impacted.

9.    A permit for a special event may be approved for up to a three-year period upon request at the time of application. The community development director may deny or revoke a zoning permit if inspection or complaints indicate that the use may be objectionable by reason of production of noise, offensive odors, smoke, dust, bright lights, vibration, unusual traffic, or involve the handling of explosive or dangerous materials.

H.    Outdoor Food Service, Tables, and Seating Placement on Sidewalks.

1.    Outdoor food service and seating activities may be conducted on sidewalk areas in conjunction with an existing restaurant, sandwich shop, coffee shop, and similar food service businesses located within a building in the commercial districts.

2.    The outdoor seating location shall be defined on a map submitted with the zoning permit application and shall be limited to the storefront area or the minimum area necessary for outdoor seating facilities. All outdoor seating facilities shall generally be located adjacent to the building or structure unless otherwise specifically approved by community development department staff.

3.    Outdoor food service and seating activities shall not obstruct sidewalk areas or block building entries or exits. All equipment related to outdoor seating activities shall be maintained in a clean condition, and the activities shall be conducted and maintained in a neat and orderly manner.

4.    Outdoor seating facilities in the downtown area shall be of a bistro or Victorian style utilizing high quality and durably constructed sidewalk furniture. All sidewalk furniture shall be approved by the community development department prior to it use.

5.    A minimum sidewalk and doorway clearance of thirty-six inches shall be maintained at all times within areas of outdoor seating.

6.    Each outdoor seating business owner in the downtown area shall sign and submit a hold harmless agreement.

I.    Requirements for Outdoor Display/Sales Activities in Commercial Districts.

1.    Small scale (less than two hundred square feet) outdoor display and sales activities on private property may be conducted without time limitation, or in accordance with a time limit as specified in the zoning permit. The applicant for outdoor display and sales activities shall specify the display schedule as part of the zoning permit application. Outdoor display on city sidewalks in the downtown area shall be limited to one hundred days in a calendar year.

2.    The application for the outdoor display/sales activities shall indicate the type and location of tables, racks, and other storage and display activities to be utilized. All facilities shall be limited to the applicant’s storefront area, or the minimum area necessary for effective outdoor display activity associated with an existing commercial business. Tables and racks, along with other equipment used for outdoor display and sales activities, shall be of a high-quality and durably constructed material and approved by the city.

3.    Small scale outdoor display and sales activities shall not obstruct sidewalk areas or block building entries and/or exits. A thirty-six inch sidewalk/doorway clearance must be maintained at all times. All outdoor display and sales activities, including the display of merchandise, shall be conducted and maintained in a neat and orderly fashion at all times.

4.    Signing related to small scale outdoor display and sales activities shall be defined in the zoning permit application and approved by the community development department prior to their display. Signing related to outdoor commercial activities shall be oriented to pedestrians.

5.    The display height of merchandise in a small scale outdoor display and sales activity shall not exceed six feet measured from the sidewalk grade.

6.    All small scale outdoor display and sales activities shall generally be located adjacent to buildings or structures unless otherwise specifically approved by the community development department as part of the zoning permit.

7.    A minimum sidewalk and doorway clearance of thirty-six inches shall be maintained at all times in the vicinity of the small scale outdoor and sales activity.

8.    Business owners involved in small scale outdoor display on city sidewalks shall sign and submit a hold harmless agreement.

J.    Requirement for Larger Scale and/or Short Term Outdoor Display and Sales Activities.

1.    Larger scale (more than two hundred square feet), short-term outdoor display and sales activities may be conducted for a time period not to exceed fourteen days in a calendar year, or as specified in the zoning permit. The application for a zoning permit for larger scale short-term outdoor display and sales activities shall indicate the intended time frame, proposed location, extent of the sales area, and type of merchandise to be displayed. A site plan which identifies the outdoor sales area shall accompany the application.

2.    The area shall be limited to the minimum necessary. Tables, racks, or other equipment used for the sales event shall be of high-quality, durably constructed material and approved by the city prior to their use.

3.    Larger scale short-term outdoor sales activities shall not obstruct sidewalk areas, block building entries and/or exits, hinder the movement of traffic within a parking lot, impact neighboring properties, or create other health and safety related problems. Minimum sidewalk and aisle widths of thirty-six inches shall be maintained at all times within areas of outdoor display and sales activities. All larger scale short-term outdoor sales events shall be conducted and maintained in a neat and orderly fashion at all times. Haphazard, sloppy, or conditions that result in health and safety problems shall not be permitted.

4.    Signing related to a large scale short-term parking lot sale shall be specified in the application for a zoning permit and approved by the community development department prior to display. Signing related to outdoor commercial activities shall be limited in their placement oriented to pedestrians.

K.    Home Occupations.

1.    The home occupation shall be strictly secondary and subordinate to the principal residential use and shall not change or detrimentally affect the residential character of the dwelling unit premises or neighborhood.

2.    Home occupations shall not involve any structural alterations of the dwelling, and the entrance to the home occupation room shall be from within the dwelling except as approved by the city on a case-by-case basis.

3.    The home occupation shall be conducted solely by the residential dwelling occupants and no employees shall be connected with the home occupation.

4.    A home occupation shall not create any radio or television interference, any noise, any obnoxious odors or fumes, or any other detrimental negative effects to adjacent property owners.

5.    There shall be no outdoor storage of materials or supplies related to the home occupation.

6.    Vehicles related to home occupations shall not be used for display of signs to attract attention to the home occupation.

7.    One parking space shall be provided when a vehicle is to be used primarily as part of the home occupation in addition to those parking spaces required for the dwelling unit.

8.    Home occupations shall comply with all applicable state, county, and local laws.

9.    Home occupations shall not involve on-site retail sales as a primary function.

L.    Agricultural Uses Including the Keeping of Livestock.

1.    Limited, small scale agricultural activities which include, but are not limited to, the tilling of soil, growing of crops or gardens, and the keeping of small animal pets (such as rabbits) is permitted in conjunction with a residential use in a residential district without a zoning permit. Said agricultural activities shall conform to the standards herein and shall not detrimentally impact surrounding property owners’ rights to enjoy the peaceful occupancy of their residences.

2.    Other agricultural activities including commercial, agricultural businesses, the keeping of large animals, livestock, and similar activities shall be subject to the issuance of a zoning permit. Applications for zoning permits shall specify the type of agricultural activity being proposed, parcel size, the number and types of animals and/or number and types of crops to be kept on the property, and other details necessary to make a decision on the zoning permit.

3.    The sale of agricultural produce grown on the premises may be permitted as a component of the zoning permit provided that no structure is maintained primarily for such sale activity. The display and sale of all produce grown on the site shall be set back from street right-of-way or adjacent lot lines a minimum of fifteen feet.

4.    The keeping of small animals, livestock, caged pets, birds, and other animals are subject to the following animal density standards.

Type of Animal

Numbers of Animals and Minimum Lot Size

Small animals such as rabbits, caged pets, and birds

Up to three animals may be maintained on a standard city lot (5,000--6,000 square feet in size). Each additional animal shall require 1,000 square feet in land area.

Mid-size animals such as pot-bellied pigs or goats

One mid-size animal may be maintained per 10,000 square feet of land area. Each additional animal shall require 2,500 square feet of land area.

Large animals such as cows or horses

One large animal may be maintained with a minimum lot size of one acre. Each additional animal shall require an additional 15,000 square feet of land area.

5.    The keeping of all animals, livestock, caged pets, and birds shall not impact surrounding or nearby properties. Animal runs, cage areas, pastures, and other similar areas shall not be located closer than ten feet from adjacent property lines, shall be located in the rear yard of all areas, unless otherwise defined in the approved zoning permit, and shall be maintained in a neat and orderly fashion.

6.    The standards set forth herein are considered to be the minimum and may be increased by the community development department as a condition of the issuance of a zoning permit when it is determined that said increase is necessary for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare.

7.    The community development department may require, revise, or revoke a zoning permit issued for agricultural activities when there has been a determination that the activity has caused or is creating a public health, safety, and welfare issue which is impacting surrounding or adjacent property owners. The community development director may also require review of the zoning permit by the planning commission.

M.    Docks, Piers, and Boat Houses. The development of docks, piers, and boat houses on parcels adjacent to the shoreline of Clear Lake shall be subject to the issuance of a zoning permit by the community development department. Said zoning permit application shall be made concurrent with an application for encroachment permit from the county of Lake. Upon the issuance of an encroachment permit by the county of Lake, a city building permit, in compliance with all lakebed management conditions, shall be obtained. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

Chapter 17.23
REGULATIONS FOR PARKING, ACCESS, AND LOADING FACILITIES
Sections:

17.23.010    Purpose.

17.23.020    Applicability/Architectural and design review.

17.23.030    Exceptions.

17.23.040    Units of measurement.

17.23.050    Required number of spaces.

17.23.060    Parking development standards.

17.23.010 Purpose.
To assure that all uses and developments are provided and maintained with safe, efficient, adequate, and well-designed parking and loading facilities in an effort to reduce street congestion, traffic hazards, and on-site circulation problems. To promote an attractive urban environment with proper parking design and landscaping standards. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.23.020 Applicability/Architectural and design review.
The following minimum off-street requirements for the parking of vehicles shall apply to all buildings constructed or erected, enlargements of existing uses, and uses initiated after the effective date of this code. All new or reconstructed parking lots shall be subject to the architectural and design review requirements set forth in Chapter 17.27. (Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003: Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.23.030 Exceptions.
A.    The requirements set forth in this section shall be considered minimums and shall not prevent the planning commission, city council, or other review authority from requiring additional parking spaces, design modifications, or other improvements.

B.    The parking requirements set forth in this section may be reduced by the planning commission, city council, or other review authority when the following findings are made.

1.    The characteristics of a particular use do not necessitate the number of parking spaces, parking lot design, or improvements required by this section; and

2.    The reduced parking standards will be adequate to accommodate all parking needs generated by the use and will not be a detriment to the public health, safety, and welfare.

C.    When there is a change in occupancy of a building that does not increase the need for additional parking, no additional parking shall be required. Expansions or enlargements of existing buildings shall provide additional parking corresponding to the amount required by the expansion only. No additional parking facilities shall be required solely because of a remodel to an existing use or building unless there is a significant change in occupancy or an increase in floor area or other unit of measurement. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.23.040 Units of measurement.
A.    For the purpose of this section, "floor area" means the total gross area of all floors of a building as measured to the surface of the interior walls and shall include corridors, stairways, elevator shafts, storage rooms, bathrooms, utility rooms, basements, offices, balconies, and related usable floor area, including area outside of the building if intended to be utilized as part of the business operation. Parking areas within a building shall not be included in the computation of floor area.

B.    Indoor or outdoor places of assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews, or other similar seating shall be counted as one seat for each eighteen inches of such seating for the purpose of requiring off-street parking. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.23.050 Required number of spaces.
Parking spaces for residential, commercial, industrial, and public service uses shall be provided as specified below. For any use not specifically set forth below, the community development department, the planning commission, city council, or other review shall determine the amount of parking required.

 

USES

SPACES REQUIRED

A.

Residential Uses.

1.

Single-family dwelling or duplex on individual lots

One covered and one uncovered space per dwelling unit. Covered spaces may be substituted for uncovered spaces.

2.

Triplex, fourplex, or multifamily dwelling

One covered and one-half uncovered space per dwelling unit. One-half additional uncovered space for each unit with three or more bedrooms; and For multifamily dwellings, one recreational vehicle parking space per ten dwelling units; and Covered spaces may be substituted for uncovered spaces.

3.

Rooming or boarding house; dormitory

One parking space for every rentable room in addition to the parking required for the residence; for dormitories, 100 square feet of floor area shall be considered a bedroom.

4.

Mobilehome in a mobilehome park

One covered space per dwelling unit; and one recreational vehicle parking space per five dwelling units; and one visitor parking space for each two dwelling units.

5.

Emergency shelters in the C-3 service commercial district

One space for every 6 adult beds or 1/2 space per bedroom designated for family units with children. One space shall be provided for each manager/staff member. Bike rack parking shall also be provided by the facility.

B.

Commercial Uses. All commercial uses shall provide a minimum of four spaces or the following, whichever is greater.

1.

Retail store or personal service establishment

One space per 250 square feet of floor area.

 

Barber or beauty salon

Two spaces for each barber or beautician.

2.

Banking, finance, law, real estate, and similar general administrative offices

One space per 250 square feet of floor area.

3.

Restaurant, bar, cocktail lounge

One space for each two hundred square feet of floor area.

4.

Hotel, motel, and similar use

One and one-half spaces per unit, or two on-site spaces per unit for units with kitchens; plus two spaces for the manager’s office.

5.

Service station, not including convenience stores which sell gas

Two spaces for each working bay plus one space for each employee on the largest shift.

6.

Minor and major auto repair; body and fender shop

One space per 500 square feet of floor area.

7.

Cabinet, plumbing, heating, and electrical shop; construction support service

One space per 600 square feet of floor area.

8.

Commercial service establishment or retail store which handle only bulky merchandise such as furniture, household appliances, fireplaces

One space per 400 square feet of floor area.

9.

Outdoor sales facility such as automobile, boat, mobilehome, or trailer sales, or rental lot, retail nursery, and other commercial uses not in an enclosed building

One space for each 2,000 square feet of display area.

 

Commercial rummage sale

One space per 200 square feet of sales area

 

Contractor’s storage yard

One space per 3,000 feet of lot area.

10.

Mini-storage warehouse

One space per each on-site employee.

C.

Recreational and Entertainment.

1.

Theater, auditorium, skating rink, sports area, assembly, conference, or meeting rooms

Without fixed seats, one space per 150 square feet of floor area; with fixed seats, one space per four seats.

2.

Dance hall

One space per 50 square feet of floor area.

3.

Tennis and racquetball court

Two spaces per court.

4.

Spa and health club

One space per 200 square feet of area.

5.

Public swimming pool

One space per 125 square feet of pool area.

6.

Miniature golf course

One and one-half parking spaces for each hole.

7.

Golf course

Three spaces per hole plus one space per 250 square feet of building area used for commercial purposes.

8.

Driving rang

One space per tee, or ten feet of lateral distance on an unimproved tee.

9.

Game room/amusement arcade

One parking space per 250 square feet of floor area.

10.

Commercial stable and riding academy

One parking space for each stall or three horses, whichever is greater.

D.

Industrial Uses. All industrial uses shall provide a minimum of two spaces; or the following, whichever is greater.

1.

Manufacturing

One space per 600 square feet of floor area; or one space for each employee on the shift having the largest number of employees, whichever is greater.

2.

Warehousing

One space per 2,500 square feet of floor area.

3.

Incidental office associated with industrial uses

One space per 250 square feet of floor area.

4.

Vehicle and freight terminal

Two spaces per loading bay.

E.

Public Service Uses. All public service uses shall provide a minimum of four spaces; or one space per two hundred fifty square feet of floor area; or the following, whichever is greater.

1.

Nursery school, day care, or similar use

One space for each employee plus one space for each ten children.

2.

Elementary and junior high school

One space for each employee plus one space for each eight students.

3.

Senior high school

One space for each employee plus one space for each six students.

4.

College, university, or institutions of higher learning; business and professional school or college; trade, art and craft school or college; music and dancing school

One space for each three students.

5.

Church

One space for every four fixed seats, or one space for every 18 inches of pew or bench, plus one space per 150 square feet of area in church or auditorium, plus one space per 600 square feet of floor area of all facilities.

(Ord. 880 §2(4), 2010)

17.23.060 Parking development standards.
A.    Fully-improved off-street parking areas shall be provided at the time of commencement of the use of the land or at the time of a major alteration, conversion, or increase in capacity by the addition of floor area, dwelling units, rooms, beds, or seats to a structure. Parking areas shall be used solely for vehicle parking with no sales, storage of inoperable, unlicensed vehicles, repair work, dismantling, or servicing of any kind unless so approved by the city.

Off-street parking in setback areas: In all residential zoning districts, all off-street parking shall occur within defined driveways provided with an asphalt or concrete driveway to city standard. Parking within required setback areas shall not be allowed except in defined driveway locations.

Required front, side, and rear yards shall not be used to supply any of the off-street parking spaces required by the terms of this chapter in any R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-5 zoning districts.

B.    No-parking areas shall be designed so that vehicles back into street right-of-way except for single-family residential uses.

C.    When two or more uses are combined in a site, the required parking shall be based on the percentage of floor area devoted to each use. Parking areas within a building shall not be included in the computation of floor area.

D.    Parking required by this chapter must be developed on-site. Parking may be provided within a three hundred foot radius of the project after approval by the planning commission or city council. If said parking is located on land not owned by the project developer, a cross access agreement or other contractual arrangement must be provided. Said parking must be available without charge.

Joint use of parking facilities may be allowed by the appropriate review authority when there is no conflict of use and when there is sufficient parking for all uses. Joint use of parking facilities will only be considered upon the submittal of a cross access easement or other agreement allowing said parking.

E.    The city may allow up to twenty-five percent of a parking area to be developed as compact parking stalls.

F.    The calculation and design of handicap accessible parking spaces required shall be pursuant to the requirements of the Uniform Building Code and the Americans with Disabilities Act.

G.    All new commercial, multifamily residential, and industrial parking lots developed in the city shall be constructed in accordance with the following requirements:

1.    All parking lots, spaces, maneuvering areas, turn-arounds, and driveways shall be paved with a minimum of two inches of asphalt concrete over four inches of compacted aggregate base or similar material in accordance with the standards set forth in the Uniform Building Code.

2.    All parking lots shall be provided with a six inch concrete curb around the perimeter of the lots. Bumper guards, wheel stops, and asphalt curbs may be provided if approved by the planning commission or city council.

3.    All parking spaces except those in individual garages or carports shall be marked with paint or other distinguishable material. Compact and handicap parking spaces shall be properly marked to preclude use by non-appropriate vehicles. Directional signs shall mark one-way entrances and aisles and shall be visible to drivers of vehicles using the facility.

4.    Lighting in parking areas shall be designed in such a way so as to minimize light spill and glare on adjacent properties and roadways.

5.    Parking areas shall be separated from residential uses and zones, churches, schools, or parks by the use of landscaping, fences, or masonry walls at the discretion of the planning commission or city council.

H.    All new or restriped parking lots shall be developed with the following space and aisle requirements:

1.    Required off-street parking spaces shall be not less than nine feet in width and nineteen feet in length exclusive of access drives, aisles, ramps, posts, or other uses of space.

2.    Parallel parking spaces shall be nine feet in width and twenty-two feet in length.

3.    Minimum aisle width for two-way traffic shall be twenty-four feet and twelve feet for one-way aisles.

4.    For those parking lots that are developed with thirty to eighty degree angles, the stall depth, aisle width, curb length, and section width may be developed in accordance with accepted industry standards.

5.    Compact car spaces shall be not less than seven and one-half feet in width and not less than sixteen feet in length and shall be clearly marked and permanently identified.

6.    Handicap accessible spaces shall be seventeen feet in width and twenty feet in length and shall be properly located, marked, painted, and signed and meet all other Americans with Disabilities Act requirements.

7.    All parking lots shall be designed so as to allow vehicular turns and maneuvers to be accomplished within the parking lot.

I.    All new parking areas shall be developed with the following landscaping requirements:

1.    Parking areas shall be landscaped with a planter strip on the perimeter of the property bounded by a street except for crosswalks and traversing driveways. The minimum width of perimeter landscaping shall be three feet.

2.    A minimum of five percent of the total area of the parking lot, including perimeter landscaping, shall be landscaped. There shall be one fifteen-gallon tree for every ten parking spaces.

3.    Landscaped areas shall be provided with underground automated irrigation systems.

J.    Within the CBD zoning district, the following special parking standards shall apply: Owners or lessees with existing structures within the CBD who construct new floor area, expand by converting existing floor area, and/or intensify the occupancy load (as defined by the California Building Code) of an existing building, and whose location limits the development of on-site parking as required by this chapter may be permitted to obtain a development permit, and not be required to provide the required on-site parking spaces, unless there is adequate on-site area available for parking lot expansion or development. A deviation of parking application must be considered and approved by the planning commission in such cases. For all other projects, payment of an in-lieu of parking fee is an alternative. Said in-lieu fees shall be set by resolution of the city council.

K.    Access Standards. All lots shall have adequate vehicular access from a dedicated and improved street or public way in order to permit the unimpeded movement of vehicles and pedestrians. Visibility on streets and at intersections shall not be blocked by signs, trees, or structures. Directional signs and graphics may be used to promote the safe and efficient movement of vehicles and pedestrians.

L.    Loading Standards. Except in the CB district, every commercial, industrial, or office land use shall have adequate off-street loading areas to accommodate the delivery vehicles associated with operation of the use. The following standards shall be required:

1.    Loading space shall be situated to serve the site and buildings without blocking vehicular movement to a driveway or parking stall.

2.    An individual loading space shall be at least twelve feet wide by forty-five feet long and have a minimum height clearance of fifteen feet.

3.    Loading spaces may be required at the time of project review if determined to be necessary to assure adequate loading facilities. For buildings with up to fifty thousand square feet in gross floor area, up to three loading spaces may be required. For buildings in excess of fifty thousand square feet, four or more loading spaces may be required depending on the proposed use.

4.    All loading docks and doors facing a public street shall be located at one hundred feet from the property line. All maneuvering shall occur on site and not on a public street. Approaches shall be designed to preclude direct access to a loading dock or door from a public street.

5.    Each loading space shall be clearly marked and kept clear and unobstructed at all times. All loading areas must be appropriately striped and labeled with minimum three inch striping and lettering.

6.    School bus loading zone shall be provided at private schools. Said loading zone shall be separate from other required parking areas.

M.    Parking lots shall be maintained and kept in good repair, including patching of potholes, repainting of faded or missing pavement markings, replacement of signs as necessary, etc.

N.    All new driveways and parking areas constructed in the city of Lakeport shall conform with the following standards.

1.    Detailed plans for the proposed driveway and parking lot improvements shall be submitted to the city community development and engineering departments for review prior to building and encroachment permit issuance.

2.    Concrete Driveways or Parking Lots. Concrete used in the construction of parking lots or driveways shall be either four inches thick with six by six by ten by ten welded wire mesh or reinforcement steel over a four inch compacted base material; or six inches thick without reinforcement over a four inch compacted base material. Concrete shall be of a Class B material in accordance with the standard specifications. Plans shall detail the expansion joint locations and depth.

3.    Asphalt Parking Lot and Driveways. Asphalt used in the construction of parking lots and driveways shall be two inches thick over a four inch thick imported base material compacted to a minimum ninety percent compaction.

O.    Residential driveways serving a garage where the garage is within twenty feet of the front property line shall be constructed to the standards set forth in subsections (N)(2) and (4) of this section for the entire length and shall be a minimum of ten feet wide.

1.    Residential driveways serving a garage where the garage is more than twenty feet from the front property line shall be improved to the above standards set forth in subsections (N)(3) and (4) for a minimum distance of twenty feet measured from the front property line and shall be a minimum of ten feet wide.

a.    Residential driveways as stated above beyond the twenty foot mark shall be improved with four inches of imported base material compacted to a minimum of ninety percent compaction, or improved with concrete in accordance with subsection (N) (3) of this section, and shall be a minimum of ten feet wide.

P.    Public, multifamily, industrial, and commercial driveways and parking lots shall be provided with an asphalt or concrete surface to city standard in their entirety regardless of the length or width.

Q.    Upon city review, certain proposed developments with anticipated high traffic volume or heavy traffic vehicle loads may require soil engineering testing and improvement with a greater structural section to accommodate the projected volumes or weight.

R.    Curb, gutter, sidewalk, and driveway entrances shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications of the city of Lakeport engineering department.

S.    Proposed driveways on collector or arterial streets as identified by the Lakeport general plan shall be reviewed by the city relative to the impact on public safety and shall be located so as to minimize the impact on the flow of traffic. Generally speaking, driveways shall be developed on side or intersecting streets and shall be situated as far away from intersections as is possible. (Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003; Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

Chapter 17.24
USE PERMITS
Sections:

17.24.010    Purpose.

17.24.020    Authority to grant use permit.

17.24.030    Application.

17.24.040    Findings.

17.24.050    Use of property before final decision.

17.24.060    Use permit expiration.

17.24.070    Time extension.

17.24.080    Revocation and modification.

17.24.090    Use permit to run with the land.

17.24.100    Periodic review.

17.24.110    Development standards and guidelines.

17.24.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the use permit is to ensure the proper integration of land uses which, because of their special nature and/or potential for becoming a nuisance, may be suitable only in certain locations or zoning districts, and then only when such uses can be controlled, operated, or designed in a particular manner so that they are compatible with uses on adjoining properties and in the surrounding area. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.24.020 Authority to grant use permits.
The planning commission may approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove applications for a use permit subject to the general purposes of this title, the specific purposes of the base or combining zoning district in which a development site is located, and the provisions of this chapter. The planning commission may impose requirements and conditions with respect to location, siting, construction, maintenance, operation, duration, and any other aspect of the use as may be deemed necessary for the protection of adjacent properties and uses and the public’s health and safety. The granting of a use permit shall not exempt the applicant from complying with the requirements of the city’s building codes, other requirements of this ordinance, and other applicable city, state, or federal requirements. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.24.030 Application.
An application for a use permit shall be filed in a manner consistent with the requirements contained in Chapter 17.29. Upon receipt in proper form of a complete use permit application, a public hearing date shall be set and notice of the hearing given in a manner consistent with Chapter 17.29. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.24.040 Findings.
Following a public hearing, the commission shall record the decision in writing and adopt the findings upon which such decision is based. The commission may approve and/or modify a use permit application in whole or in part, with or without conditions, when the following findings are made:

A.    That the proposed location and use is consistent with the objectives of this ordinance and the purposes of the district in which the site is located; and

B.    That the proposed location of the use and proposed conditions under which it would be operated or maintained will be consistent with the general plan; will not be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of persons residing or working in or adjacent to the neighborhood of such use; and will not be detrimental to properties or improvements in the vicinity or to the general welfare of the city; and

C.    That the proposed use will comply with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.24.050 Use of property before final decision.
No development permit shall be issued for any use involved in an application for approval of a use permit until, and unless, the same has become final. No activity subject to approval of a use permit shall be initiated prior to decision by the planning commission. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.24.060 Use permit expiration.
A use permit shall be exercised within one year from the date of approval or the use permit shall become null and void. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.24.070 Time extension.
The commission may, upon an application prior to expiration and for good cause, grant a time extension not to exceed one year. Upon granting of an extension, the commission shall ensure that the use permit complies with all code provisions. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.24.080 Revocation and modification.
The commission may hold a hearing to revoke or modify a use permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Ten days prior to the hearing, notice shall be delivered in writing to the applicant and/or owner of the property for which such use permit is granted.

A use permit may be revoked or modified by the commission if any one of the following findings can be made:

A.    That circumstances have changed so that one or more of the findings contained in Section 17.24.040 can no longer be made.

B.    That the use permit was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud.

C.    That the use for which the use permit was granted had ceased or was suspended for six or more consecutive calendar months.

D.    That one or more of the conditions of the use permit have not been met.

E.    That the use is in violation of any statute, ordinance, law, or regulation.

F.    That the use permitted by the use permit is detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or constitutes a nuisance. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.24.090 Use permit to run with the land.
A use permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the site, business, or structure provided the use remains the same and is not discontinued for six or more consecutive calendar months. The new owners or operators shall assume responsibility for compliance with conditions of approval by transferring the use permit. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.24.100 Periodic review.
The commission may conduct periodic reviews of previously granted use permits. The review may be noted as a condition of approval or conducted upon a determination of necessity by the commission. Notice of the commission’s intent to review a use permit shall be mailed to the applicant and/or land owner of the property for which a use permit was granted at least ten days in advance. Upon review of the facts, the planning commission may reapprove, revoke, or modify the use permit in accordance with Section 17.24.080. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.24.110 Development standards and guidelines.
Specific land uses in each of the city’s zoning districts are subject to the issuance of a. use permit. The following development standards and design guidelines shall be complied with in the development and operation of some of the following land uses:

A.    Mixed use--Residential in conjunction with commercial or office use:

1.    The residential use shall be initiated concurrently or subsequent to the construction of a commercial or office building and shall be an accessory use to the principle commercial or office building or use in terms of its appearance, duration, and size. No residential activity shall be permitted prior to the development of the commercial use.

2.    The residential use in a commercial or office zoning district shall generally be developed in such a way so as to appear to be non-existent or secondary to the primary commercial use.

3.    The residential use in a commercial zoning district must be provided with some useable private open space in the form of an enclosed yard and a deck, balcony, or similar outdoor living area.

4.    The residential use must be provided with a separate pedestrian access than that provided for the commercial use. This separate access shall be provided in a location that makes it secondary in nature. If it is impossible to provide for a secondary access, the internal access to the residential use shall be designed so as to minimize impact on the commercial activity.

5.    The construction and operation of the residential use shall comply with the requirements of the Uniform Building and Fire Codes. The commission may require conditions in the approval of the project in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the commercial and residential occupants of the subject building and adjacent structures.

6.    One off-street parking space shall be provided for the residential use in addition to the requirements of the commercial use.

7.    The owners of a proposed residential use shall be required to submit a floor plan and occupant load information to the community development and fire departments along with the use permit application. In addition, the units shall be inspected on an annual basis with a fee paid to the city for inspection services. The intent of said inspection is to ensure compliance with the fire and life safety requirements of the city. In the event that there is a residential use in a commercial zoning district which fails to comply with the basic health, safety, and welfare provisions as required by this code, the planning commission may, after a hearing, revoke the use permit and disallow the residential use in the commercial zoning district.

B.    Bed and breakfast inns in residential and commercial zoning districts shall be developed in conformance with the following requirements:

1.    Bed and breakfast inns shall maintain an up-to-date guest registry.

2.    Bed and breakfast inns shall be managed with a full-time attendant who occupies a room in the inn or a detached room on the premises. The planning commission may allow, on a case-by-case basis, an off-site manager.

3.    The maximum stay for overnight guests in a bed and breakfast inn shall be fourteen consecutive nights.

4.    The maximum number of guest bedrooms in a bed and breakfast inn shall be five, with a maximum total of twenty overnight guests occupying the inn at any one time. No more than four overnight guests shall occupy a guest room. A greater number of guest bedrooms, and a higher number of maximum overnight guests occupying the inn at any one time, may be approved by the planning commission on a case-by-case basis taking into consideration parcel size, building design, floor plan layout, carrying capacity of the site, and impact on neighboring properties and the character of the neighborhood.

5.    Bed and breakfast inns shall be limited to one building-mounted or free-standing sign with a maximum area of eight square feet per side and a maximum area of sixteen square feet for both sides.

6.    Fire and safety improvements shall be required per the Uniform Building Code based upon the intensity of use and construction materials used in each bed and breakfast inn. All bed and breakfast inns shall install approved smoke detectors and fire extinguishers, where required, and shall provide an evacuation plan in each guest room. Other improvements that may be required include a fully automatic fire detection system, a fire sprinkler system, fire escapes, and other facilities as determined by the planning commission upon recommendation of the fire department or the building official.

7.    Accessory structures shall not be used for bed and breakfast inn rental rooms.

8.    No cooking facilities shall be permitted in guest rooms. Food service for bed and breakfast inns that do not offer food service and catering approved under the provisions of Section 17.24.110(C) shall be limited to registered overnight guests only.

9.    One parking space per guest room plus two for the resident family or manager shall be developed on-site or within close proximity of the bed and breakfast inn pursuant to a parking plan approved by the planning commission. At least one parking space shall be handicapped-accessible.

10.    The minimum land area for a bed and breakfast inn shall be ten thousand square feet unless a smaller parcel is approved by the planning commission.

11.    Landscaping shall be provided to preserve the appearance of the residential character of the neighborhood. A landscaped buffer strip or fence for visual screening shall be provided on all sides abutting residential uses.

12.    The bed and breakfast inn building shall be of a design that is compatible with the surrounding residential area.

13.    The bed and breakfast inn property shall front on and be served by an existing publicly maintained road.

C.    Bed and Breakfast Inns with Food Service and Catering. Bed and breakfast inns located in R-3, R-5, and commercial zoning districts may offer food service and food catering subject to the issuance of a use permit and conformance with the following standards:

1.    A bed and breakfast inn which intends to offer food service and catering shall have a valid use permit for the inn operation.

2.    The bed and breakfast/food service/food catering operation shall have a county health department caterers/restaurant permit prior to offering food for sale. A copy of said permit shall be submitted to the community development department.

3.    Adequate vehicle parking for both the bed and breakfast inn operation and the food service/food catering operation shall be provided either on-site or in the vicinity of the use pursuant to the approval of a parking plan by the planning commission. At least one parking space shall be handicapped-accessible.

4.    The bed and breakfast inn with food service and catering facilities shall be compatible with the surrounding area in terms of land use.

5.    The bed and breakfast inn/food service/catering operation shall be limited to eight events per month, with a maximum event occupancy load determined by the planning commission on a case-by-case basis using parcel and building size as a determining factor in establishing the carrying capacity.

6.    The bed and breakfast inn/food service/catering operator shall obtain all required alcoholic beverage control licenses prior to commencing said use and shall submit a copy of said licenses to the city.

D.    Rooming and boarding houses shall be developed in conformance with the following requirements:

1.    Rooming and boarding houses shall maintain an up-to-date tenant registry.

2.    Rooming and boarding houses shall be managed with a full-time attendant.

3.    The maximum stay for rooming and boarding house tenants shall be thirty consecutive nights.

4.    The maximum number of bedrooms in a rooming and boarding house shall be determined based on building size and function.

5.    Rooming and boarding houses shall be limited to one building-mounted or free-standing sign with a maximum area of eight square feet per side and a maximum area of sixteen square feet for both sides.

6.    Fire and safety improvements shall be required per the Uniform Fire Code. All rooming and boarding houses shall install approved smoke detectors and fire extinguishers, where required, and shall provide an evacuation plan in each tenant room. Other improvements that may be required include a fully automatic fire detection system, a fire sprinkler system, fire escapes, and other facilities as determined by the planning commission upon recommendation of the fire department or the building official.

7.    Accessory structures shall not be used for rooming and boarding houses’ rental rooms.

8.    No cooking facilities shall be permitted in rooms.

9.    The minimum land area for a rooming and boarding house shall be ten thousand square feet unless a smaller parcel is approved by the planning commission.

10.    The rooming and boarding house building shall be of a design that is compatible with the surrounding residential area.

E.    Short term rental of residences to transient guests (vacation home):

1.    As provided in Section 3.20.020(A) of this code, any residential structure, or any portion of any residential structure which is to be occupied by transient persons for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes shall be subject to the following standards. Section 3.20.020(G) defines a transient as any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license, or other agreement for a period of thirty consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Section 3.20.020(E) of this code defines the term rent, as it applies to transient occupancies, as the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel, valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor, or otherwise.

2.    The establishment, continued operation, or practice of renting dwellings within the city to transient guests on a short term basis shall be subject to the approval of a use permit by the Lakeport planning commission and the following criteria:

a.    The use and operation of a short-term vacation rental home shall not result in any activity or behavior which impacts the character of the adjacent area or adjoining residences in a negative way. Specifically, the operation of a short-term vacation home shall not create obnoxious noise, raucous activity or behavior, parking or traffic impacts, visual or lighting problems, or any other problem that would interfere with the right of neighboring property owners or residents to the peaceful enjoyment of their property. Rentals of homes specifically for parties, weddings, dances, or for similar gatherings are not permitted. The short term rental of residences to transient guests shall be strictly for residential purposes.

b.    Compliance with Chapter 3.20 (Transient Occupancy Tax) of this code.

c.    Compliance with Chapter 5.04 (Business Licenses) of this code.

d.    The owner/operator of the vacation home rental shall post a notice within the vacation home and provide a handout to guests at the time of check-in which shall read:

The owners of this home and the city of Lakeport welcome you to our town. We sincerely hope that you and your family enjoy your stay and return again soon. This home has been approved by the City for use as a vacation home rental. Because it is located in a residential area we ask that you and your family maintain a quiet and peaceful atmosphere. There are adjacent neighbors who live here full time and would appreciate your consideration. Your cooperation is appreciated.

e.    There shall be no placement of signs on the premises advertising the vacation rental property.

f.    Transient guests shall be encouraged to park their vehicles, boat trailers, etc. off city streets and on the site of the vacation home rental.

g.    The use permit shall be reviewed by the planning commission as necessary to determine compliance with conditions and may be revoked for non compliance.

F.    Large Family Day Care.

1.    A use permit is required for family day care homes and nursery schools providing family day care to nine or more individuals, including licensee’s and assistant’s children under twelve years of age.

2.    All outdoor play or exercise areas are to be enclosed with fencing a minimum of four feet high (three feet in front yard areas). Fencing six feet in height shall be provided on property lines abutting or adjoining residential uses.

3.    Hours of operation shall be between seven a.m. and nine p.m. daily. Hours may be extended upon approval of the planning commission.

4.    Parking and Loading. A minimum of two on-site parking spaces shall be reserved for the use of dropping off and picking up of individuals. These spaces shall be in addition to the normal parking requirements of the residential use. The drop-off area should be on a driveway with a loop, or an on-site turn around area should be provided. Applications may be denied if a looped driveway or on-site turn-around is not provided, and if the planning commission determines the site of the proposal would therefore be detrimental to the public’s safety.

5.    Fire Safety Requirements. A minimum of one fire extinguisher and one smoke detector shall be maintained in good working order on the premises. These devices shall meet the standards of the State Fire Marshal and the Lakeport fire department. The use shall comply with the standards of the Uniform Fire Code and Uniform Building Code as to the number of exits, and areas devoted to the use shall be constructed in compliance with the specifications of the Lakeport fire department as to the floor or floors on which the day care is to be provided.

G.    Marinas.

1.    A marina located in commercial or resort residential zoning districts may provide berthage by rental, lease, or other arrangement, incidental or accessory retail sales of food, fuel, drinks, clothing, fishing or boating supplies; and sales, rental, operating instruction, maintenance or repair services for boats or accessory equipment. A marina located in any other zoning district shall only provide private berthage facilities.

2.    Off-street parking shall be supplied at the ratio of one-half parking space for each berth, and marinas with boat ramps or hoists shall provide boat trailer parking at the ratio of one-half space per parking space required under this section.

3.    Facilities for the storage and the sale of marine-related fuel, paint, or other flammable materials shall be approved by the Lakeport fire department. Fuel pumps shall be grounded and shall meet current fire protection standards. Fuel storage facilities shall meet state and county standards.

H.    Mobilehome Parks. Unless otherwise regulated by the state of California, mobilehome parks located in the R-3 high density residential zoning district shall conform to the following minimum standards:

1.    Minimum Site Area. One acre.

2.    Maximum Density. Ten spaces per acre. No more than one single-family mobilehome may be placed in a defined space. No travel trailer, camper, or recreational vehicle shall be allowed on any approved mobilehome space.

3.    Minimum Space Area.

a.    Two thousand four hundred square feet for single-wide mobilehomes.

b.    Three thousand four hundred square feet for double-wide mobilehomes.

c.    Four thousand four hundred square feet for triple-wide mobilehomes.

4.    Minimum Space Width.

a.    Single-wide mobilehome: forty feet.

b.    Double-wide mobilehome: fifty feet.

c.    Triple-wide mobilehome: sixty feet.

5.    Maximum Lot Coverage. Mobilehomes and accessory structures shall not cover more than sixty-five percent of the park area.

6.    Minimum Yards. Minimum yard setbacks for individual spaces shall be five feet on all sides, except for any side or rear yard abutting the project property line, in which case the minimum yard setback shall be ten feet.

7.    Projection into Yard. The following structures may be erected or project into any required yard setback:

a.    Eaves, stairways, and awnings not to exceed one foot of encroachment.

b.    Landscape elements including trees, shrubs, and other plants provided that such landscape feature does not hinder the movement of the mobilehome in or out of its space or detrimentally impact adjacent on-site parking.

c.    Mobilehome tongue or hitch.

d.    Necessary appurtenances for utility services.

8.    Skirting. Spaces beneath mobilehomes shall be enclosed with skirts or by a combination of skirts, decks, and grading with ventilation and access in accordance with state law.

9.    Perimeter Fencing. A six-foot-high solid fence of masonry, wood, or other fencing or screening material as approved by the planning commission shall be provided around the perimeter of all developed areas of the mobilehome park; except that the planning commission may waive fencing along sides that front the water.

10.    Buffer Strip. There shall be a twenty foot open space landscaped buffer strip along all streets or roadways adjoining the park. No mobilehome or parking spaces shall be placed in the buffer strip. The buffer strip shall be located along the street side of any perimeter park fencing required.

11.    Recreation Area.

a.    Fifteen percent of park area shall be devoted to recreational areas and facilities, excluding any buffer strip. Use of such facilities shall be limited to park residents. All recreational areas and facilities shall be completed prior to park occupancy, except as approved by the planning commission in a phasing program.

b.    No recreation area shall be less than three thousand square feet in area, and total recreation area for any park shall not be less than six thousand square feet in area.

c.    All recreation areas shall be landscaped or planted with lawn and be included in the landscape plan submitted in conjunction with the use permit application (see subsection (G)(16) of this section).

12.    Access.

a.    All streets shall be designed by a registered civil engineer and paved with asphaltic concrete to not less than twenty-four feet in width.

b.    All cul-de-sac bulbs shall have a minimum outside turning radius of thirty feet.

c.    All corners shall have a minimum fifteen foot radii.

d.    Curbs and gutters may be installed on both sides of the streets, including roll curbs and gutters, as required by the planning commission, and the commission may approve alternatives in cases of extreme topography or low-density developments.

e.    All streets shall be illuminated pursuant to Title 25 of the State Building Code.

f.    Each space shall front on an access street.

g.    Stop signs shall be provided at all public street intersections.

h.    Circulation. All mobilehome park developments shall compliment adjoining, existing, or contemplated vehicle circulation patterns described in the transportation element of the general plan. All mobilehome park developments may be required to dedicate land adjoining public roads to the city for road widening purposes. Improvements of the same to city standards may be required by the planning commission to offset the burden placed on the public by the estimated generation of new traffic.

13.    Utilities. All utility distribution facilities shall be placed underground. Transformers, terminal boxes, meter cabinets, pedestals, concealed ducts, and other necessary appurtenant structures may be placed above ground. Water and sewer distribution facilities shall be installed in conformance with applicable utility specifications. All mobilehome spaces must be served with individual water, sewer, electricity, telephone, and cable lines.

14.    Antennas. Individual overhead television antennas, radio antennas, and satellite receivers shall not be permitted. A single community antenna or satellite receiver with underground connections, and/or underground cable television shall be provided. This subsection shall not be interpreted to prohibit "CB" or "ham radio" antennas.

15.    Trash Storage. Centralized refuse and trash storage area(s) shall be provided and be readily accessible to all mobilehome spaces. Trash storage areas shall be concealed from any public and private street and enclosed by a six foot solid wall or fence.

16.    Landscaping. All mobilehome parks shall have the following:

a.    A landscape plan for open space/buffer and recreational areas.

b.    Planting areas drawn to scale and plants clearly located and labeled. A plant list shall include the following:

1.    Common name.

2.    Size to be planted (identified in gallons).

3.    Quantity of each.

c.    Location, name, and size of all existing trees and shrubs that are to be incorporated as part of the landscape plan.

d.    Irrigation facilities adequate to maintain plant materials at all times. Use of automatic watering systems is encouraged to facilitate maintenance. Hose bibs shall be located within serviceable proximity to every planter where fixed and/or automatic water systems are not employed.

e.    A continuous landscape maintenance program shall be provided by the mobilehome park developer. The program shall include repair or replacement as needed for the life of the park.

f.    All approved landscaping shall be installed or financial assurance provided to the community development department in an amount sufficient to fund the total cost of the required landscaping prior to initial residential occupancy.

17.    Accessory Uses. Accessory uses serving park residents and which shall not be available for use by the general public, including: coin-operated machines for laundry, soft drinks, and similar uses provided that such uses shall be located inside the park and shall not occupy more than five hundred square feet of area for each fifty mobilehomes.

18.    General Provisions.

a.    The owner or operator of a mobilehome park shall be responsible for maintaining compliance with all city, county, state, and other pertinent laws and regulations pertaining to the use, operation, and maintenance of such mobilehome park. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to abrogate, void, or minimize any other pertinent regulations.

b.    The owner operator shall have a resident manager on duty at all times who shall be responsible for such compliance in the absence of the owner or operator.

c.    It shall be the responsibility of the park owner to ensure that the common landscaped areas are well-kept and maintained.

I.    Campgrounds shall conform to the following standards:

1.    Minimum Site Area. One net acre.

2.    Maximum Density. Twelve campsites per acre.

3.    Parking Space. One parking space shall be provided for each campsite. Seventy percent of all spaces shall be designed to accommodate both a car and a recreational vehicle. Parking spaces shall not be located closer than forty feet apart.

4.    Access. Each campsite shall abut and have direct access to a roadway surfaced with asphaltic concrete or a chip seal surfacing.

5.    Setbacks. All campsites or structures, except entry booths within a campground, shall be at least forty feet from the right-of-way of public roadway and at least twenty feet from an interior property line.

6.    Recreational Facilities. Any recreational facilities constructed as part of a campground shall be limited to the use of campground residents unless approved as a resort by use permit.

7.    Restroom Facilities. Restroom and shower facilities shall be provided in accordance with the Uniform Building Code.

8.    Each space shall be provided with a space number of at least three inches in height.

J.    Recreational vehicle parks shall conform to the following standards:

1.    Maximum Site Area. One acre.

2.    Maximum Density. Twelve spaces per acre.

3.    Space Area/Width. The minimum space area shall be one thousand eight hundred square feet. The minimum space width shall be thirty feet.

4.    Setbacks. Recreation vehicles shall be located a minimum of five feet from any side space line and ten feet from any rear space line or property line.

5.    Buffer Strip. A minimum twenty foot open space landscaped buffer strip shall be provided along all streets or roadways adjoining the park. No mobilehome or parking spaces shall encroach in the buffer strip. A minimum ten foot buffer strip shall be provided along all interior property lines.

6.    Recreation Area. Fifteen percent of the park shall be devoted to recreational areas and facilities, excluding any buffer strip. This area may be reduced to ten percent of the park area for parcels fronting on the lake.

7.    Road Design. The maximum grade on all roadways shall be fifteen percent.

8.    Access. Main access to a recreational vehicle space shall be by means of a twenty-five foot minimum paved access road with four-foot shoulders. The road shall be constructed to city standards.

9.    Restroom Facilities. Restroom and shower facilities shall be provided in accordance with the Uniform Building Code.

10.    Parking Standards.

a.    At least one off-street parking space shall be provided with each RV space. In addition, guest parking shall be provided at the rate of one-half additional space per RV space or campsite. Guest parking may be located in a centralized area(s) or on or adjacent to each RV space or campsite. Parking areas shall be screened from roads, activity areas, and adjoining property whenever possible. A minimum of two tandem parking spaces shall be provided at the park entrance to permit parking for persons registering for the campground.

b.    Improvements to a city road may be required along the frontage of the project. Off-site improvements may be required to provide a safe and adequate access.

11.    Numbering. Spaces shall be numbered with numbers at least three inches in height provided for each RV space.

12.    Commercial Uses. A recreational vehicle park may contain commercial uses which are for the convenience of campers, subject to a use permit.

13.    Manager’s Quarters. Living quarters may be provided for the use of a caretaker or manager.

14.    Landscaping. A landscaping plan and/or a tree management plan shall be prepared and approved for recreational vehicle parks.

a.    The landscape plan shall be prepared and shall include the following:

1.    Contours at intervals sufficient to indicate all slope areas to be landscaped.

2.    Planting areas drawn to scale and plants clearly located and labeled.

3.    Location, name, and size of all existing trees and shrubs that are to be incorporated as part of the landscape plan.

4.    Irrigation facilities adequate to maintain plant materials at all times. Hose bibs shall be located within serviceable proximity to every planter where automatic water systems are not employed.

5.    A continuous maintenance program shall be provided by the mobilehome park developer for the landscaped areas. The plan shall include repair or replacement as needed for the life of the park.

6.    All approved landscaping shall be installed or financial assurance provided to the community development department in an amount sufficient to fund the total cost of the required landscaping.

15.    Buffer. All campsites and spaces shall be buffered from other campsites and spaces with trees, shrubs, and/or other vegetation.

16.    Each campsite or recreational vehicle space may be equipped with a picnic table and fire pit or barbecue located at least twenty feet from perimeter RV space lines.

K.    Adult oriented businesses shall conform to the following criteria. No adult oriented business may be established:

1.    Within five hundred feet of any residential zone or residential use; or

2.    Within five hundred feet of any church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or any other noncommercial establishment operated by a bona fide religious organization used primarily for religious worship and related activities, community meeting use types including boys’ clubs, girls’ clubs, or similar youth organizations, or any establishment likely to be frequented or used by minors; or

3.    Within five hundred feet of any public or private school, educational facility, vocational school, college, school grounds, park, playground, preschool, nursery, day care center, or any other place frequented by children; or

4.    Within the boundaries of the Lakeport redevelopment project area; or

5.    Within two hundred feet of another adult oriented business; or

6.    Within one hundred fifty feet of Highway 29.

L.    Schools, preschools, and nursery schools shall conform to the following standards:

1.    A use permit shall be required for all schools, nursery schools, and preschools facilities and shall be subject to the issuance of a license and/or certification by all appropriate local and state agencies. The facilities shall be discontinued when local or state certification is withdrawn or expires.

2.    The maximum number of students/children attending the school, preschool, or nursery school shall be determined by the planning commission upon review of the use permit application based on site size, size of building, available parking and access, size of play area, and other relevant factors. The planning commission shall set a limit on the number of students/children as a condition of the permit.

3.    All outdoor play areas shall be enclosed with fencing a minimum of six feet high which shall conform to all setback requirements. Outdoor play areas shall be appropriately sited and properly designed. All gates shall be equipped with self-closing devices.

4.    Hours of operation for the facility shall be as determined under the use permit.

5.    A minimum of two on-site parking spaces shall be reserved for the use of dropping off and picking up of children. These spaces shall be in addition to the required parking for the staff based on the size of the facility. The drop-off/pick-up area should be designed in a drive-through loop, or an on-site turnaround area shall be provided.

6.    Minimum fire safety standards should include but not be limited to the following:

a.    Provision of at least one fire extinguisher and at least one smoke detector maintained in good working order;

b.    Compliance with the standards of the City Fire Code, State Fire Code, Uniform Fire Code, and Uniform Building Code relative to the number of entries and exists to the building and other fire safety features.

M.    Residential Care Facilities and Large Residential Care Homes--Development Standards. Residential care facilities and large residential care homes shall be developed in conformance with the following requirements:

1.    Applicants for residential care facilities and large residential care homes shall submit the following information in conjunction with the use permit application: the number of individuals to be cared for, number of on-site staff, hours of operation, description of community care facility operations, description of the surrounding neighborhood, the existing and proposed number of on-site parking spaces, a site plan and building floor plan describing the existing and proposed facility, improvements to be made, and other applicable details.

2.    Residential care facilities and large residential care homes shall not provide medical care other than normal at-home care.

3.    The use of a residential dwelling for a residential care facility or large residential care home shall not alter the outside appearance of the structure to make it appear to be anything other than a residential unit.

4.    No signs larger than four square feet advertising the use of the property as a residential care facility or large residential care home shall be permitted in residential zones.

5.    All necessary state licenses and permits to operate shall be obtained prior to approval.

6.    At least one on-site parking space shall be provided per employee of the residential care facility or large residential care home.

7.    Outside exercise areas and outside common meeting areas shall not be permitted in front yards or street side yards, unless approved by the planning commission.

8.    There shall not be more than one residential care facility or large residential care home permitted within a three-hundred-foot radius of another community care facility or day care center, unless approved by the planning commission.

9.    The proposed residential care facility or large residential care home shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood.

10.    The proposed residential care facility or large residential care home shall not materially reduce the privacy otherwise enjoyed by residents of adjoining and/or nearby properties.

11.    The proposed residential care facility or large residential care home by design and layout shall avoid noise which shall be a nuisance to neighbors.

12.    The proposed residential care facility or large residential care home shall comply with the requirements of the California Building Code, including approval by the Lakeport County fire protection district indicating conformance with the fire code.

N.    Additions or alterations to existing structures within historic areas or subdivisions shall conform to the development standards in the zoning ordinance, except that the planning commission may approve reduced development standards for lot size, lot width, lot length, length to width ratio, lot coverage, setbacks, height, and parking when the following findings are made:

1.    The reduction in development standards is the minimum necessary to facilitate a permissible use.

2.    The existing lot or structure has a unique characteristic which creates a problem which limits the ability of the proposed project to conform to the development standards of the zoning ordinance.

3.    The granting of the use permit for the reduced development standard will result in an enhanced appearance or a more functional project which benefits the surrounding neighborhood.

4.    The granting of the permit for the reduced development standard shall not create or exacerbate any health or safety impacts which effect the surrounding neighborhood. (Ord. 893 §3(11), 2014; Ord. 874 §1, 2008; Ord. 837 §1, 2005; Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003; Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

Chapter 17.25
MINOR EXCEPTIONS
Sections:

17.25.010    Purpose.

17.25.020    Conditions.

17.25.030    Applicability.

17.25.040    Application.

17.25.050    Approval notification.

17.25.060    Findings.

17.25.070    Precedents.

17.25.080    Burden of proof.

17.25.090    Minor exception expiration.

17.25.100    Time extension.

17.25.110    Revocation.

17.25.010 Purpose.
These provisions allow for minor adjustments from the standards contained in this code when, because of special circumstances applicable to the property, the strict application of this code deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under identical land use districts. (Ord. 903 §2(part), 2016: Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.25.020 Conditions.
Any minor exception granted shall be subject to such conditions as will ensure that the adjustment will not constitute a grant of special privilege(s) inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and land use district in which such property is situated. (Ord. 903 §2(part), 2016: Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.25.030 Applicability.
The community development director may grant a minor exception up to a maximum of ten percent governing the following measurable design/site considerations or other similar situations.

A.    Distance between structures.

B.    Lot dimensions.

C.    On-site parking, loading, and landscaping.

D.    Setbacks.

Any modification request which exceeds the prescribed limitations outlined in this section shall require the filing of a variance application. (Ord. 903 §2(part), 2016: Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.25.040 Application.
An application for a minor exception shall be filed on forms provided by the community development department. (Ord. 903 §2(part), 2016: Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.25.050 Approval notification.
Prior to approval of a minor exception, and not less than ten calendar days prior to the proposed issuance, the community development department shall notify owners of contiguous properties immediately adjacent to the said project and/or additional properties as determined by the community development director. Notification shall be given by mail or delivery.

The written notice shall declare that the requested minor exception may be issued without review and decision by the planning commission if no written request for review is filed with the community development department within ten calendar days of the date of mailing.

If no request for review and decision by the planning commission is filed with the community development department, the minor exception permit may be issued by the community development director.

If a request for review by the planning commission is filed with the community development department pursuant to this section, the community development director shall schedule a public hearing before the planning commission at its next regularly scheduled meeting. Notification of said public hearing shall adhere to the requirements of Chapter 17.30. (Ord. 903 §2(part), 2016: Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.25.060 Findings.
The community development director shall make a decision on the request in writing and recite therein the findings upon which such decision is based, pursuant to Section 65906 of the Government Code. The director may approve and/or modify an application in whole or in part, with or without conditions, only if all of the following findings are made:

A.    That there are special circumstances applicable to the property, including its size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings which create an unusual situation in terms of the ability to comply with code requirements.

B.    That granting the minor exception is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other properties in the same vicinity and land use district and is restrictive to the property for which the minor exception is sought.

C.    That granting the minor exception will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in such vicinity and land use district in which such property is located.

D.    That granting the minor exception does not constitute a special privilege inconsistent with the limitation upon other properties in the vicinity and land use district in which such property is located.

E.    That granting the minor exception does not exceed ten percent of the standard(s) being modified, or allow a use or activity which is not otherwise authorized by the regulations governing the subject parcel.

F.    That granting the minor exception will not be inconsistent with the general plan. (Ord. 903 §2(part), 2016: Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.25.070 Precedents.
The granting of a prior minor exception is not admissible evidence in support of the granting of a new minor exception. (Ord. 903 §2(part), 2016: Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.25.080 Burden of proof.
The burden of proof to establish the evidence in support of the findings is the responsibility of the applicant. (Ord. 903 §2(part), 2016: Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.25.090 Minor exception expiration.
A minor exception shall be exercised within one year from the date of approval, or it shall become null and void. (Ord. 903 §2(part), 2016: Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.25.100 Time extension.
The director may, upon an application being filed prior to expiration and for good cause, grant a time extension not to exceed six months. Upon granting of an extension, the director shall ensure that the minor exception complies with all current code provisions. (Ord. 903 §2(part), 2016: Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.25.110 Revocation.
The planning commission may hold a public hearing to revoke or modify a minor exception granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Ten days prior to the public hearing, notice shall be delivered in writing to the applicant and/or owner of the property for which such minor exception was granted. Notice shall be deemed delivered two days after being mailed, first class postage paid, to the owner as shown on the current tax rolls of the county of Lake, and/or the project applicant.

A minor exception may be revoked or modified by the director if any one of the following findings can be made:

A.    That circumstances have changed so that one or more of the findings contained in Section 17.25.060 can no longer be made, and the grantee has not substantially exercised the rights granted by the minor exception.

B.    That the minor exception was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud.

C.    That the improvement authorized pursuant to the minor exception had ceased or was suspended for six or more consecutive calendar months.

D.    That one or more of the conditions of the minor exception have not been met, and the grantee has not substantially exercised the rights granted by the minor exception.

E.    That the improvement authorized pursuant to the minor exception is in violation of any statute, ordinance, law, or regulation.

F.    That the improvement permitted by the minor exception is detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or constitutes a nuisance. (Ord. 903 §2(part), 2016: Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

Chapter 17.26
VARIANCES
Sections:

17.26.010    Purpose.

17.26.020    Application.

17.26.030    Applicability.

17.26.040    Hearings and notice.

17.26.050    Findings.

17.26.060    Precedents.

17.26.070    Burden of proof.

17.26.080    Variance expiration.

17.26.090    Time extension.

17.26.100    Modification and revocation.

17.26.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to provide flexibility in the application of land use and development regulations necessary to achieve the purposes of this title by establishing procedures for approval or disapproval of variance applications. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.26.020 Application.
Application for a variance shall be filed in a manner consistent with the requirements contained in Chapter 17.29. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.26.030 Applicability.
The planning commission may grant a variance from the requirements of this code governing the modification of the dimensional standards involving the distance between structures, lot area, lot coverage, lot dimensions, setbacks, and the number and dimensions of parking area or loading space requirements. Variances to use standards or general plan densities are prohibited by the California Government Code. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.26.040 Hearings and notice.
Upon receipt of a variance application, a public hearing shall be set and notice of such hearing given in a manner consistent with Chapter 17.29. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.26.050 Findings.
Following the public hearing, the planning commission shall record their decision in writing and shall recite the findings upon which such decision is based, pursuant to Section 65906 of the Government Code. The commission may approve and/or modify an application in whole or in part, with or without conditions, only if all of the following findings are made:

A.    The strict application of this code deprives the property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity, and under identical land use district classification, due to special circumstances applicable to the property including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings;

B.    That granting the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other properties in the same vicinity and land use district and denied to the property for which the variance is sought;

C.    That granting the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or injurious to the property or improvements in such vicinity and land use district in which the property is located;

D.    That granting the variance does not constitute a special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and land use district in which such property is located;

E.    That granting the variance does not allow a use or activity which is not otherwise expressly authorized by the regulations governing the subject parcel; and

F.    That granting the variance will not be inconsistent with the Lakeport general plan. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.26.060 Precedents.
The grant of a prior variance is not admissible evidence for the granting of a new variance. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.26.070 Burden of proof.
The burden of proof to establish the evidence in support of the findings is the responsibility of the applicant. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.26.080 Variance expiration.
A variance shall be exercised within one year from the date of approval or the variance shall become null and void. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.26.090 Time extension.
The planning commission may, upon an application and for good cause, grant a time extension not to exceed six months. Upon granting of an extension, the commission shall ensure that the variance complies with all current code provisions. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.26.100 Modification and revocation.
The planning commission may hold a public hearing to revoke or modify a variance granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Ten days prior to the public hearing, notice shall be delivered in writing to the applicant and/or owner of the property of which such variance was granted.

A variance may be revoked or modified by the commission if one of the following findings can be made:

A.    That circumstances have changed so that one or more of the findings contained in Section 17.26.050 can no longer be made and the grantee has not substantially exercised the rights granted by the variance;

B.    That the variance was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud;

C.    That the improvement authorized pursuant to the variance had ceased or was suspended for six or more consecutive calendar months;

D.    That one or more of the conditions of the variance have not been met and the grantee has not substantially exercised the rights granted by the variance;

E.    That the improvement authorized pursuant to the variance is in violation of any statute, ordinance, law, or regulation; and

F.    That the improvement permitted by the variance is detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or constitutes a nuisance. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

Chapter 17.27
ARCHITECTURAL AND DESIGN REVIEW
Sections:

17.27.010    Purpose.

17.27.020    Projects subject to architectural and design review.

17.27.030    Authority.

17.27.040    Preliminary consultation.

17.27.050    Concept plan review.

17.27.060    Plans to be submitted--Application.

17.27.070    Application review.

17.27.080    Approval, special conditions, and findings.

17.27.090    Expiration of plan approval.

17.27.100    Compliance with conditions of approval.

17.27.110    Architectural and design review criteria and standards.

17.27.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is:

A.    To protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the city by promoting orderly and harmonious growth;

B.    To carry out the goals, policies, and programs of the Lakeport general plan with respect to land development and community design;

C.    To ensure that new development occurs in accordance with the provisions of this title;

D.    To recognize the correlation between land values and aesthetics and to provide a method by which the city may manage this correlation to the benefit of the community;

E.    To lend stability to land values and investments by implementing consistent design standards and guidelines;

F.    To ensure that future development is attractive and harmonious with Lakeport’s unique character and community identity;

G.    To encourage excellence in design for all new development which harmonizes style, intensity, and type of construction with the natural environment and respects the unique features of each site and the surrounding area;

H.    To promote high quality design that enhances the entire community, is consistent with the scale and quality of existing development, and is harmoniously integrated with the natural environment;

I.    To discourage the development of individual buildings which dominate the surrounding area or attract attention through inappropriate colors, mass, or architectural expressions;

J.    To upgrade the appearance, quality, and condition of existing improvements in conjunction with new development or remodeling of the site; and

K.    To preserve buildings and areas with historic or aesthetic value and maintain the character and scale of the city. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.27.020 Projects subject to architectural and design review.
Architectural and design review is required for all new proposed commercial, industrial, multifamily residential, institutional, or similar buildings for the proposed exterior remodel of buildings that result in altered appearances, additions, extensions, or enlargements, and for all proposed residential to office/commercial conversion projects. No building permit or other entitlement for a parking lot, a new structure, or the remodel, alteration, or enlargement of an existing structure, shall be issued until the site plan, the architectural elevations, landscape plan, and related plans have been reviewed and approved by the planning commission or community development director as provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003: Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.27.030 Authority.
Authority to approve plans for projects subject to architectural and design review shall be authorized as follows:

A.    Administrative Approval. The community development director is authorized to review and administratively approve:

1.    Change of Use. A change of use in an existing nonresidential building involving no new construction upon the finding that the use and site meet the requirements of this title and that all standard public improvements are existing.

2.    The painting or repainting of all commercial, industrial, multifamily, institutional, or similar buildings.

3.    Single-family dwellings and additions thereto.

B.    Minor Architectural and Design Review. The community development director is authorized to review and decide upon applications for minor architectural and design review involving the following:

1.    Small Projects. New uses, renovations, remodels, or additions to existing nonresidential structures which do not exceed four hundred square feet in gross floor area or that do not involve alterations to more than twenty percent of any one or more exterior side(s) of the structure.

2.    Duplex residential units.

C.    The community development director may refer to the planning commission any project application which involves a significant policy issue or that cannot be decided upon at a staff level. The planning commission shall then assume authority for the review and decision of the project application.

D.    Planning Commission. The planning commission is authorized to review and decide on all other plans for commercial, industrial, multifamily residential, and institutional structures, and the alteration or enlargement of existing commercial, industrial, multifamily, and institutional structures except as provided for in subsections A and B of this section.

E.    No condition of the architectural and design review approval shall impose requirements pertaining to use, density, floor area ratio, creek setbacks, parking and loading, and similar requirements that are more restrictive than those required by the applicable zoning district on a valid use permit or variance. (Ord. 903 §3, 2016: Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.27.040 Preliminary consultation.
Preliminary consultation between the project sponsor and the community development department staff to discuss applicable standards and design guidelines is recommended and may be initiated by requesting an appointment at the community development department. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.27.050 Concept plan review.
Prior to the submittal of a formal application for architectural and design review, the project sponsor may submit a less detailed development plan for review by either the staff or the planning commission. Concept plans will be informally reviewed by the staff or planning commission and comments generated as to issues, concerns, and necessary modifications. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.27.060 Plans to be submitted--Application.
The property owner or an authorized agent shall submit clearly drawn and well-prepared plans as part of an application for architectural and design review.

Plans for major architectural and design review shall be prepared by a licensed architect, engineer, or designer. In all cases, the application shall include the following:

A.    A site plan drawn to scale showing the proposed location of structures and other improvements including driveways, pedestrian walks, off-street parking and loading areas, landscaped areas, fences, walls, and other proposed project improvements. Site plans shall indicate the location of entrances and exits, the direction of traffic flow of the off-street parking and loading areas, parking spaces, loading berths, and the areas for turning and maneuvering of vehicles. The site plan shall also show the location(s) of exterior lighting, trash enclosures, location and size(s) of water and sewer lines, storm drainage facilities, fire hydrants, property lines, setbacks, service areas, storage or work areas, and any other detail necessary to depict the project.

B.    An architectural drawing or rendering drawn to standard architectural scale showing all elevations of the proposed structure(s) as they are intended to appear upon completion of the project. The drawing shall detail the proposed use of building materials, windows, doors, and other architectural features in a way that will allow the planning commission, staff, and the general public to understand the project and the inter-relationship of the various components. A color rendering of the proposed structure, building material samples, and proposed paint colors shall also be submitted.

C.    A landscape plan for the project indicating existing and proposed vegetation, the location and design of landscaped areas, irrigation facilities, plant size and spacing, and all other landscape features. A tree report may also be required.

D.    A grading plan indicating existing and proposed grades (contours) on the site, retaining walls, or other soil stability issues.

E.    For painting or re-painting projects, a color rendering of the building, color chips, color charts, or similar graphic plans shall be submitted showing the primary color to be used on the structure along with trim and accent colors.

F.    An optional floor plan showing the inter-relationship between the inside function of the building and outside improvements. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.27.070 Application review.
Architectural and design review applications considered by the planning commission shall be reviewed at a public hearing in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.29. The planning commission shall consider the application at the most appropriate meeting date within sixty days following a determination by the community development director that the application is complete. The community development director shall publish a notice in the local newspaper, at least ten calendar days in advance of the meeting, giving the application number, the applicant’s name and address, the proposed action, the location, and assessor’s parcel number along with the date, time, and place of the public hearing.

Prior to approval of an administrative or minor architectural and design review, and not less than ten calendar days prior to the proposed issuance, the community development department shall notify owners of contiguous properties immediately adjacent to the said project and/or additional properties as determined by the community development director. Notification shall be given by mail or delivery.

The written notice shall declare that the requested administrative or minor architectural and design review may be issued without review and decision by the planning commission if no written request for review is filed with the community development department within ten calendar days of the date of mailing.

If no request for review and decision by the planning commission is filed with the community development department, the administrative or minor architectural and design review may be issued by the community development director.

If a request for review by the planning commission is filed with the community development department pursuant to this section, the community development director shall schedule a public hearing before the planning commission at its next regularly scheduled meeting. Notification of said public hearing shall adhere to the requirements of Chapter 17.30. (Ord. 903 §4, 2016: Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.27.080 Approval, special conditions, and findings.
The planning commission or community development director may approve, conditionally approve, or deny an application for architectural and design review. The planning commission or community development director shall review proposed applications for consistency with the architectural and design review criteria and standards included herein and shall require any conditions necessary to meet the purpose of this chapter in order to attain compliance with the criteria set forth herein.

A.    The planning commission or community development director shall make the following findings in approving an architectural and design review application:

1.    The proposed project is consistent with the purposes of the Lakeport zoning ordinance.

2.    The project is in substantial compliance with the design criteria.

3.    The project is consistent with the Lakeport general plan.

B.    The planning commission or community development director shall make findings (reasons) in denying an architectural and design review application.

C.    After a decision is made on an architectural and design review application, the community development department shall forward a letter to the applicant indicating the decision and listing any conditions or required changes in the project design.

D.    Appeals of the community development director or planning commission’s decision shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 17.31 of this title. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.27.090 Expiration of plan approval.
Architectural and design review approval shall lapse and become void after one year following the date of the approval unless a building permit is issued and construction is begun. The approval may be extended for up to one year by the original decision-making body provided that the application for an extension is filed with the community development department prior to the expiration. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.27.100 Compliance with conditions of approval.
Applicants who have received approval for architectural and design review shall comply with all conditions of approval and maintain the project in accordance with the required conditions at all times. Failure to comply with the conditions will result in a violation of the municipal code.

Prior to issuance of a building permit for the project, final site plans, landscape and irrigation plans, and other plans, where required, shall be approved by the community development director. The final plans shall be fully implemented prior to final building permit inspection of the project. If implementation of final plans have not been completed on such date, an extension of time for completion may be granted by the community development director if implementation is secured by an agreement and posting of adequate security.

Proposed changes, modifications, and alterations in the design or appearance of an approved project shall be submitted to and approved by the city. Minor changes (see Section 17.27.030(B)) may be approved by the community development director. All other changes, modifications, and alterations shall be submitted to and approved by the planning commission. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.27.110 Architectural and design review criteria and standards.
Projects subject to architectural and design review shall be in general compliance with the following criteria.

A.    Criteria Promoting Harmony of Design of Buildings.

1.    New buildings should be generally consistent with the scale, form, and proportion of existing development. This can be done by repeating existing building lines and surface treatment and requiring some uniformity of detail, scale, proportion, textures, materials, color, and building form.

2.    The use of unusual shapes, color, and other characteristics which cause new buildings to call excessive attention to themselves and create a jarring disharmony should be avoided or reserved for structures of broad public significance.

3.    New buildings should strengthen the particular design features of their locale by, for example, framing views, enclosing open spaces, or continuing particular design features or statements.

4.    The height and bulk of new buildings should relate to the prevailing scale of existing development to avoid overwhelming or dominating it.

5.    The existing building line of a structure (at the street line) should be maintained unless a proposed setback conforms to an overall design plan or is part of a larger development plan.

6.    The relationship of structural mass to voids (windows or doors) of a front facade should relate to adjacent buildings.

7.    If several storefronts are located in one building, they should be unified in design treatment; e.g., design of windows and door openings, use of materials and color. All storefronts should include display windows with a sill height not more than two feet from grade.

8.    Building additions should be designed to reflect the existing building in terms of scale, materials, fenestration, and color. A change in scale may require a transitional design element between the addition and the existing building. Facade renovations should include as few different materials as possible.

9.    Adjacent buildings of different architectural styles should be made compatible by such means as materials, repetition of certain plant varieties, screens, and sight breaks.

B.    Criteria Promoting Creativity and Diversity of Design.

1.    Monotony of design in single or multiple building projects should be avoided. Variation of detail, form, and siting should be used to provide visual interest.

2.    Architectural design is not restricted. Evaluation of the appearance of a project should be based on the quality of its design and relationship to surroundings.

C.    Criteria Regarding Building Design.

1.    Where large structures are proposed, massing should be broken up through the use of setbacks and other design techniques. Buildings with excessive blank walls are discouraged. Variation in color, trim, and building materials is encouraged in these situations. Building offsets shall be provided along each building to relieve the visual effect of a single long wall. Roof lines should also be varied. An individual building should use a combination of story heights to provide further visual relief. The development should incorporate masonry chimneys, cupolas, dormers, skylights, or belvederes.

2.    Buildings should be designed so that the roofs are visually less dominant than the walls.

3.    The orientation of buildings to provide access through rear entrances is allowed when the rear facade receives appropriate design treatment.

4.    New buildings should be oriented or designed with setbacks to minimize shadows falling on public or semi-public spaces.

D.    Criteria Regarding Building Details.

1.    A human scale should be achieved at ground level, at entryways, and along street frontages through the use of such elements as windows, doors, columns, and canopies.

2.    Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roofs, the ground, or buildings should be screened from public view with materials harmonious with the building, or they should be so located as not to be visible from public view.

3.    Building components, such as windows, doors, eaves, and parapets, should be in proportion to one another.

4.    The structural lines of a building and its material should be retained at the storefront level, for instance, brick piers and columns should be carried down to street level.

5.    Roof shape (flat, hip, mansard, or gable) and material should be architecturally compatible with the rest of the building and should reflect the area pattern.

6.    Materials should be selected for suitability to the type of buildings and the design in which they are used. Buildings should have the same materials, or those that are architecturally harmonious, used for all building walls and other exterior building components wholly or partly visible from public ways. Materials should be of durable quality.

7.    Metal awnings are not recommended. Awnings should have solid colors complimenting the exterior building colors. Awnings should be in scale with the building design.

8.    Facade renovations should not destroy or cover original architectural features of a building. These details are often vital to the proper proportion of the facade. The city encourages the removal of false storefronts.

9.    In renovations, natural, unpainted brick should be retained. Painted brick, if weathered and losing its paint finish, can be stripped using chemical solutions. In many cases, painted brick should remain painted to protect the older, softer brick.

10.    Brick and stone facades should not be covered with artificial siding or panels. Generally, no material will look more appropriate on a facade than what was originally used.

11.    Roof cornices should be retained, repaired, replaced, or added as they cap or terminate a building. When replacing or adding windows on a facade, use window and window trim of the same size and character as the original.

E.    Criteria Regarding Building Color.

1.    In general, no more than three colors should be used on a building: the base color, the major trim, and the minor trim. The base color should be the natural color of the masonry or a primary paint color. The base color should relate harmoniously with the base colors on contiguous or close by buildings.

2.    Light base colors will visually project and lessen the importance of the building mass. Darker base colors tend to visually recede and emphasize the trim. The major trim color is used on the decorative elements which serve to define the facade of the building. These include the upper and lower cornices, window caps and sills, and storefront columns.

3.    When the base color of the building is a natural brick, the major trim color should be related to the brick color. When the base color is painted, the trim color should complement the base color. The minor trim color should be used primarily as an accent to highlight the architectural details of the facade. Window frames and other trim elements can be emphasized by the minor trim color. Sometimes two colors can be used as a minor trim color depending on how much detail exists.

4.    General Building Color Guidelines.

a.    Use more subtle colors on larger and plainer buildings.

b.    Use more colors and more intense colors on small buildings and those with elaborate detailing.

c.    Relate paint colors to natural materials found on the building.

d.    Relate paint colors to existing elements found on the building such as signs or awnings.

e.    Encourage contrasting colors which accent architectural details.

f.    Encourage colors which accent entrances to the building.

g.    Avoid the most intense hues of a color.

h.    Avoid using more than one vivid color per building.

i.    Avoid using colors that are disharmonious with colors found on adjacent buildings.

j.    Within the CB district, use historically appropriate colors.

F.    Criteria Regarding Buffering, Incompatible Uses.

1.    Project features that may have negative impacts upon adjacent properties should be buffered from the adjacent properties. Screening should be provided for roof equipment; parking and loading areas shall be screened from residential areas; garbage and dumpster areas shall be enclosed; landscaping shall be used to soften the impact of parking and loading areas.

2.    In areas where parking lot paving abuts the sidewalk, raised planters can be used to partially screen parking areas. Low fencing can provide maximum screening while adding an attractive and decorative element to the streetscape.

G.    Criteria Regarding Lighting. Exterior lighting, when used, can enhance the building design and the adjoining landscaping. Lighting standards and building fixtures should be of a design and size compatible with the historic character of the area, building, and adjacent areas. Lighting shall be restrained in design and excessive brightness avoided. Lighting must not create glare or shine into street right-of-way.

H.    Maintenance Criteria.

1.    Continued good appearance depends upon the extent and quality of maintenance. The choice of materials and their use, together with the types of finishes and other protective measures, must be conducive to easy maintenance and up-keep.

2.    Materials and finishes shall be selected for their durability and wear as well as for their beauty. Proper measures shall be taken to protect against the elements, neglect, damage, and abuse.

3.    Provision for washing and cleaning of buildings and structures, and control of dirt and refuse, should be included in the design. Improvements that tend to catch and accumulate debris, leaves, trash, dirt, and rubbish shall be avoided.

I.    1. Landscape Design Guidelines. Landscape design guidelines in site planning are based on three considerations: (a) landscaping serves multiple functions; (b) landscape design should be consistent with good design principles; and (c) landscaping must be sensitive to the characteristics and maintenance concerns of the most common landscaping material, namely plants.

2.    Landscape Functions.

a.    The most common function of landscaping is aesthetic. Through the use of plantings and other landscaping elements, a site may be made more pleasing and/or undesirable views may be hidden. Landscaping can help unify the composite parts of a site, blend inharmonious land uses, and buffer incompatible uses. Landscaping can compliment the design of a building, add color to the built environment, or soften spaces or surfaces that appear cold or unwelcoming.

b.    Landscaping may be used to control soil erosion, reduce harsh unpleasant sounds, remove pollutants from the air, control glare and reflection, and slow the effects of erosive winds.

c.    Shade trees and windbreaks are examples of landscaping elements used for climate control. Plants increase human comfort by shading the sun’s rays and intercepting solar radiation.

d.    Landscaping elements can also block and divert winds or channel them through narrow openings. When the prevailing wind direction shifts with the season, a summer breeze can be captured and winter winds and rains diverted with careful placement of plantings and buildings. Long, thin walls are the most effective windbreaks, particularly if they are not completely impenetrable. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

Chapter 17.28
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Sections:

17.28.010    Purpose and intent.

17.28.010 Purpose and intent.
Performance standards regulate the design and use of buildings or parcels of land, in order to minimize public hazards and to prevent the creation of nuisances and other conditions which are potentially harmful or detrimental to the users of the property or surrounding area. The purpose of the performance standards shall be to protect and improve the living and working environment, the appearance of the community, reduce or eliminate nuisance conditions, and to minimize the impacts of certain land uses on adjacent properties.

Performance standards shall apply to the use of land or buildings and to all new construction, renovation, and alteration of existing uses or structures in all zoning districts. No building or land shall be used or constructed if it creates a fire or explosion hazard; noise or vibrations; smoke, dust, odor, or other air pollution; electrical disturbance; glare; heat; or liquid or solid waste amount or degrees that adversely affect users of the property or surrounding areas.

In addition to the development standards contained in other sections of the zoning ordinance, the following performance standards shall be complied with. Whenever the performance and development standards are in conflict, the more stringent standards shall apply.

A.    Noise. Certain noise levels are detrimental to the health and safety of individuals. Excessive noise is considered a public nuisance and is discouraged by the city. In no case shall noise or sound emissions, for any use occurring on any property, exceed the equivalent sound pressure levels and decibels (the A-weighted scale) for any fifteen-minute period in any one-hour period as stipulated in the following:

Maximum 15-minute within any one-hour equivalent sound pressure levels (A-weighted - dBA)

Time of Day

Receiving Property Zoning District

 

*Residential

Commercial

Industrial

7 a.m. - 10 p.m.

60

70

75

10 p.m. - 7 a.m.

45

55

60

*NOTE: The residential category includes all single-family and multifamily zoning districts.

These maximums are applicable at any point beyond the property lines of the property containing or generating the noise.

1.    Noise of Short Duration. Some noise may be of a short duration or an impulsive character such as hammering, screeching, motor noise, barking dogs, power boats, home power tools, etc. The median octave band sound pressure levels, as indicated in the following table, shall not be exceeded beyond the property line of origin when the receiving property is zoned residential or is occupied by a dwelling, hospital, school, library, or nursing home.

Octave Band Center

 

 

Frequency, Hz

7:00 a.m.--10:00 p.m.

10:00 a.m.--7:00 a.m.

31.5

68

65

63

65

62

125

61

56

250

55

50

500

52

46

1,000

49

43

2,000

46

40

4,000

43

37

8,000

40

34

2.    New Development. In the review of new land use and development proposals, the city shall require the following:

a.    A standard of forty-five dB for indoor noise in all new residential development including hotels and motels.

b.    The preparation (if necessary) of noise studies and noise attenuation features as a condition of approval for new projects.

c.    Post-construction testing for residential and office projects that are proposed in areas that have an existing Ldn of sixty-five dB.

B.    Light and Glare. To ensure that development within the community does not unnecessarily create light and glare nuisances, the following performance standards shall be observed:

1.    Shielding and Downlighting. Lighting used in the community must be shielded, boxed, or directed at a downward angle so as to minimize the generation of light and glare and to assure that there is no spill over of light and glare that will impact drivers or pedestrians on the public streets, on site activities, and adjoining or nearby properties. No activity shall be permitted which causes excessive light and glare to be transmitted or reflected to surrounding properties at a level resulting in detrimental impacts to the community.

2.    Candle Power. The candle power of all lights shall be the minimum needed to accomplish the purpose of the light.

3.    Flashing Lights. Light sources shall generally not be permitted in landscaped, buffer, or setback areas except for those illuminating pedestrian walkways. Lighting used to illuminate parking areas of commercial uses shall be designed, located, and installed to be shielded and downlit and to reflect away from any nearby residential or open space zoning districts. Lighting for advertising signs shall not create glare or light which extends to surrounding properties.

C.    Radioactivity or Electrical Disturbances. No activities shall be permitted which emit dangerous radioactivity at any point nor shall electrical disturbances which adversely affect the operation of any equipment, other than that of the creator of such disturbances, be allowed.

D.    Odors, Smoke, Fumes, Dust, Particulate Matter. No emission shall be permitted at any point which would violate the current regulation for such emission as established by the Lake County Air Quality Management District. No emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter shall be permitted in such quantities as to be readily detectable when diluted in the ratio of one volume of odorous air to four volumes of clean air at the lot line. Any process which may involve the creation or emission of any odors shall be provided with a secondary safeguard system so that control will be maintained if the primary safeguard system should fail.

During grading, earthwork, and/or building construction activities, adequate dust suppression methods shall be utilized. Such methods include frequent watering and the use of dust palliatives. All soil materials that are being transported on or off the project site shall be covered, and all materials deposited within a public right-of-way shall be removed immediately.

E.    Liquid or Solid Waste. No discharge shall be permitted at any point into any public sewer, private sewage system, stream, or into the ground, except in accord with standards approved by the state and county departments of health and local ordinances, of any materials of such nature or temperature as can contaminate any water supply, interfere with bacterial processes in sewage treatment, or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or offensive elements. There shall be no accumulation outdoors of solid wastes unless stored in closed containers. Commercial-type dumpsters shall not be used for typical trash storage activities in single-family residential areas.

F.    Fire and Explosion Hazards. All activities involving, and all storage of, flammable and/or explosive materials shall be provided with adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and/or explosion and adequate fire fighting and fire suppression equipment and devices standard in the industry as required by the Uniform Fire Code.

G.    Heat. For the purpose of this title "heat" is defined as thermal energy of a radioactive, conductive, or convective nature. Heat emitted at any or all points shall not at any time cause a temperature increase on any adjacent property in excess of ten degrees Fahrenheit, whether such change be in the air or on the ground, in a natural stream or lake, or in any structure on such adjacent property.

H.    Public Utility Facilities. Public utility distribution and transportation lines, towers and poles, and underground facilities for the distribution of gas, water, communication, and electrical facilities shall be allowed in all zoning districts except for the CBD district. All proposed routes for these transmission lines shall be submitted to the city planning commission for review and recommendation to the city council for their approval. Such approval shall be made prior to the acquisition of necessary right-of-way or easements.

I.    Undergrounding of Utilities. All electric and communication facilities that are intended to serve new buildings or structures constructed in all zoning districts shall be placed underground on the premises to be served except for appurtenant facilities such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes, meter cabinets, and concealed ducts. New or relocated off-site utilities serving new development areas such as shopping centers, subdivisions, industrial parks, multifamily residences, or similar projects shall be installed underground. Undergrounding of utilities may be waived by staff or the planning commission when there is a finding made that there are unique or unusual circumstances existing which preclude the underground installation.

J.    Location Restrictions for RVs, Campers, and Trailers. Recreational vehicles, campers, or trailers shall only be used for human habitation or occupied for living or sleeping quarters when installed in an approved development. Recreational vehicles, campers, and trailers may be occupied on individual residential lots within the city on a temporary basis by visiting friends, relatives, or in similar situations for not more than thirty days in a calendar year.

K.    Fire Protection Fee-Building Height. Buildings in any district shall not be more than forty feet in height unless a use permit is secured. As a condition of the use permit, the planning commission shall require the payment of a special fire protection fee equivalent to one dollar for each square foot of gross floor area above thirty-five feet allowed by the use permit. Any building in any zoning district less than forty feet in height and containing more than two stories shall pay the special fire protection fee equivalent to one dollar for each square foot of gross floor area for all stories above two.

L.    Special Height Restrictions. Chimneys, silos, flag poles, monuments, radio towers, water tanks, church steeples, and similar structures or mechanical appurtenances may exceed the thirty-five foot height limit within the city upon approval of a use permit.

M.    Projection of Eaves and Canopies. Architectural features on primary buildings such as cornices, eaves, or canopies may not extend closer than three feet to any side lot line. Eaves and canopies may extend a maximum of three feet into the required front or rear yard area. Architectural features in commercial zoning districts may extend beyond the property line assuming that fire safety regulations and Uniform Building Code requirements are complied with.

N.    Projection of Porches, Landings, and Stairways. Open uncovered raised porches, landing places, or outside stairways may project to within four feet of any side lot line and to within six feet of any rear lot line.

O.    Fences and Walls/Residential Areas. Fences and walls constructed in all residential zoning districts shall be subject to the following:

1.    Fences or walls up to six feet in height are permitted along the interior side lot line(s) to the front setback line, along the interior rear lot line, along the front yard setback line, and along the side yard street setback line.

2.    Fences or walls up to three feet in height are permitted along the front lot line--within the front yard setback area, and along the street side lot line--within the street side yard setback area. Fences or walls over three feet in height, but not exceeding six feet in height, may be allowed along the front or street side lot lines within the front or street side yard setback areas only if approved by the planning commission, and when the following criteria are complied with:

a.    The fence shall not create a substantial hazard to the public by creating reduced visibility or other sight distance problems.

b.    The fence shall be aesthetically pleasing and not create an inappropriate walled-in effect, visual barrier, or result in a public safety problem.

3.    Fences or walls over six feet in height but under eight feet in height along interior side or rear lot lines may be approved by the planning commission when the following criteria are complied with:

a.    The fence shall not create a substantial hazard to the public by creating reduced visibility or other sight distance problems.

b.    The fence shall be aesthetically pleasing and does not create an inappropriate walled-in effect, visual barrier, or result in a public safety problem.

4.    Retaining walls are permitted along all property lines for the purpose of retaining natural grade or engineered fill areas subject to the issuance and approval of a building permit in compliance with the Uniform Building Code. All retaining walls in excess of four feet in height measured from the footing shall be designed by a civil or structural engineer. Retaining walls of any height may be constructed adjacent or along all property lines without setback requirements.

5.    Prior to the review of fence height request by the planning commission, and not less than ten calendar days prior to the proposed meeting of the planning commission, the community development department shall notify owners of contiguous properties immediately adjacent to the said project and/or additional properties as determined by the community development director. Notification shall be given by mail or delivery. The planning commission may impose conditions on the approval of a fence height request in order to achieve compliance with the fence criteria. The planning commission may deny a request when the criteria have not been satisfied.

P.    Fences and Walls--Commercial. Fences and walls constructed in commercial zoning districts shall be subject to the following:

1.    Fences or walls in commercial or office zoning districts shall be subject to the issuance of a zoning permit or architectural and design review.

2.    Fences or walls may be permitted in the front or side yard setback areas adjacent to a street within commercial zoning districts subject to the issuance of a zoning permit.

Q.    Decks. Decks that serve the upper stories of residential uses shall be allowed to extend into the rear yard air space a distance not to exceed fifty percent of the rear yard area measured from the rear of the main structure to the rear property line. Said decks shall not extend more than twenty feet from the rear of the main structure and shall maintain a minimum rear yard setback of ten feet. All decks shall maintain the following standards:

1.    All decks shall have a rail for safety in accordance with the requirements of the Uniform Building Code.

2.    No deck shall be enclosed to form a living or storage area when used as a portion of the rear yard setback.

3.    At least one method of ingress and egress shall be directly provided from the living unit from which the deck is designed to serve.

4.    Decks or patios serving the ground floor of a residential structure shall not exceed an elevation of eighteen inches from natural grade when constructed in the required side or rear yard setback area.

R.    General Plan Roadway Improvement Lines and Building Setback Lines. For the purpose of obtaining adequate street right-of-way widths to ensure traffic safety, accommodate increased traffic volumes, and provide for an efficient flow of vehicles, general plan roadway improvement lines are established for the purpose of identifying the necessary road right-of-way width on certain streets. General plan roadway improvement lines shall be consistent with the intent of Map 11-3 Recommended Roadway Improvements found in the Lakeport general plan. Additions or remodeling of structures occurring on parcels adjacent to general plan lines shall recognize these lines in the determination of setbacks. Development projects involving the conversion of an existing structure, or new construction on parcels adjacent to general plan lines, shall require an offer of dedication of land in accordance with the general plan as a condition of approval. Where a general plan recommended roadway line has been established for any street within the city, the required yards shall be measured from such line, and in no case shall there be an encroachment into or upon any official plan line.

S.    Accessory Buildings. Where an accessory building is attached to a main building, it shall be made structurally a part of and have a common roof consistent with the main building. It shall comply in all respects with the requirements of this title and in accordance with the following:

1.    An accessory building in a residential district shall be located on the rear one-half of the lot and at least ten feet from any dwelling or building existing on or under construction on the same lot or on an adjacent lot.

2.    Accessory buildings shall not be located within five feet of any alley or, in the case of a corner lot project, beyond the front yard required or existing on an adjacent lot.

3.    Residential garage entrances shall be a minimum of twenty feet from the front property line.

4.    Accessory buildings shall be constructed with or subsequent to the construction of the main building.

5.    Accessory buildings in any district shall not exceed fifteen feet in height.

6.    A lawn, garden, or storage shed unserved by utilities (except electrical power), and containing less than one hundred fifty square feet, is exempt from these requirements, except for height and setback limitations. Such accessory buildings may be placed to within one foot of the side and rear property lines but shall not encroach into the street-side, setback, or front yard setback area.

T.    Swimming Pools. Swimming pools in residential districts shall be constructed on the rear one-half of all lots or fifty feet from the front property line, whichever is less. Pools shall not be located closer than five feet to any rear lot line or side lot line. On the street side of a corner lot, no pool shall be located closer than ten feet to such street-side lot line. Filter and heating systems shall not be located any closer than five feet to any property line and shall be enclosed within sound and visual structures. Fenced enclosures, in accordance with the Building Code, shall be provided around swimming pools.

U.    Setback Determinations. In R-1 and R-2 zoning districts where four or more lots in a block have been improved with buildings at the time of the passage of the ordinance codified in this title the minimum required setback may be the average of the improved lots.

V.    Substandard Residential Lots. In any residential district, single-family dwellings may be erected on any parcel of land, the area of which is less than the building area required for that particular district under these provisions, only if the lot was part of a subdivision in existence at the time of the adoption of the first city of Lakeport zoning ordinance on January 6, 1969. The width of side yards on single-family dwellings constructed pursuant to this section may be reduced to ten percent of the average lot width, but in no case less than three feet.

W.    Side Entrances to Structures / Setbacks. In any residential district where a dwelling unit is located on a lot where the main entrance is on the side of the building, the required side yard setback from the entrance shall not be less than ten feet.

X.    Yard Deviations. In any residential district, additions may be made to existing structures within required side yards provided that such addition does not extend beyond the existing structure and is no closer than three feet to the side property line.

Y.    Sight Distance. No foliage or structural features shall extend into the cross visibility area between three feet and seven feet above the surface of the public sidewalk or existing grade adjacent to the street.

Cross visibility is defined as the intersection of two public rights-of-way measured from the face of curb or edge of the paved roadway.

A triangle having two sides "X" feet long running along each public right-of-way, said length beginning at their intersection, and the third side formed by a line connecting the two ends.

Local streets:

X = 10’

Collector streets:

X = 15’

Arterial streets:

X = 20’

Z.    Garage, Yard, Home, Patio, or Other Similar Sales.

1.    Garage sales include, but are not limited to, yard sales, home sales, patio sales, or other similar use on any residentially zoned or residentially occupied property. Garage sales may be conducted in accordance with the provisions contained herein.

2.    The provisions of this section shall not apply to any charitable or religious organization or occasional sales, when the proceeds from such sales are used solely for charitable or religious purposes, nor shall this chapter apply to sales conducted pursuant to the process or order of any court of competent jurisdiction.

3.    No business license fee shall be required for any garage sale lawfully conducted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

4.    No more than three garage sales shall be conducted on the same premises during any calendar year.

5.    No sale shall be conducted for more than three consecutive days or for more than two consecutive weekends for two days each. Sales shall not be conducted before seven a.m. nor after six p.m. on the permitted days.

6.    Personal property offered for sale shall not be displayed within or on the city public right-of-way.

7.    Signs advertising a garage sale may be placed on the sale premises. No more than two signs advertising a garage sale may be posted, erected, or maintained on the premises on which the sale is to be held. Signs shall not be lighted. No sign posted, erected, or maintained shall exceed four square feet in area or be placed more than five days preceding the lawful commencement of the sale. Each posted sign shall be removed at or before the close of the last day of the garage sale.

AA.    Off-street parking in setbacks:

1.    Off-street parking in all residential zoning districts shall not be located in any required yard or setback area.

2.    Required front, side, and rear yards shall not be used to supply any of the off-street parking spaces required by the terms of this chapter in any R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-5 zoning districts.

BB.    Fabric Covered Carports and Accessory Sheds. All fabric covered carports, sheds, or similar facilities shall comply with city setback requirements in the zone in which they are located. Unless the facility is considered a structure under the Building Code, no building permit shall be required for their placement. Fabric covered facilities shall be properly maintained, cleaned, and repaired as necessary. There shall be no electricity or other utilities provided to fabric covered carports, sheds, or similar facilities.

CC.    Secondary Accessory Residential Units.

1.    Only one secondary accessory residential unit shall be permitted on any one parcel.

2.    Secondary accessory residential units shall contain separate kitchen and bathroom facilities and shall have a separate entrance from the main dwelling.

3.    The total floor area of the secondary accessory residential unit shall be not less than three hundred square feet and shall not exceed sixty percent of the square footage of the existing single-family house.

4.    The primary and secondary accessory residential unit shall remain under single ownership.

5.    The secondary accessory residential unit shall not be constructed unless there is an existing single-family dwelling located on the site.

6.    The secondary accessory residential unit may be either attached to the existing dwelling or detached from the existing dwelling and must be located on the same lot.

7.    The secondary accessory residential unit should be constructed or sited on the parcel to the rear or side of the existing single-family dwelling so that it is clearly secondary or incidental to the primary single-family residential unit.

8.    The architectural style and construction materials used in the secondary accessory residential unit shall generally conform to those existing on the primary residential unit in terms of building height, roof style, roof materials, siding, windows, doors, siding and trim colors, and other architectural details.

9.    Secondary accessory residential units shall be provided with one covered off-street parking space, which shall be in addition to the covered parking required for the existing single-family dwelling. New covered parking shall be provided for the secondary accessory residential unit if there is no covered parking for the existing dwelling.

10.    The minimum lot size for a parcel that contains a primary and secondary accessory residential unit shall be seven thousand five hundred square feet.

a.    A secondary accessory residential unit may be approved by the planning commission (use permit) and constructed on an existing parcel with less than seven thousand five hundred square feet if the unit meets the following criteria:

i.    The provision of exceptional architectural design, including a high level of architectural compatibility with the existing single-family dwelling; or

ii.    Off-street parking is provided in excess of the combined minimum requirements for both the primary and secondary accessory dwellings; or

iii.    New right-of-way improvements (including, but not limited to, curb, gutter, and sidewalk) are installed along the street frontage(s) of the subject property; or

iv.    The property owner enters into a written agreement with the city stipulating that the secondary accessory residential unit shall be rented to low income, very low income or extremely low income tenants with maximum income levels established for Lake County by the state of California. The rental affordability agreement shall be in effect for a minimum of five years and shall be binding on all owners or persons having or acquiring any right, title, or interest in the property subject to the agreement. Longer rental affordability agreements are encouraged.

11.    Sewer expansion fees shall be collected in conjunction with the construction/development of all new secondary accessory residential units as required by city of Lakeport municipal sewer district (CLMSD south or CLMSD north). Water expansion fees shall be collected if a new water meter is installed for the new secondary accessory residential unit or if an existing water meter is upsized.

12.    A separate address for the secondary accessory residential unit shall be assigned by the city of Lakeport.

DD.    Residential Uses in a C-1 Light Retail, C-2 Major Retail, C-3 Service Commercial, CB Business, or Professional Office Zoning District.

1.    The residential use shall be initiated concurrently or subsequent to the construction of a commercial or office building.

2.    The residential use shall be aesthetically pleasing.

3.    The residential use shall be provided with some useable private open space in the form of a yard, deck, balcony, or similar outdoor living area.

4.    The residential use shall be provided with a pedestrian access separate from that provided for the commercial use. If it is impossible to provide a separate access, the internal access to the residential use shall be designed so as to minimize impact on the commercial activity.

5.    The construction and operation of the residential use shall comply with the requirements of the building and fire codes.

6.    Off-street parking shall be provided for the residential use as required by Chapter 17.23 in addition to the parking required for commercial or other on-site uses.

7.    Single-family residential and mixed use--residential projects shall ensure that the viability of commercial and office operations is not adversely affected by residential development.

8.    Residential uses that are not single-family homes shall provide:

a.    Secure areas for residents’ personal property. Outdoor storage areas for personal property brought on site by clients shall be screened from public view by minimum six-foot-tall visually screening mature landscaping or a minimum six-foot-tall decorative masonry wall.

b.    Laundry facilities adequate for the number of residents.

c.    Toilets and showers at ratios of not less than one toilet for every eight beds per gender; one shower for every eight beds per gender; and a private shower and toilet facility for each area designated for families with children.

d.    Telephone(s) for use by residents.

9.    Residential uses include community care facilities, emergency shelters, and mixed use projects for the purposes of this section.

EE.    Emergency Shelters in a C-3 Service Commercial District.

1.    Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to establish standards to ensure that the development of emergency shelters (shelters) does not adversely impact adjacent parcels or the surrounding neighborhood and that they are developed in a manner which protects the health, safety, and general welfare of the nearby residents and businesses. These performance standards shall apply to shelters. A use permit is required to establish a shelter that does not meet the location, development, and/or operational standards of this section or that would provide more beds than allowed by this section.

2.    Location. A shelter may be established in any "C-3" service commercial district; provided, that the property boundaries are located more than three hundred feet from any other shelter (measured from property line to property line) unless it is separated therefrom by a state highway.

3.    Maximum Number of Beds. A maximum of twenty-four beds may be provided.

4.    Property Development Standards. The development shall conform to all property development standards of the C-3 zoning district (Chapter 17.11), as well as Chapters 17.23 (Parking, Access and Loading), 17.27 (Architectural and Design Review), 17.28 (Performance Standards), and 17.52 (Signs).

5.    Length of Stay. The maximum length of stay at the facility shall not exceed one hundred twenty days in a three-hundred-sixty-five-day period.

6.    Hours of Operation. Shelters shall establish and maintain set hours for client intake/discharge. Hours of operation must be prominently posted on site. Clients shall be admitted to the facility between six p.m. and eight a.m. during Pacific Daylight Time and five p.m. and eight a.m. during Pacific Standard Time. All clients must vacate the facility by eight a.m. and have no guaranteed bed for the next night.

7.    On-Site Parking. On-site parking shall be provided in the ratio of one space for every six adult beds or one-half space per bedroom designated for family units with children. One space shall be provided for each manager/staff member. Bike rack parking shall also be provided by the facility.

8.    Lighting. Adequate exterior lighting shall be provided for security purposes. The lighting shall be stationary and shielded/downlit away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way.

9.    Required Facilities. Shelters shall provide the following facilities:

a.    Indoor client intake/waiting area of at least one hundred square feet. If an exterior waiting area is provided, it shall not be located adjacent to the public right-of-way and shall be visually separated from public view by minimum six-foot-tall visually screening mature landscaping or a minimum six-foot-tall decorative masonry wall. Provisions for shade/rain protection shall be provided.

b.    Interior and/or exterior common space for clients to congregate shall be provided on the property at a ratio of not less than fifteen square feet per client, with a minimum overall area of one hundred square feet. Common space does not include intake areas.

10.    Optional Facilities/Services. Shelters may provide one or more of the following types of common facilities for the exclusive use of residents:

a.    Central cooking and dining room(s) subject to compliance with county health department requirements.

b.    Recreation room.

c.    Counseling center.

d.    Child-care facilities.

e.    Other support services intended to benefit homeless clients.

11.    Shelter Management. The shelter provider or management shall demonstrate that they currently operate a shelter within the state of California or have done so within the past two years and shall comply with the following requirements:

a.    At least one facility manager shall be on site and awake at all times the facility is open. The manager’s area shall be located near the entry to the facility. Additional support staff shall be provided, as necessary, to ensure that at least one staff member is provided in all segregated sleeping areas, as appropriate.

b.    An operational and management plan (plan) shall be submitted for review and approval by the community development director. The approved plan shall remain active throughout the life of the facility, and all operational requirements covered by the plan shall be complied with at all times. At a minimum, said plan shall contain provisions addressing the following issues:

i.    Security and safety: addressing both on- and off-site needs, including provisions to ensure the security and separation of male and female sleeping areas, as well as any family areas within the facility.

ii.    Loitering/noise control: providing specific measures regarding operational controls to minimize the congregation of clients in the vicinity of the facility during hours that clients are not allowed on site and/or when services are not provided.

iii.    Management of outdoor areas: including a system for daily admittance and discharge procedures and monitoring of waiting areas with a goal to minimize disruption to nearby land uses.

iv.    Staff training: with objectives to provide adequate knowledge and skills to assist clients in obtaining permanent shelter and income.

v.    Communication and outreach with objectives to maintain effective communication and response to operational issues which may arise in the neighborhood as may be identified by city staff or the general public.

vi.    Adequate and effective screening: with the objectives of determining admittance eligibility of clients and providing first service to Lakeport area residents.

vii.    Litter control: with the objective of providing for the regular daily removal of litter attributable to clients within the vicinity of the facility. (Ord. 903 §5, 2016; Ord. 893 §3(12), 2014; Ord. 887 §1(H), 2013; Ord. 880 §2(3), 2010; Ord. 868 §1(C), 2007; Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003; Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

Chapter 17.29
APPLICATIONS AND FEES
Sections:

17.29.010    Purpose.

17.29.020    Eligibility for filing.

17.29.030    Land use application procedures.

17.29.040    Project evaluation and staff reports.

17.29.050    Expiration of application.

17.29.060    Fees.

17.29.010 Purpose.
To define the procedures and requirements for applications for land use actions. (Ord. 903 §6(part), 2016: Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.29.020 Eligibility for filing.
An application may only be filed by the owner of the subject property or a lessee or authorized agent of the owner with the written consent of the property owner. The applicant shall be signed by the owner of the subject property or a lessee or authorized agent of the owner if written authorization from the owner is filed concurrently with the application. (Ord. 903 §6(part), 2016: Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.29.030 Land use application procedures.
The following procedures shall be followed in processing of land use applications and development permits which require planning commission or city council action:

A.    Preapplication Conference.

1.    A prospective project proponent is encouraged to request a preapplication conference with community development staff before completing and filing a land use application/development.

2.    The purpose of the preapplication conference is to:

a.    Inform the project proponent of city requirements as they apply to the proposed project;

b.    Review the city’s land use development review process, possible project alternative or modifications; and

c.    Identify information and materials the city will require with the application, and any necessary technical studies and information relating to the environmental review of the project.

3.    Information and materials provided by city staff to the applicant at the preapplication conference shall not be construed as a recommendation for either approval or denial of the proposed project.

4.    Failure by city staff to identify all required studies or all applicable requirements shall not constitute a waiver of those requirements.

B.    Application Contents.

1.    Application for land use projects, action, permits, permit modifications, amendments, and other matters pertaining to this code shall be filed with the community development department on an official city application form.

2.    The application shall be filed with all required fees, deposits, information, and materials as specified by the community development department.

3.    Project proponents are encouraged to contact the community development department before submitting an application to verify which materials are necessary for application filing.

C.    Review of Application.

1.    The community development department shall review each application for completeness and accuracy before it is accepted in compliance with Government Code Section 65943. Acceptance of the application shall be based on the city’s list of required application contents and any additional written instructions provided to the project proponent in a preapplication conference, and/or during the initial application review period.

2.    At the discretion of the community development department, or where otherwise required by this code or state or federal law, an application may be referred to any public agency that may have interest in the proposed project.

3.    Within thirty calendar days of application acceptance, the project proponent shall be informed in writing that the application is complete and has been accepted for processing, or that the application is incomplete and the additional information is required in conformance with Government Code Section 65943. Upon receipt of any resubmittal of the application, a new thirty-day review period shall begin, during which the community development department shall again determine the completeness of the application.

4.    When the community development department determines that an application is incomplete, and the project proponent believes the application is complete or that the information requested by the community development department is not required, the project proponent may appeal the determination in compliance with Chapter 17.31 (Appeals and City Council Review).

5.    After the city has accepted an application as complete, the community development department may require the applicant to submit additional information for the environmental review of the project in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). (Ord. 903 §6(part), 2016: Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.29.040 Project evaluation and staff reports.
A.    Staff Evaluation. The community development department shall review all land use applications/development permits to determine if they comply with all applicable requirements, including the zoning ordinance, other applicable provisions of the municipal code, the general plan, and any applicable specific plan.

B.    Staff Report. The community development department shall provide a written recommendation for all land use applications/development permits subject to the review authority of the planning commission and/or city council (as applicable) as to whether the application should be approved, approved with conditions, or denied.

C.    Report Distribution. Each staff report shall be furnished to the applicant at the same time it is provided to the review authority before action on the application. (Ord. 903 §6(part), 2016: Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.29.050 Expiration of application.
A.    If an applicant fails to provide additional information, as specified in Section 17.29.030(C)(3), requested in writing by the community development department within six months (one hundred eighty days) following the date of the letter, the application shall expire and be deemed withdrawn, without any further action by the city.

B.    The community development director may grant one ninety-day extension, if the project proponent files a written request with the community development department before expiration.

C.    After the expiration of an application, future city consideration shall require the submittal of a new, complete application and associated fees. (Ord. 903 §6(part), 2016)

17.29.060 Fees.
The city council shall, by resolution, establish a schedule of fees for land use applications, amendments, and other matters pertaining to this chapter. The schedule of fees may be changed or modified by resolution of the council. Review shall not commence on any application until all applicable fees have been paid in full. The city is not required to continue processing and application unless its fees are paid in full. Failure to pay the applicable fees is grounds for denial of the application. (Ord. 903 §6(part), 2016: Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999. Formerly 17.29.050)

Chapter 17.30
NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING
Sections:

17.30.010    Purpose.

17.30.020    Notice of land use actions by publication.

17.30.030    Notice by mail or delivery.

17.30.040    Request for notification.

17.30.050    Failure to receive notice.

17.30.060    Hearing continuation.

17.30.010 Purpose.
To establish the procedures for public notice and public hearings on land use projects/ actions when required. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.30.020 Notice of land use actions by publication.
A.    When a provision of this title or state law requires notice of a public hearing of a land use action to be given, notice shall be published one time in a newspaper of general circulation within the Lakeport area at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing.

B.    All notices required pursuant to this section shall provide the date, time, and place of the public hearing, the identity of the public body conducting the hearing, a general explanation of the matter to be considered, and a general description in text or in diagram of the location of the property that is the subject of the hearing.

C.    In addition to the notice required by this section, notice of the hearing may be given in any other manner deemed necessary by the community development department. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.30.030 Notice by mail or delivery.
A.    When a provision of this title or state law requires a notice of a public hearing of a land use action to be given, notice shall be given in all of the following ways:

1.    Notice of the hearing shall be mailed at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing date to the owner of the subject property, the authorized agent, and to the project applicant.

2.    Notice of the hearing shall be mailed or delivered at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing to all owners of real property within three hundred feet of the real property which is the subject of the hearing. The names and addresses of the owners of all real property shall be obtained from the latest county of lake assessment.

3.    If the number of property owners to whom notice is to be mailed pursuant to this section is greater than one thousand, in lieu of mailed or delivered notice, notice may be given by placing a display advertisement of at least one-eighth page in at least one newspaper of general circulation within the Lakeport area at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing.

B.    If the notice is mailed or delivered pursuant to subsection A of this section, the notice must also either be:

1.    Published one time in a newspaper of general circulation within the Lakeport area at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing; or

2.    Posted at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing in at least three public places within the city, including one public place in the area directly affected by the proceedings.

C.    All notices provided pursuant to this section shall include the information as specified in Section 17.30.020(B). (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.30.040 Request for notification.
Any person who has filed a written request for notice with the city clerk or the community development department shall receive notice in accordance with Section 17.30.030. The city may charge a fee which is reasonably related to the cost of providing this service, and the request for such notice shall be annually renewed. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.30.050 Failure to receive notice.
Notice shall be deemed to have been given when the records of the community development department so indicate that said notice has been mailed or published. The failure of any person or entity to receive notice given pursuant to this section shall not constitute grounds to invalidate the actions of the city. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.30.060 Hearing continuation.
Any public hearing conducted under this section may be continued from time to time at the request of the city or the applicant or as may be necessary for other reasons. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

Chapter 17.31
APPEALS AND CITY COUNCIL REVIEW
Sections:

17.31.010    Purpose.

17.31.020    Appellate jurisdiction.

17.31.030    Administrative appeals.

17.31.040    Appeals to the city council.

17.31.050    Automatic appeals.

17.31.060    City council call for review.

17.31.010 Purpose.
To establish the procedures for appeal of the decisions of the community development department and planning commission on land use actions. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.31.020 Appellate jurisdiction.
The review authority having appellate jurisdiction over the administerial decision of the community development director shall be the Lakeport planning commission. The review authority having appellate jurisdiction over the decisions of the Lakeport planning commission shall be the Lakeport city council. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.31.030 Administrative appeals.
A.    Application. An application for an administrative appeal shall be made as follows:

1.    Persons eligible. The applicant or an affected person not satisfied with the decision of the community development director shall be eligible to file an administrative appeal. An affected person shall include an individual who has received notice or who submitted written comments to the city pursuant to a notice.

2.    Timeliness. An administrative appeal shall be filed within five business days of the date on which the decision was rendered.

3.    Form Filing and Fee. An appeal of an administrative decision shall be made on the prescribed form and filed with the community development department, accompanied by the fee set by resolution of the Lakeport city council.

4.    Required Documents. An appeal shall be accompanied by a written statement setting forth the grounds upon which the appellant asserts that there was an error or abuse of discretion, and how the decision of the community development director is inconsistent with the purposes of the zoning ordinance.

B.    Affect of Filing the Appeal. An appeal of an administrative decision shall halt all further proceedings. No development permits shall be issued until such time as the appeal has been acted upon as set forth in Section 17.31.030(D). The applicant may continue to act in reliance on any previously issued permit, however, further reliance upon receipt or notice of an appeal is done at their own risk pending the outcome of the appeal.

C.    Forwarding of the Record. Prior to the appeal hearing, the community development department shall transmit to the planning commission copies of the pertinent application materials including all maps and data, and a statement setting forth the reasons for the decision by the community development department staff or other review authority.

D.    Public Hearing and Notice. The planning commission shall conduct a public hearing on all administrative appeals. The public hearing shall be on the record, and all affected persons may appear and present evidence.

E.    Decision. Within thirty days after the close of the hearing, the planning commission may either sustain the decision or render a new decision. Notice of the decision of the planning commission shall be mailed to the appellant and/or the applicant.

F.    The Effective Date. The decision of the planning commission on an administrative appeal shall be final, conclusive, and effective immediately unless an appeal of the planning commission decision is filed with the Lakeport city council as provided for in Section 17.31.040. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.31.040 Appeals to the city council.
A.    Application: decisions of the planning commission may be appealed as follows:

1.    Persons Eligible. The applicant or affected persons not satisfied with the decision of the planning commission may file an appeal. Affected persons shall include individuals who received notice of a land use application, or who attended the planning commission meeting and made verbal comments, or submitted written comments in response to the notice.

2.    Timeliness Form Filing and Fee. An appeal of a decision made by the planning commission shall be filed with the community development director within five business days of the decision. Said appeal shall be filed on the prescribed form and accompanied by the fee in the amount set by resolution of the city council.

3.    Timeliness. An administrative appeal shall be filed within five business days of the date on which the decision was rendered.

B.    Affect of Filing the Appeal. The filing of an appeal shall halt the proceedings and the effective date of the decision of the planning commission until such time as the appeal has been acted upon as hereinafter set forth.

C.    Forwarding of the Record. Prior to the hearing on said appeal, the community development department shall transmit to the Lakeport city council the pertinent application materials setting forth the reasons for the decisions made by the planning commission.

D.    Public Hearing and Notice. Following the filing of an appeal, the Lakeport city council shall conduct a public hearing on the matter. The public hearing shall be on the record and all affected persons may appear and present evidence.

E.    Decision. Within thirty days after the close of the hearing, the city council may sustain or overturn the planning commission decision, or may grant or modify an application subject to specified conditions it imposes, or may revoke or deny the permit. Notice of the decision of the council, together with a copy of any findings adopted by the council, shall be mailed to the appellant and/or applicant.

F.    Finality and Effective Date. The decision of the Lakeport city council on an appeal shall be final, conclusive, and effective immediately. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.31.050 Automatic appeals.
A.    Automatic appeals. If the planning commission is unable to take action because of legal disqualification or abstentions, the matter shall be deemed to be automatically denied and appeals to the Lakeport city council. Automatic appeals pursuant to this section shall not be subject to the filing fees.

B.    Continuations. If a ballot of the members of the planning commission results in a tie vote, the planning commission may continue the matter for further consideration or refer the matter to the city council as an appeal. Said appeal shall not be subject to filing fees. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.31.060 City council call for review.
The city council by a majority vote may call for the review of a planning commission decision. Said call for review shall be made within five business days of the date of the planning commission decision. The review shall be considered by the city council at a public hearing. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

Chapter 17.32
ZONING AND GENERAL PLAN AMENDMENTS
Sections:

17.32.010    Zoning amendments.

17.32.020    General plan amendments.

17.32.010 Zoning amendments.
The zoning ordinance may be amended by changing the boundaries of districts, or by changing the text whenever the public convenience, necessity, and general welfare requires such an amendment by following the procedures set forth in this chapter.

A.    Initiation. Any zoning changes, amendments, alterations, rezonings, or establishments, herein referred to as an amendment, may be initiated by:

1.    The owner of real property wherein such application is accompanied by a fee prescribed by the city council; or by

2.    A minute order or resolution of the city council; or by

3.    A minute order or resolution of the planning commission.

B.    Amendment criteria. An application for an amendment to the zoning ordinance shall include a justification statement submitted by the applicant, planning commission, or city council. The justification statement shall described the intended amendment, whether it is a change in district boundaries, or an amendment of the zoning ordinance text. The justification statement shall give the reasons why the amendment is necessary and shall provide information documenting that:

1.    The proposed amendment is in the public’s interest.

2.    The proposed amendment is consistent with the Lakeport general plan.

3.    The proposed amendment will not be detrimental to the community’s health, safety, and welfare.

4.    The proposed amendment complies with the California Government Code and California Environmental Quality Act.

C.    Public Hearing by the Planning Commission. Upon receipt of a complete application, the matter shall be set for public hearing. If the proposed ordinance text amendment affects the permitted uses on real property within the city, notice of the hearing shall be given pursuant to Section 17.30.020 of this title. After the close of the public hearing, the planning commission shall render its recommendation on the proposed ordinance amendment. Within ten calendar days of a decision, the planning commission shall transmit its recommendation to the city council. The planning commission shall include the reasons for the recommendation, the relationship of the proposed amendment to the city’s general plan, and other relevant information.

D.    Public Hearing by the City Council. Upon receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission, the Lakeport city council shall conduct a public hearing thereon. If the proposed ordinance affects permitted uses of real property within the city, notice of the hearing shall be given pursuant to Section 17.30.020 of this title. Following the hearing, the city council may approve by ordinance, modify, or disapprove the proposed amendment. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.32.020 General plan amendments.
The Lakeport general plan may be amended by changing the boundaries, designations, or text whenever the public convenience, necessity, or general welfare requires such an amendment. However, general plan amendments shall comply with state law in terms of the number of amendments approved on an annual basis.

A.    Initiation. A general plan amendment may be initiated by:

1.    The owner of real property wherein such application is accompanied by a fee prescribed by the city council; or by

2.    A minute order or resolution of the city council; or by

3.    A minute order or resolution of the planning commission.

B.    Amendment Criteria. The applicant shall submit a justification statement with the following information, documenting that:

1.    The proposed general plan amendment is in the public’s interest.

2.    The proposed general plan amendment is consistent and compatible with the entire general plan and any implementation programs that may be affected.

3.    The potential impacts of the proposed general plan amendment have been assessed and have been determined not to be detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare.

4.    The proposed general plan amendment has been processed in accordance with the applicable provisions of the California Government Code and the California Environmental Quality Act.

C.    Public Hearing by the Planning Commission. Upon receipt of a complete application, the community development department shall set a date for a public hearing thereon. After the public hearing, the planning commission shall render its recommendation on the proposed amendment. Within ten calendar days of a decision, the planning commission shall transmit its recommendation to the city council. The planning commission shall include the reasons for the recommendation and other relevant information.

D.    Public Hearing by the City Council. Upon receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission, the Lakeport city council shall conduct a public hearing thereon. Following the hearing, the city council may approve by resolution, modify, or disapprove the proposed amendment.

E.    Map and Legal Description Required. Applicants requesting a change to the city’s general plan map shall submit a map as Exhibit A which shall clearly indicate the subject property being requested to be amended and a legal description as Exhibit B.

F.    Amendment of the Official General Map. Upon approval by the city council of a general plan amendment resolution, the general plan map or text shall be amended consistent with the decision of the city council. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

Chapter 17.33
ANNEXATION PROCEDURES
Sections:

17.33.010    Annexation procedures and requirements.

17.33.010 Annexation procedures and requirements.
Pursuant to the California Government Code and the Lakeport general plan, the following procedures shall be followed in consideration of an application for reorganization/annexation to the city:

A.    Environmental Review. If the city has pre-zoned land considered for reorganization/annexation, the city will be the lead agency, prepare the initial study, and determine the appropriate environmental clearance for the project. The project proponent shall submit the necessary application, supporting information, and fees.

B.    General Plan Policies and Programs. Applicants for city reorganization/annexation shall comply with the Lakeport general plan and shall address the policies and programs set forth therein. The community development department shall review all proposals for reorganization/annexation and prepare a report for consideration by the planning commission who shall then make a recommendation to the city council on the annexation’s compliance with general plan policies and programs.

C.    Council Action. The city council shall consider proposals for reorganization/annexation in view of the policies and programs set forth in the general plan, the planning commission recommendation, and other available information. The city council shall set forth its decision in a resolution indicating the findings relative to the matter. (Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003; Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

Chapter 17.34
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
Sections:

17.34.010    Purpose.

17.34.020    Application requirements.

17.34.030    Pre-application process.

17.34.040    Department review and recommendation.

17.34.050    Public hearing required.

17.34.060    Planning commission action.

17.34.070    City council action.

17.34.080    Annual review.

17.34.090    Application of existing rules, regulations, and policies.

17.34.100    Modification and termination.

17.34.110    Administration.

17.34.010 Purpose.
In order to strengthen the public planning process, encourage private participation in comprehensive planning, and reduce the economic cost of development, the California legislature adopted Section 65864 et seq. of the Government Code, authorizing local governments to enter into development agreements with applicants for development projects. The objective is to provide assurances that, upon approval of the project, the applicant may proceed in accordance with existing policies, rules, and regulations, subject to the conditions of approval, thus vesting certain development rights in the property. The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures and requirements for development agreements consistent with state law. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.34.020 Application requirements.
An applicant may propose that the city consider entering into a development agreement pursuant to Title 7, Chapter 4 of the Government Code by filing an application with the community development department. The application shall be accompanied by the following:

A.    A proposed agreement which shall contain the following:

1.    A legal description of the property sought to be covered by the agreement;

2.    A statement of concurrence by the owner if the applicant is not the fee owner;

3.    A description of the proposed uses, height, and size of building(s), density or intensity of use, and provision for reservation or dedication of land for public purposes;

4.    A statement of terms and conditions relating to applicant financing of public facilities and required improvements;

5.    All proposed conditions, terms, restrictions, and requirements for subsequent city discretionary actions;

6.    A statement specifying which rights are intended to vest on the effective date of the agreement, and the timing and sequence of subsequent discretionary approvals and vesting of rights.

7.    The proposed time when construction would be commenced and completed for the entire project and any proposed phases; and

8.    The termination date for the agreement.

B.    A map showing the location and street address of the subject property and of all lots of record within three hundred feet of the boundaries of the property.

C.    A list, drawn from the last equalized property tax assessment roll, showing the names and addresses of the owner of record of each lot within three hundred feet of the boundaries of the property. Envelopes addressed to these owners also shall be provided for mailing notices.

D.    A statement documenting that the project is consistent with the general plan and all applicable specific plans.

E.    Such other information as the community development director may require by policy or to satisfy other requirements of law.

F.    The required fee. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.34.030 Pre-application process.
City staff shall not begin to negotiate with the applicant until authorized by the city council following completion of the pre-application process as set forth below:

A.    The community development department shall review the proposal, consult with all city departments, obtain additional information from the applicant as may be deemed necessary, and shall, within forty-five days of receipt of the proposal, prepare a report containing the department’s recommendation to the city council. The recommendation shall consist of the following:

1.    A statement of potential public benefits accruing to the city if the agreement were entered into;

2.    A recommendation whether the city should negotiate further with the applicant;

3.    A statement of issues for further research and investigation and issues that should be addressed in the development agreement;

4.    A statement of those documents, applications, and other items required to further process the application or negotiate with the applicant.

B.    Upon receipt of the recommendation of the community development director, the request shall be set for a public hearing before the city council. The city council shall consider whether to authorize city staff to negotiate with the applicant concerning the development agreement. Notice of the hearing shall be given in accordance with the Government Code.

C.    Upon the close of the hearing, the city council shall either:

1.    Direct city staff, by resolution, to continue negotiating with the applicant, and to prepare a proposed development agreement for planning commission review; or

2.    Determine that no further negotiations are desirable and so state in a resolution, including the reasons for such a determination, and reject the application. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.34.040 Department review and recommendation.
Unless the project is categorically exempt, the department shall undertake environmental review and, upon completion of such review, transmit the application, together with the department’s recommendations, to the planning commission. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.34.050 Public hearing required.
Upon receipt of an application, the planning commission shall schedule a public hearing to determine whether the proposal conforms to the general plan, and determine the environmental clearance. The planning commission hearing shall be scheduled within six months following city council authorization to staff to negotiate with the applicant unless the city and the applicant mutually agree to a later date.

Notice of intention to consider the application shall be given as provided in Sections 65090 and 65091 of the Government Code. In addition, if the application is being processed together with the development project, notice of such intention shall be given as required for consideration of the development project. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.34.060 Planning commission action.
After the public hearing is closed, the commission shall recommend either approval, modification, or disapproval of the proposed development agreement. The commission shall transmit its recommendation to the city council within thirty calendar days. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.34.070 City council action.
A.    Upon receipt of the application, the results of the environmental review, and the recommendations of the department and the planning commission, the city council shall schedule a public hearing on the application. Notice of intention to consider the application shall be given in the same manner as set forth in Section 17.34.050.

B.    If the application is being processed together with the development project, the public hearing on the development agreement application may be held concurrently with this hearing on the project.

C.    After the public hearing is closed, the city council shall approve, modify, or disapprove the proposed development agreement. An agreement shall not be approved unless the city council makes the following findings:

1.    That the agreement is consistent with the general plan and with any specific plan;

2.    That the agreement is consistent with all provisions of this ordinance, the Lakeport Municipal Code, and state law;

3.    That the agreement will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare; and will not adversely affect the orderly development of property or the preservation of property values;

4.    That the city council has considered the effect of the development agreement on the housing needs of the region in which the city is situated and has balanced these needs against the public service needs of its residents and available fiscal and environmental resources.

Any approval of a proposed agreement shall be made by ordinance, which shall authorize the mayor and the city attorney to sign the agreement on behalf of the city, and shall become effective after thirty calendar days following the second reading unless a referendum is filed within that time.

D.    No agreement shall be signed by the mayor and the city attorney until it has been duly signed by the applicant and owner, if the applicant is not the owner. If the applicant has not signed and returned the approved agreement to the mayor and the city attorney for signing within thirty calendar days of council approval, said application shall be deemed withdrawn by applicant.

E.    Within ten calendar days after the mayor and the city attorney sign a development agreement and the ordinance becomes effective, the city clerk shall cause a copy thereof to be recorded.

F.    All agreement provisions are subject to modification or suspension as set forth in Title 7, Chapter 4, Article 2.5 of the Government Code commencing with Section 65864. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.34.080 Annual review.
A.    Development agreements shall be limited in their term to a period not to exceed a maximum of five years from the effective date of the adopting ordinance. The city may specify in the agreement options to renew the term of the agreement.

B.    All development agreements shall be reviewed by the planning commission and city council at least once every twelve months, unless the agreement provides for more frequent review, in which case the agreement shall prevail.

C.    The purpose of the review shall be to inquire into the good faith compliance of the applicant with the terms and conditions of the agreement and for any other purpose specified in the agreement.

D.    Prior to each review, the department shall prepare a report relative to all development that has occurred under the agreement subsequent to the last past review and any other matters the department wishes to bring to the city council’s attention.

E.    If the department review determines that all terms and conditions of the agreement have been met, and the city council concurs in writing, no further review shall be required.

F.    If the department report recommends modification or termination of the agreement, of if the community development director proposes to make such a recommendation to the city council, he shall schedule a public hearing before the planning commission on the agreement. Notice of intention to modify or terminate the agreement shall be given in the same manner as set forth in Section 17.34.050. At such hearing, the applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating his good faith compliance with the terms and conditions of the agreement. After closing the public hearing, the planning commission shall determine whether to recommend that the agreement be terminated or modified.

G.    Upon receipt of the community development director’s or planning commission’s recommendation, the city council shall schedule a public hearing. Notice of intention to modify or terminate the agreement shall be given in the same manner as set forth in Section 17.34.050.

If, after the public hearing is closed, the city council finds and determines on the basis of substantial evidence that the applicant or its successor in interest has not complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement, the city council may modify or terminate the agreement. Any modification or termination is subject to the provisions of Section 17.34.100. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.34.090 Application of existing rules, regulations, and policies.
Unless otherwise provided by the development agreement, rules, regulations, and official policies applicable to development of the property subject to a development agreement shall be those rules, regulations, and official policies in force at the time of execution of the agreement. A development agreement shall not prevent the city, in subsequent actions applicable to the property, from applying new rules, regulations, and policies which do not conflict with those rules, regulations, and policies applicable to the property as set forth herein, nor shall a development agreement prevent the city from denying, or conditionally approving, any subsequent development project application on the basis of such existing or new rules, regulations, and policies. No rights shall be deemed to vest in the applicant, or any other person, under any development agreement, except as expressly set forth in the development agreement. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.34.100 Modification and termination.
Any development agreement may be amended or canceled, in whole or in part, by mutual consent of the applicant (or its successor in interest) and the city, or it may be modified or terminated pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.34.080. Notice of intention to take any such action shall be given in the manner provided by Section 17.34.050; provided, however, that the parties may set forth an alternative procedure in the agreement for processing insubstantial amendments. Any significant amendment shall be subject to the provisions of the Government Code, Section 65867.5. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.34.110 Administration.
The community development director shall prepare and adopt such application forms, checklists, and other documents as considered necessary and desirable to implement these procedures and requirements. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

Chapter 17.35
PROJECT CONDITIONS AGREEMENT AND MONITORING PROCEDURES
Sections:

17.35.010    Agreement required.

17.35.020    Project conditions monitoring procedure.

17.35.030    Development project conditions enforcement.

17.35.010 Agreement required.
Applicants for all land use projects shall be required to execute a project conditions agreement specifying the nature of the land use application, the location, the assessors parcel number, the project’s conditions of approval as required by staff, and/ or planning commission, and/or city council. Said agreement shall indicate that the development and/or the use of the real property shall conform to the conditions of approval, and shall be binding on all owners and persons having or acquiring right, title, or interest in the real property. The agreement shall be signed by the applicant/ owner/developer and dated. Said agreement shall be executed prior to engaging in the use or issuance of any development permits. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.35.020 Project conditions monitoring procedure.
Upon execution of the project conditions agreement, the community development department (staff) shall carry out the following monitoring procedure:

A.    Staff shall conduct a pre-construction/pre-permit review of the conditions that must be satisfied prior to the issuance of a building or other development permit and note the status accordingly;

B.    Staff, in conjunction with other city departments, shall conduct a review of the project and the conditions that must be satisfied during the construction or development phase of the project. All required conditions shall be completed prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit, operation of the use, or execution of a financial security agreement.

C.    Staff, in conjunction with other city departments, shall conduct post-construction review of the project and the conditions of approval. The post-construction monitoring shall be completed as needed. The post-construction report must indicate the status of all conditions, remedial action necessary, and other observations and recommendations. Post-construction reports may be made available to the Lakeport planning commission or city council who may initiate actions necessary to correct any deficiencies. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.35.030 Development project conditions enforcement.
Failure of an applicant/owner/developer to comply with the conditions of approval imposed by staff, planning commission, and/or city council for a development project shall be deemed a violation of the municipal code. The enforcement procedures and penalties as set forth in Chapter 17.48 of the municipal code shall be applicable. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

Chapter 17.36
NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES, AND LOTS
Sections:

17.36.010    Purpose.

17.36.020    Compatible nonconforming uses, structures and lots.

17.36.030    Modification of compatible nonconforming uses, structures and lots.

17.36.040    Incompatible nonconforming uses, structures and lots.

17.36.050    Termination and removal of incompatible nonconforming uses and structures.

17.36.060    Development of incompatible nonconforming lots.

17.36.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to declare uses, structures, and lots legally existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title as nonconforming because they no longer conform to the present requirements of the zoning district in which they are located. Furthermore, uses and structures which have been deemed to be incompatible nonconforming uses are encouraged to be eliminated or brought into conformity within a reasonable period of time. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.36.020 Compatible nonconforming uses, structures and lots.
Nonconforming uses, structures, and lots which are generally not detrimental to the zoning district in which they are located are considered compatible. Compatible nonconforming uses, structures, and lots include:

A.    Residential uses and structures located in residential zones which do not comply with the current requirements for the residential zone in which they are located, but did comply at the time of their construction.

B.    Residential uses and structures located in nonresidential zones.

C.    Commercial, industrial, and office uses and structures located in residential, commercial, industrial, or other zones which have been determined by the planning commission to be compatible.

The determination that a nonconforming commercial, industrial, or office use or structure is compatible shall require the approval of a use permit.

D.    Nonconforming structures or premises which have historic significance and have been so designated by the city council.

E.    Nonconforming parcels or lots which were legally created prior to 1972.

The determination that a nonconforming lot is compatible shall require the approval of a certificate of compliance. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.36.030 Modification of compatible nonconforming uses, structures and lots.
A.    Compatible nonconforming residential uses and structures in residential zones may be remodeled or rehabilitated provided the use or structure is not enlarged.

Compatible nonconforming residential structures in residential zones may be added to or enlarged if the structure is nonconforming only because of noncompliance with the required height, yard, and/or parking requirements; provided that such new additions or enlargements comply with all requirements for new structures, and off street parking is provided in accordance with the requirements for new residential structures.

B.    Compatible residential structures located in nonresidential zones may be remodeled or rehabilitated provided the use or structure is not enlarged.

Compatible residential structures located in non-residential zones may be added to or enlarged provided a use permit is obtained.

C.    Compatible commercial, industrial, or office structures located in residential, commercial, industrial, or other zones may be remodeled or rehabilitated, provided the structure is not enlarged and no additional exterior square footage is created.

D.    A compatible nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use if the new use is of a similar or more restrictive nature.

The determination that a subsequent nonconforming use is similar to or is less restrictive, and therefore compatible, shall require the approval of a use permit.

E.    Compatible nonconforming parcels or lots may be developed provided that all requirements applicable to the zoning district in which it is located are met. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.36.040 Incompatible nonconforming uses, structures and lots.
Incompatible nonconforming uses, structures, and lots are those that do not meet the criteria for compatible uses outlined in Section 17.36.020. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.36.050 Termination and removal of incompatible nonconforming uses and structures.
Incompatible nonconforming uses and structures shall be subject to the following provisions:

A.    Incompatible nonconforming uses which have been discontinued for any reason for a period of six months shall be terminated and shall not be reestablished.

B.    Incompatible nonconforming uses or structures shall not be intensified or expanded.

C.    Incompatible nonconforming structures shall not be moved to any other lot, or to any other portion of the lot on which it is located, unless, as a result of the move, the structure conforms to the regulations of the zoning district in which it will be relocated.

D.    Incompatible nonconforming structures which are damaged or partially destroyed by any reason to an extent of not more than fifty percent of its market value at that time may be restored, and a nonconforming use or occupancy may be resumed provided that such restoration commences within a one-year period and is diligently pursued to completion.

1.    In the event that such damage or destruction exceeds fifty percent of its market value, the building or structure shall not be repaired or reconstructed unless every portion of such building is made to conform to all regulations for new buildings in the zoning district in which it is located.

2.    This regulation shall not apply to the reconstruction of one single-family dwelling or manufactured home in the R-3 high density residential district if it is to replace a previously existing residence which has suffered damage or destruction which exceeds fifty percent of its market value. (See Section 17.06.050(C).) (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.36.060 Development of incompatible nonconforming lots.
Incompatible nonconforming lots shall not be improved or developed unless legally merged with an adjacent parcel which meets the criteria of the zoning district in which it is located. Said merger shall be subject to the approval of an application for a voluntary merger as set forth in the subdivision ordinance. (Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003: Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

Chapter 17.37
DEFINITIONS
Sections:

17.37.010    Purpose and applicability.

17.37.020    General rules for construction of language.

17.37.030    General terms.

17.37.040    Words and phrases.

17.37.010 Purpose and applicability.
To promote consistency and precision in the interpretation of the zoning ordinance. The meaning and construction of words and phrases as set forth shall apply throughout the zoning ordinance, except where the context of such words and phrases clearly indicates a different meaning or construction. Definitions contained in the Uniform Building Code shall be applicable except when in conflict with definitions contained in the zoning ordinance, in which case the zoning ordinance definitions shall prevail. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.37.020 General rules for construction of language.
The following general rules of construction shall apply to the textual provision of the zoning ordinance.

A.    Headings. Section and subsection headings contained herein shall be not deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of any provision of the zoning ordinance.

B.    Illustration. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of any provision and any illustration, the text shall control.

C.    Shall and May. "Shall" is mandatory. "May" is discretionary or permissive.

D.    Tenses and Numbers. Words used in the present tense include the future, and words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.

E.    Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, the following conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows.

1.    "And" indicates that all connected items or provisions apply:

2.    "Or" indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply singly or in any combination.

3.    "Either ... or" indicates that the connected items or provisions shall apply singly but not in combination.

4.    All public officials, bodies, and agencies to which reference is made are those of the city of Lakeport unless otherwise indicated. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.37.030 General terms.
A.    "Uses permitted" means permitted without the requirement for a minor or major use permit but subject to all other applicable permits or regulations.

B.    "Department" means the community development department.

C.    "City" means the city council of the city of Lakeport.

D.    "Commission" or "planning commission" means the planning commission of the city of Lakeport.

E.    "Federal" means the Government of the United States of America.

F.    "State" means the state of California.

G.    "Used" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "occupied," or "intended to be occupied for."

H.    "General plan" means the city of Lakeport general plan.

I.    "Director" means the community development director.

J.    "Section" means a section of the zoning ordinance unless otherwise indicated.

K.    "Chapter" means a chapter of the zoning ordinance unless otherwise indicated.

L.    "Title" means Title 17 of the city municipal code unless otherwise indicated.

M.    "Code" or "this code" means the municipal code of the city of Lakeport, state of California. (Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

17.37.040 Words and phrases.
For the purposes of this title, words and phrases used in this title shall be defined as follows:

"Abandonment" means the relinquishment of property, or a cessation of the use of the property by the owner for a period of one year or more.

"Abutting" means having a common boundary except that parcels having no common boundary other than a common corner shall not be considered abutting.

"Accessory" means incidental, appurtenant or subordinate to the principal use or structure on the same lot or parcel.

"Accessory residence" means a single-family dwelling or mobilehome for the use of the business operator, caretaker, or watchmen whether as a portion of the business building or as a separate structure.

"Accessory structure" means a structure containing no kitchen and located upon the same lot or parcel as the principal use or structure to which it is an accessory. The structure is customary, incidental, appropriate, and subordinate to the use of the principal building, or the principal use of the land; and

Structures accessory to uses permitted without first obtaining a use permit shall be constructed with, or subsequent to the construction of the principal structure or subsequent to activation of the principal use; and

Structures accessory to uses permitted by use permit shall be constructed with, or subsequent to activation of the principal use only if authorized by the permit. Otherwise, the addition of such accessory structures shall require either an amendment to the permit authorizing the principal use or a separate use permit.

"Accessory residence" means a single-family dwelling or mobilehome for the use of the business operator, caretaker, or watchman whether as a portion of the business building, or as a separate structure.

"Accessory structure" means a structure containing no kitchen and located upon the same lot or parcel as the principal use of structure to which it is an accessory. The structure is customary, incidental, appropriate, and subordinate to the use of the principal building, or the principal use of the land; and

Structures accessory to uses permitted without first obtaining a use permit shall be constructed with, or subsequent to the construction of the principal structure or subsequent to activation of the principal use; and

Structures accessory to uses permitted by use permit shall be constructed with, or subsequent to the construction of the principal structure or subsequent to activation of the principal use only if authorized by the permit. Otherwise, the addition of such accessory structures shall require either an amendment to the permit authorizing the principal use or a separate use permit.

"Accessory use" means a use conducted upon the same lot or parcel as the principal use or structure to which it is an accessory. The use is customary, incidental, appropriate and subordinate to the use of the principal building, or the principal use of the land; and

Uses accessory to uses permitted without first obtaining a use permit shall be activated with, or subsequent to the construction of the principal structure or activation of the principal use.

Uses accessory to uses permitted by use permit shall be activated with, or subsequent to the construction of the principal structure or activation of the principal use only if authorized by the permit. Otherwise, the addition of such accessory uses shall require either an amendment to the permit authorizing the principal use or a separate use permit.

Accessory Uses and Structures, Agricultural. "Agricultural accessory uses and structures" means those uses and structures customarily incidental and subordinate to the agricultural use of the land including but not limited to: barns, storage shed, corrals, pens, fences, windmills, watering and feed troughs; the storage and use of farm implements, irrigation and crop protection equipment; the storage and use of fuels for heating buildings and operating farm equipment or appliances; water and wastewater treatment facilities and systems for private domestic use; permitted signs; and other accessory uses and structures which are determined by the community development department to be necessary, customary, and incidental to the agricultural use of the lot or parcel. "Accessory use, agricultural" shall not include residences of any kind or construction equipment storage yards.

Accessory Uses and Structures, Residential. "Residential accessory uses and structures" means those uses and structures customarily incidental and subordinate to the residential use of the land including but not limited to: private garages, children’s playhouses, patios, decks, fences, landings, porches, gazebos, outdoor gardens, storage sheds, radio and television antennas, private satellite dish antennas, solar panels, flag poles; private boat docks, boathouses, and boat ramps; private pools, tennis courts, spas and hot tubs; domestic animal keeping; water and wastewater treatment facilities and systems for private domestic use; permitted signs; the storage and use of fuels for heating buildings or for operating light equipment or household appliances; the parking of or temporary storage of fully operative automobiles, light trucks, boats, recreational vehicles, and motorcycles; and other accessory uses and structures which are determined by the community development director to be necessary, customary and incidental to the residential use of the lot or parcel. "Accessory use, residential" shall not include mobile storage trailers, storage structures or cargo boxes designed or once serving as commercial shipping or cargo containers, truck trailers or boxes; or the parking of tractor/trailers or separate tractors or cargo trailers.

Accessory Uses and Structures, Commercial. "Commercial accessory uses and structures" means those uses and structures customarily incidental and subordinate to the commercial use of the land including but not limited to: trash storage areas and bins; vending machines; six or less games/amusement devices and two or less pool tables occupying less than twenty-five percent of the net floor area of the principal use; required loading and unloading facilities; outdoor tables, benches, umbrellas, fountains, ponds, statues, sculpture, paintings and other works of art; radio and television antennas, private satellite dish antennas; the storage and use of fuels for fleet vehicles, heating buildings or for operating appliances or equipment used within a building; water and wastewater treatment facilities and systems; incidental services such as cafeterias, storage facilities and garages, sales offices, showrooms and administrative offices, permitted signs; the storage and use of commercial fleet vehicles as part of the principal use; and other accessory uses and structures which are determined by the community development director to be necessary, customary, and incidental to the commercial use of the land.

Accessory Uses and Structures, Industrial. "Industrial accessory uses and structures" means those uses, structures, and buildings customarily incidental and subordinate to the industrial use of the land including, but not limited to: loading and unloading facilities and equipment, parking areas and shipping terminals, water and wastewater treatment facilities and systems; incidental services such as cafeterias; storage facilities and garages, sales offices, showrooms and administrative offices; radio and television antennas, private satellite dish antennas; the storage and use of fuels for fleet vehicles, heating buildings or for operating appliances or equipment used within a building; the storage and use of fleet vehicles, heavy equipment or trucks as part of the principal use; permitted signs; and other accessory uses and structures which are determined by the community development director to be necessary, customary, and incidental to the industrial use of the land.

"Acre" means a measure of land area containing forty-three thousand five hundred sixty square feet unencumbered by any public or private street right-of-way or roadway easement except as provided herein.

"Addition" means any construction which increases the size of a building such as a porch, attached garage or carport, or new room or wing. An addition is a form of alteration.

"Agricultural use" means the tilling of soil, the raising of crops, horticulture, silviculture, viticulture, aviculture, aquaculture, apiculture, livestock grazing, the raising of small animals and poultry, domestic livestock farming, dairying, and animal husbandry.

"Agricultural processing" means the refinement, treatment, or packaging of agricultural products. Examples of agricultural processing include, but are not limited to: packing sheds, fruit dehydrators, cold storage houses, and hulling operations, and the storing, cleaning, packing, and storing of agricultural products preparatory to sale and/or shipment in their natural form including all uses customarily incidental thereto. Agricultural processing shall not include wineries, or manufacturing of secondary products using agricultural products such as commercial kitchens, bakeries, breweries, and woodworking.

"Agricultural service establishment" means a commercial business principally established to serve farming or ranching activities and which relies on agriculture as its major means of support. Agricultural service establishments shall include blacksmiths or farriers; commercial harvesters, irrigation or crop sprayers; farm equipment repair services, and custom meat cutter.

"Airport" means any area of land or water which is used or intended for use for the landing and taking off of aircraft and any appurtenant areas which are used or intended for use for airport buildings or other airport facilities or rights-of-way, together with all airport buildings and facilities located thereon.

"Airstrip" means any area of land or water used for the landing, take-off, or taxiing of aircraft.

"Alley" means a public or private thoroughfare which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation.

"Alteration" means any change or rearrangement in the supporting members of an existing building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, or interior partitions, as well as any change in doors or windows, or any enlargement to or diminution of a building or structure, whether horizontally or vertically, or the moving of a building or structure from one location to another.

"Animal husbandry" means the breeding, keeping, care and production of animals.

"Apartment" means a room or suite of rooms within a building but comprising an independent self-contained dwelling unit, with kitchen or cooking facilities, occupied or suitable for occupation as a residence for eating, living, and sleeping purposes.

"Apartment house" means any building or portion thereof containing three or more apartments or dwelling units. See "multifamily dwelling" or "multifamily dwelling group."

"Applicant" means any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture, corporation, or any entity or combination of entities which seeks city permits and approvals.

"Appurtenant" means accessory to a principal use or structure on the same site.

"Aquaculture" means the culture of plants or animals in water.

"At one location" means all adjacent land owned or controlled by the applicant, the property lines of which are contiguous at any point, or the property lines of which are separated by a public or private street, road, or other public or private right-of-way.

Automotive Repairs, Major. "Major automotive repairs" means repair or refurbishing of any motor vehicle including the dismantling of an engine by removal of the head or pistons; the removal of the transmission, rear end or major assembly of any motor vehicle. Painting, body, and fender work are excluded.

Automotive Repairs, Minor. "Minor automotive repairs" means limited repair of any motor vehicle including the sales and installation of tires or replacement of fluids or minor automotive parts including, but not limited to: spark plugs, belts, batteries, mufflers, tires, and wheels. Major automotive repair, painting, body, and fender work are excluded.

"Auto wrecking yards" means land used for dismantling or wrecking of used motor vehicles or trailers, or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled or wrecked vehicles or their parts. The presence on any lot or parcel of land of motor vehicles exceeding thirty days have not been capable of operating under their own power, or from which parts have been or are to be removed for reuse or sale shall constitute prima facie evidence of an automobile wrecking yard.

"Average cross slope" means the average degree of deviation of the surface of a parcel of land from the horizontal, expressed as a percentage. The following formula shall be used to determine the average cross slope of any given parcel:

 

S

=

.00229 (I) (L)

 

 

 

A

where:

S

=

The average cross-slope of the ground in percent.

 

I

=

The contour interval in feet.

 

L

=

The combined length in feet of all contours on the parcel map.

 

A

=

The area of the parcel in acres.

"Bar" means a structure or part of a structure used primarily for the sale or dispensing of liquor by the drink.

"Barn" means a building used for the shelter of livestock, the storage of agricultural products, the storage and maintenance of farm equipment or the storage of agricultural supplies.

"Bed and breakfast" means a commercial lodging use accessory to a principal dwelling further defined as two or less guest rooms located in the principal dwelling used, designated, or intended to be used, let or hired out for overnight sleeping accommodations.

"Bed and breakfast inn" means a commercial lodging use accessory to a principal use or as the principal use, and further defined as three to eight rooms or suites used, designated, or intended to be used, let, or hired out for overnight sleeping accommodations.

"Boarding house" means a dwelling other than a hotel or bed and breakfast, where lodging and/or meals for three or more persons is provided for compensation.

"Buildable area" means the net lot area minus any required minimum yard provided the maximum lot coverage is not exceeded.

"Building" means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods, or material of any kind or nature. "Building" shall include "structure."

Building Accessory. See "Accessory structure."

Building Envelope. See "Buildable area."

Building Height. See "Maximum height."

"Building setback line" means a development standard defined as a boundary line drawn on a sectional district map which separates buildable and non-buildable areas. The building setback line may be a specific distance from a physical feature such as a creek bank, stream center line, roadway, or follow a contour elevation line on a topographic map.

Building, Principal. "Principal building" means a building or structure in which is conducted the principal use of the lot or parcel on which it is situated.

Business, Retail. "Retail business" means the sale or any service, article, substance, or commodity to the consumer.

Business, Wholesale. "Wholesale building" means the handling and sale of any article, substance, or commodity for resale, including incidental retail sales.

"Campground" means an area or tract of land used for outdoor overnight accommodations of one or more camping parties in tents, trailers, or recreational vehicles, provided that no more than twenty-five percent of the campground spaces possess waste disposal facilities suitable for recreational vehicles.

"Camping party" means a person or group of not more than ten persons occupying a campsite.

"Campsite" means an area within a campground occupied by a camping party.

"Cattle and hog feed yard" means any area where cattle or hogs are held or maintained for the purpose of feeding and fattening where sixty percent or more of the feed for such cattle is imported or purchased; when not incidental to a farm or ranch.

"Carport" means a roofed structure, or a portion of a building, open on two or more sides for the parking of automobiles.

"Cemetery" means land dedicated for the burial of animal or human remains, and for this title including columbariums, crematoriums, mausoleums, and mortuaries.

"Cocktail lounge" means an area or room within or connected to a restaurant where alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises, structurally separated from the dining area.

"Community care facility" means any facility, place, or building which is maintained and operated to provide nonmedical residential care, adult day care, or home finding agency services for children, adults, or children and adults, including, but not limited to, the physically handicapped, mentally impaired, or incompetent persons. "Community care facility" shall include residential facility, residential care facility for the elderly, adult day care facility, home finding agency, and social rehabilitation facility, as defined in Section 1502 of the Health and Safety Code. Community care facilities include group homes and special care homes. See definitions for "Residential care facility," "residential care home, large," and "residential care home, small."

"Condominium" means the joint ownership of certain common property along with private, separate ownership of living space, including stock cooperatives and timeshare developments.

"Contractor’s equipment storage yard" means storage of large equipment, vehicles, or other materials commonly used in the contractor’s type of business; storage of scrap materials used for repair and maintenance of contractor’s own equipment; and buildings or structures for uses such as offices and repair facilities.

"Conversion" means a change in the use of land or a structure from one use to another.

"Conveyance or convey" means any sale, transfer, lease, rent, or disposition or act to transfer, sell, lease, rent, or dispose of any affordable unit and include, but are not limited to, transfer of title or any interest therein by non judicial or judicial foreclosure and sale; but does not include transfer by gift, devise, or inheritance to the unit’s owner’s spouse or issue, taking of title by joint tenant, transfer of title to a spouse as part of divorce or dissolution proceedings, or acquisition of title or interest therein in conjunction with marriage.

"Cottage industry" means a small scale commercial or manufacturing activity accessory to the principal residential or agricultural use.

Covered Space. See "Parking, covered."

Coverage. See "Maximum Coverage."

Dams, Small, Medium, and Large. "Small, medium and large dams" means an earthen, concrete, or stone wall to confine a flow of water, as a stream, and raise its level. Small dams to not exceed six feet in height from the natural bed of the stream or watercourse at the downstream toe of the barrier. Medium dams are of seven to fifteen feet in height from the natural bed of the stream or watercourse at the downstream toe of the barrier. Large dams are those exceeding fifteen feet in height from the natural bed of the stream or watercourse at the downstream toe of the barrier.

"Density" means the total number of dwelling units permitted per acre of land.

"Density bonus" means a density increase over the otherwise maximum permitted density for residential dwelling units as specified by the zoning district.

"Detached" means not sharing a common wall or roof.

"Developed" means on land, in or under land or water, the placement or erection of any solid material or structure; discharge or disposal of any dredged material or of any gaseous, liquid, solid, or thermal waste; grading, removing, dredging, mining, or extraction of any materials, change in the density of intensity of use of land, including, but not limited to: subdivision pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act (commencing with Section 66410 or the Government Code), and any other division of land except where the land division is brought about in connection with the purchase of such land by a public agency for public recreational use; change in the intensity of use of water, or of access thereto; construction, reconstruction, demolition, or alteration of the size of any structure, including any facility of any private, public, or municipal utility; and the removal or harvesting of major vegetation other than for agricultural purposes, and timber harvesting operations.

"Development standards" means a set of regulations contained within each zoning district of this title setting forth minimum requirements for specifications which must be met by all applicants for permits; including but not limited to: lot dimensions, setbacks and height limits; lot coverage; animal densities; parking and signs.

"De novo" means a new hearing. The review authority may approve, disapprove, or modify any proposed permit without regard to any previous testimony or action by another review authority.

"Domestic animal keeping" means "pets" raised by the occupants of the premises including dogs, cats, birds, fish, or other such animals, when in the opinion of the community development director in consultation with the animal control director, kept at a level not to create a habitual nuisance or endanger the health and safety of the community in accordance with this title.

"Drop-off recycling center" means any premises where recyclable items such as newspapers, magazines, glass bottles, or aluminum cans are accepted, whether for compensation or not, and stored within containers until such time as the recyclable items are transferred to a recycling center.

"Duplex" means a two-family dwelling.

"Dwelling unit" means a single unit providing independent living facilities for one or more persons, including provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation, and having only one kitchen.

A dwelling designed for occupancy by one household. A dwelling unit shall not include a residential second unit approved and constructed under the provisions of Section 17.04.040 (Secondary accessory residential unit).

Dwelling, Single-Family. "Single-family dwelling" means a single detached dwelling designed for and occupied exclusively by one family alone, and having but one kitchen. Single-family dwelling includes "factory built housing" as defined in Section 19971 of the Health and Safety Code.

Dwelling, Two-Family. "Two-family dwelling" means a single detached building designed for and occupied by two families alone, and having but two kitchens. "Two-family dwelling" includes duplex.

Dwelling, Multifamily. "Multifamily dwelling" means a single detached building designed for and occupied exclusively by three or more families living independently of each other as separate housekeeping. units, including apartment house, condominiums, triplexes, and fourplexes.

"Dwelling group" means a group of two or more detached or semi-detached single-family, two-family, or multifamily dwellings occupying a parcel of land in one ownership and having any yard or court in common.

"Egress" means a point of vehicle, bicycle, or pedestrian exit from a parking area, lot, garage, driveway, or building.

"Emergency shelter" means a facility with minimal supportive services for the temporary overnight shelter of homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person.

"Employee housing" means housing providing accommodations for employees where the accommodations are maintained in connection with any work or place where work is being performed, whether or not rent is involved. Employee housing providing accommodation for six or fewer employees is considered a single-family use and shall be subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone.

"Enclosed building" means a structure supported by columns, enclosed on all sides by walls, and covered by a roof.

Equipment Repair, Light. "Light equipment repair" means a shop for the restoration or the replacement of parts or machinery powered by motors of fifteen horsepower or less.

Equipment Repair, Heavy. "Heavy equipment repair" means a shop for the restoration or the replacement of parts or machinery powered by motors greater than fifteen horsepower.

Equipment storage yard. See "Contractor’s equipment storage yard."

"Exotic animal keeping" means the keeping of wild animals for which a wild animal permit is required.

"Factory-built housing" means a single-family dwelling defined as "factory-built housing" by Section 19971 of the Health and Safety Code which has the approval of the Department of Housing and Community Development of the state of California. Factory-built housing also includes "modular home or housing."

"Family" means one or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single housekeeping unit as distinguished from a group occupying a hotel, club, fraternity, or sorority house. The family shall be deemed to include necessary servants.

"Family care home" means any residential facility providing twenty-four-hour care and supervision for six or fewer juveniles or adults.

Family Home, Small. "Small family home" means any residential facility providing twenty-four-hour care for six or fewer foster children who have mental disorders or developmental or physical disabilities and who require special care and supervision as a result of their disabilities.

"Farm labor quarters" means rooming and boarding houses, trailer coaches, mobilehomes, single-family dwellings, and mess halls for any number of farm help customarily employed principally on land owned by the owner of the building site occupied by said structures.

"Farm labor camp" means living accommodations, including structures, tents, trailers and mobilehomes, mess halls, garages, and accessory buildings and uses, or any number of persons, maintained in connection with any work or place where work is being performed, and including the premises on which said buildings and uses are situated or the area set aside for them. Labor camp and labor quarters shall also include any such living accommodations, and the premises which they occupy, which are owned, operated or maintained by any person engaged in the business of supplying lodging or meals for five or more persons who are or may be employed by him or by others.

Feedlot, Commercial. See "Cattle and hog feed yard."

"Floodplain" means the area adjoining the channel of a natural stream or river which has been or may be covered by floodwater.

Floor Area, Gross. "Gross floor area" means the total area of all floors of a building as measured to the surfaces of interior walls and including corridors, stairways, elevator shafts, attached garages, porches, balconies, basements, and offices.

Floor Area, Net. "Net floor area" means the gross floor area excluding vents, shafts, stairs, corridors, attics, and unenclosed porches and balconies.

"Foster family home" means any residential facility providing twenty-four-hour care of six or fewer children which is owned, leased, or rented and is the residence of the foster parent or parents, including their family, in whose care the foster children have been placed.

"Front yard" means that yard or area within the front one half of the lot.

"Game preserve" means a public or private land area, chiefly in a natural state, set aside for the protection, enhancement, and enjoyment of wild animals or birds; includes "game reserve."

"Game room/amusement arcades" means a place wherein games/amusement devices occupy twenty-five percent or more of the net floor area, or contains seven or more games/ amusement devices and three or more pool tables and does not include any card games of chance or gambling.

"Garage" means an accessible and usable covered and completely enclosed space of not less than ten by twenty feet per vehicle for storage of automobiles.

"Granny unit" means an accessory dwelling unit either separate from or attached to the principal residence intended for the sole occupancy of one or two persons who are sixty years of age or older.

Group Care Home. See "Community Care Facility."

"Guest house" means a detached living quarters of a permanent type of construction without kitchen or cooking facilities of any kind, intended and used for temporary guests and not rented or leased separately from the main dwelling.

"Health care facility" means any facility, place, or building which is organized, maintained, and operated for the diagnosis, care, prevention, and treatment of human illness, physical or mental, including after convalescence and rehabilitation and including care during and after pregnancy, or for any one or more of these purposes, for one or more persons, to which the persons are admitted for a twenty-four-hour stay or longer. "Health care facility" shall include general, acute psychiatric hospital, skilled nursing facility, intermediate care facility, intermediate care facility/developmentally disabled habilitative, special hospital, or intermediate care facility/developmentally disabled.

Height. See "Maximum height."

"Historic areas" or "subdivision" means a town map, subdivision map, or individual lot which was recorded (created) in the official records of the county of Lake prior to 1940.

Hobby, Kennel. See "Kennel, Hobby."

Hog Farm, Commercial. See "Cattle and Hog Feed Yard."

"Home occupation" means an occupation conducted within a dwelling by a person(s) residing in the dwelling unit, which is incidental and secondary to the residential use of the dwelling.

Hospital. See "Health care facility."

"Hotel" means any building, portion thereof or group of buildings, providing transient accommodations containing six or more rooms; used, designed, or intended to be used, let or hired out for transient occupancy.

"Housing authority" means the Lake County housing authority, a nonprofit public corporation or another city designated agency.

"Housing costs" mean the monthly mortgage principal, interest, taxes, homeowner’s insurance, and condominium fees, where applicable, for ownership units and monthly rent for rental units.

"HUD" means the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, or its successor.

"Importation of fill" means the deposit of earth in amounts exceeding fifty cubic yards in any one lot or parcel.

"Incidental" means secondary, accessory, appurtenant, or subordinate to another use, structure, or activity.

"Income eligibility" means the gross annual household income considering household size and number of dependents, income of all wage earners, elderly, or disabled members of the family and all other sources of income.

"In-lieu housing fee" means a fee paid to the city housing fund to facilitate the construction of very-low to moderate income housing elsewhere in the community.

Interior Lot. See "Lot - Interior."

"Junk" means any used, waste, discarded, or salvaged machinery, scrap iron, steel, other ferrous and nonferrous metals, tools, implements or portions thereof, glass, plastic, cordage, building materials, or other waste which has been abandoned from its original use and may be used again in its present or in a new form. Also including automobiles, other vehicles, or dismantled vehicles in whole or part.

"Junkyard" means the use of more than one hundred square feet of any lot zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, C-1, C-2 or more than two hundred square feet in any other district where "junk" is kept, stored, located, piled, salvaged, reconditioned, sold, bartered, or put to any use.

Kennels, Hobby. "Hobby kennels" means an accessory use of a principal residential or agricultural use where five to seven dogs are sheltered, bred, or trained for noncommercial purposes.

Kennels, Commercial. "Commercial kennel" means any premises where more than seven dogs, cats, or other similar animals are kept, maintained, bred, boarded, or cared for, for compensation, or are kept for the purposes of sale, hire, breeding, or exhibition. Dogs used in herding farm animals, incidental to an agricultural use, are excluded from this definition.

"Large family day care home" means a home which regularly provides care, protection, and supervision of nine or more children, including children who reside at the home, for periods of less than twenty-four hours per day, while the parents or guardians are away.

"Live entertainment" means an activity that includes the presentation of amplified music or voices.

"Lot" means a parcel of land.

Lot Area, Gross. "Gross lot area" means the area included within the boundaries of a "lot of record," including any portion described in the map or deed creating the lot as lying within a public or private street right-of-way or roadway easement. For lots five or more acres in size, or when the zoning regulations require minimum lot size of five or more acres, up to, but not exceeding fifteen percent of the minimum lot size or maximum permitted density requirement may consist of any area required for new road dedication or one half of any existing public right-of-way.

Lot Area, Net. "Net lot area" means the gross lot area minimum any public or private street right-of-way, and minus any roadway easement.

Lot, Corner. "Corner lot" means a lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection, or upon two parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty four degrees.

Lot Coverage. See "Maximum lot coverage."

Lot, Interior. "Interior lot" means a lot which is bordered on three sides by other lots, and which fronts upon a street or right-of-way.

Lot, Key. "Key lot" means a lot, the sideline of which abuts the rear line of one or more adjoining lots.

Lot, Through. "Through lot" means a lot having frontage on two parallel, or approximately parallel streets.

"Lot line" means a line separating the frontage from a street; the side from adjoining property; or the rear from an alley or street or adjoining property.

Lot Line, Front. "Front lot line" means a line separating a front yard of a lot from the street.

Lot Line, Rear. "Rear lot line" means the lot line most distance from and generally opposite the front lot line; or on a lot with two front lot lines, the lot line opposite the narrowest front lot line.

Lot Line, Side. "Side lot line" means any lot line not a front lot line or a rear lot line.

"Lot of record" means a single parcel of land, the boundaries of which are delineated in the latest recorded parcel map, subdivision map, certificate of compliance, or deed provided that such recorded deed does not create or attempt to create a lot in violation of the provisions of any applicable California law or city ordinance.

Lot Width, Minimum Average. "Minimum average lot width" means the average horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth of the lot at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines. In the case of triangular lots, or lots that are bound by more than four straight lines, or that have curvilinear side lines, the community development director shall determine lot width.

"Lower income household" is a general term which refers to households in the very-low and low income classifications.

"Lumberyard" means an area used for the storage, distribution, and sale of lumber and lumber products, but not including the manufacture, remanufacture, or fabrication of lumber, lumber products or firewood.

Manufactured Housing. See "Mobilehome."

"Maximum height" means the height for any principal or accessory structure or auxiliary facility, above which air space cannot by occupied by any building, structure, or ancillary facility. The maximum height shall be the vertical distance from the average level of the highest and lowest point of that portion of the lot covered by the building to the topmost point of the roof.

"Maximum lot coverage" means a development standard which shall have the following meaning: the percentage of the net lot are covered by the vertical projection of any structure, excluding any structure not extending above grade. Lot coverage shall not include swimming pools, and shall not include underground accessory structures such as septic tanks, gas tanks, or water and sewer lines.

"Maximum permitted density" means a development standard indicating the maximum number of dwelling units per acre.

"Median income" means the annual area median income applicable to the county, adjusted for family size in accordance with the adjustment factors adopted by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).

"Minimum lot size" means the smallest permitted size of any newly created lot(s) or parcel(s). For lots less than five acres in size, all minimum lot sizes shall be net lot area; for lots five acres or more in size, all minimum lot sizes shall be gross lot area.

"Minimum yard" is defined herein as "yard required, front," "yard required, rear," and "yard required, side" which establish areas of a lot or parcel which shall be left unobstructed of permanently affixed buildings and structures to provide for adequate light, air, and open space.

"Mining and resource extraction" for the purposes of this title, means the removal and processing of natural mineral resources such as aggregate, ore, water (including bottling plants), and other minerals. This definition shall not apply to geothermal resources.

"Minor additions or alterations" means the repair, maintenance, or minor alteration of structures, buildings, or topographic features involving negligible or no expansion of use beyond that previously existing, including but not limited to: interior or exterior alterations involving such things as interior partitions, plumbing, and electrical conveyances; restoration or rehabilitation of deteriorated or damaged structures, facilities, or mechanical equipment to meet current standards; or additions to existing structures or uses provided that the addition will not result in an increase of more than twenty percent of the floor area of the structure or use are of the current use before the addition.

"Mobilehome" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is at least twelve feet in width (excluding eaves) and five hundred sixty square feet in size, or as otherwise defined in this chapter, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation. Mobilehome includes a "manufactured home" as defined in Section 18007 of the Health and Safety Code. Mobilehome does not include a recreational vehicle (Section 18010.5), commercial coach (Section 18012), or factory-built housing (Section 19971).

"Mobilehome park" means a parcel or contiguous parcels under one ownership which are planned and improved where mobilehome spaces are used, rented, leased, or held out for use, rent, or lease to accommodate mobilehomes for human habitation.

"Mobilehome stand" means that part of an individual mobilehome space which has been reserved for the placement of the mobilehome.

"Moderate, low, and very-low income levels" means those determined periodically by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) based on the Lake County median income levels by family size.

A.    Moderate income, eighty percent to one hundred percent of the HUD median income.

B.    Low income, fifty percent to eighty percent of the HUD median income.

C.    Very low income, under fifty percent of the HUD median income.

Modular Home. See "Factory-Built Housing."

Motel. See "Hotel."

"Motorhome" means a "housecar" as defined by the California Department of Motor Vehicles, which is any vehicle designed for human habitation.

Multifamily Dwelling. See "Dwelling, Multifamily."

"Multifamily dwelling group" means a group of two or more detached or semidetached two-family or multifamily dwellings that occupy a parcel of land in one ownership.

"Newspaper distribution center" means any premises where newspapers are picked up by vendors employed for redistribution either by house to house delivery or in small quantities to retail stores.

"Nonconforming lot" means a legal lot of record having less area, dimensions, or frontage than required in the regulations of the district in which it is situated.

"Nonconforming structure" means a legal building or structure, where the setbacks, height, or area of the structure does not meet the regulations of the district in which it is situated.

"Nonconforming use" means any legal use of land which does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is situated.

Nursery, Retail. See "Plant Nursery, Retail." Nursery, Wholesale. See "Plant Nursery, Wholesale." "Nursery school" means a public or private school for children usually under five years of age.

Nursing home. A form of "Health care facility."

"Off-sale liquor" means the sale of alcohol or alcohol products for human consumption outside the place of sale.

"Off-site units" means affordable dwelling units built on a property different than and not contiguous to the development for which the affordable units are required to be constructed under the provisions of this section.

"On-sale liquor" means the sale of alcohol or alcohol products for human consumption inside the place of sale.

"Open storage" means the storage of new or usable supplies, materials, products, motor vehicles, or other appurtenances in the "open" or in view of the general public. Open storage is a form of outdoor storage but does not include a junkyard.

"Open to the public" means hours of operation of a commercial use when the goods or services provided are "available for use by persons other than employees."

"Outdoor storage" means the storage of supplies, materials, products, motor vehicles, or other articles outside of a building and left uncovered by roofs or walls.

"Outdoor recreation facility" means any premises which offers open-air recreational opportunities to the general public either on a membership basis, or on an hourly, daily, weekly, monthly, or yearly rate including, but not limited to golf courses, tennis courts, swimming pools, equestrian trails, and private hot springs. "Outdoor recreational facility" shall not include commercial resort uses such as skateboard parks, BMX tracks, miniature golf, waterslides, jet ski, and other boat rentals.

Parcel. See "Lot."

"Parking spaces" means an accessible and usable space on the lot at least nine by twenty feet in dimension for the parking of automobiles, except as otherwise provided for in Chapter 17.23.

Parking, Covered. "Covered parking" means an accessible and usable parking space of not less than ten by twenty feet in dimension located within a structure of columns and roof or enclosed by walls and roof. Includes "carport" or "garage."

"Performance standards" means a set of regulations setting forth minimum requirements or maximum allowable limits on the effects or characteristics of a use, including, but not limited to performance standards on air quality, erosion, glare, landscaping, hazardous wastes, noise, outdoor storage, and satellite dish antennas.

"Person" means any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, company, association, joint association, or local agency and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, or other similar representative thereof.

Plant Nursery, Retail. "Retail plant nursery" means the retail handling of any article, substance, or commodity related to the planting, maintenance or harvest of garden plants, shrubs, trees, packaged fertilizers, soils, chemicals, or other nursery goods and related products in small quantities to the consumer.

Plant Nursery, Wholesale. "Wholesale plant nursery" means the growing, storage, and sale of garden plants, shrubs, trees, or vines for resale, including incidental retail sales.

"Power generation" means any electrical generating facility using thermal, wind, or water energy including, but not limited to biomass plants, wind farms, coal-fired plants, or thermal power plants.

"Principal structure" means a structure in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated, except for agricultural uses.

"Principal use" means the primary or dominant use of the land, whether it be to farm, to ranch, to reside within a dwelling, or to operate a business.

"Private sewer system" means an individual septic system.

"Private utility" means any utility which is not a public utility.

"Private water system" means an individual well or mutual water system.

"Professional uses" means any one of the following uses: accountant, architect, drafting service, attorney, chiropractor, civil engineer or surveyor’s office, collection agency, dentist, doctor, insurance office, private detective, real estate office, administration office, social worker, barber shop, beauty shop, and other similar uses. Retail sales conducted in conjunction with a professional use shall be limited to items that are directly related and ancillary to the professional use activity occurring within the building.

"Project" means a housing development at one location including all units or lots for which discretionary approvals have been applied for or granted within a twenty-three-month period.

"Public area" means an area, structure, or building owned by a governmental agency and operated for use by the public including, but not limited to: public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths, and other recreational areas and other public open spaces; schools, libraries, police stations, corporation yards, and other public uses, buildings, and structures.

"Publicly maintained road" means any road in the city accepted for maintenance, or owned and maintained by a city, county, special district, or state.

"Public sewer system" means any sewage disposal system of one hundred or more connections operated and maintained by any municipality, state of California.

"Public utility" means production, storage, transmission, and recovery facilities for water, sewerage, energy, communications, and other similar utilities owned or operated by a business organization and subject to the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission.

"Public water system" means a system, regardless of type of ownership, for the provision of piped water to the public for domestic use, if such system has at least one hundred service connection.

"Public and private nonprofit campgrounds" means nonprofit camping facilities for the general public, youth organizations, or community service groups.

"Rear yard" means that yard or area within the rear one-half of the lot which extends from the rear wall of the principal building or structure to the rear lot line.

"Recreational vehicle" means a motorhome, travel trailer, camper or camping trailer, with or without motor power, designed for human habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy, with an area of less than four hundred eighty square feet. Recreational vehicle shall also include trailered boats.

"Recreational vehicle park" means any area or tract of land, where one or more spaces are rented or leased or offered for rent or lease or held out for use to owners or users of recreational vehicles or tents and which is occupied for temporary purposes.

"Recycling center" means any premises where recyclable items such as newspapers, magazines, glass bottles, or aluminum cans are accepted, whether for compensation or not, collected from drop-off recycling centers, processed and stored within containers or enclosed buildings until such time as the recyclable items are sold and shipped.

Processing may include crushing, baling, or shredding.

"Rent" means and includes the costs of all taxes and assessments on the real property of which the affordable unit is a part, including but not limited to, homeowner’s associations, fees, dues and assessments, and casualty insurance on the real property including the dwelling unit, but excludes the costs of utilities serving the allocated unit, including water, sewer, telephone, electricity and gas, required garbage collection services, and insurance on personal property of the lessee.

"Replacement value" means a building evaluation as determined by the building inspection staff not including the value of land.

"Residential second unit" means a single-family dwelling constructed after or concurrent with another single-family dwelling on the same lot or parcel. A second unit provides complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, sanitation, and parking. Only one second unit is allowed per lot.

Required Yard, Front. "Front required yard" means a development standard applied to the placement of structures and is the shortest possible distance between every structure and the front lot line of the subject lot.

Required Yard, Rear. "Rear required yard" means a development standard applied to the placement of structures and is the shortest possible distance between every structure and the rear lot line of the subject lot.

Required Yard, Side. "Side required yard" means a development standard applied to the placement of structures and is the shortest possible distance between every structure and the side lot line on the subject lot.

"Resale controls" means legal restrictions by which the price of an affordable housing unit will be controlled to ensure that the unit is affordable by lower income households over time.

Reservoir, Small, Medium, Large. "Small, medium, large reservoir" means a form of "excavated pond" or "embankment pond." A small reservoir is greater than one acre foot, but shall not exceed five acre feet. A medium reservoir is greater than five acre feet but shall not exceed fifteen acre feet. A large reservoir exceeds fifteen acre feet. The aggregate volume of all ponds on the property shall be used for calculating pond size on any individual parcel.

"Residential care facility" means a community care facility for more than fourteen persons.

"Residential care home, large" means a community care facility for seven to fourteen persons.

"Residential care home, small" means a community care facility for six or fewer persons. A small residential care facility is the same as a group home serving six or fewer persons. The count of "six or fewer" does not include the licensee, members of the licensee’s family, or the residential care home’s staff. A small residential care facility is considered a residential use of property, and shall be subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone (Health and Safety Code Sections 1267.8(c), 1267.16(a), 1566.2, and 1568.031(a).

"Residential development" or "development" means a project with five or more residential units.

Rest Home. See "Community care facility."

"Restaurant" means an establishment where food is prepared for consumption on the premises, which may include on sale alcoholic beverages in conjunction with meals, provided that there is no separate bar area.

"Review authority" for the purposes of this title, means the officer, committee, commission, board, or employee responsible for the approval or disapproval of any permit or entitlement or responsible for the administration, interpretation, or enforcement of the provisions of this title.

"Ridge" means a topographic feature indicated as an extended elevation between valleys, typically the upper part of a range of hills or mountains.

"Rifle range" means any facility or premises protected from uncontrolled entry where the firearms or arrows are lawfully discharged for target practice or competition. "Rifle range" includes pistol range, archery range, or trap shoot.

"Road building" means the removal of more than fifty cubic yards of earth for road building, or grading of roads longer than five hundred feet, but not including roads constructed for agricultural purposes.

Rummage Sale, Commercial. "Commercial rummage sale" means the sale of secondhand goods, including flea markets by individuals or organizations conducted more than twelve days per calendar year.

Rummage Sale, Nonprofit. "Nonprofit rummage sale" means the infrequent sale of secondhand goods by individuals or organizations, including garage and yard sales, and flea markets conducted between six to twelve days per calendar year.

"Sanitary landfill" means a site for solid waste disposal in which the solid waste is spread in thin layers, compacted to the smallest practical volume, and covered with solid at the end of each working day.

Satellite Dish Antenna, Commercial. "Commercial satellite dish antenna" means any structure capable of receiving radio or television signals from a transmitter or a transmitter relay located in planetary orbit, used in conjunction to a commercial use or where admission is charged to view programs received via satellite.

Satellite Dish Antenna, Private. "Private satellite dish antenna" means an accessory structure to the principal use, and capable of receiving, for the sole benefit of the principal use, radio or television signals from a transmitter or transmitter relay located in planetary orbit.

School, Private. "Private school" means a school that is established, conducted, and primarily financially supported by a non-governmental agency or group of individuals.

School, Public. "Public school" means a school that is financially supported by a local, city, county, state, or other government authority.

"Screening" means to intentionally prevent or obstruct the public’s view of some particular use, article, activity, structure, or building.

"Service station" means a retail business establishment limited to the sale of motor fuels and supplying goods and services generally required in the operation and maintenance of automotive vehicles.

Setback. See "Required Yard, Front," "Required Yard - Rear," "Required Yard, Side" or "Building setback line."

"Side yard" means that yard or area within either side of the lot and outside of the front yard or rear yard which extends from the wall of the principal building or structure to the side lot line.

"Sign" means anything whatsoever placed, erected, constructed, posted, painted, printed, tacked, nailed, glued, struck, carved, or otherwise fastened, affixed, or made visible for out-of-door advertising purposes in any manner whatsoever, on the ground or on any tree, wall, bush, rock, post, fence, building, structure, or anything whatsoever.

Single-Family Dwelling. See "Dwelling, Single-Family."

"Small family day care home" means a home which regularly provides care, protection, and supervision of eight or fewer children, including children who reside at the home, for periods of less than twenty-four hours per day, while the parents or guardians are away.

"Social rehabilitation facility" means any residential facility which provides social rehabilitation services for adult individuals for periods of not longer than eighteen months duration in a group setting.

"Space" means, when referring to a mobilehome park or recreational vehicle park, any area, lot, or site designated or used for the occupancy of one mobilehome, travel trailer, recreation vehicle, or camping party.

"Special event" means an establishment or enterprise involving large assemblages of people or automobiles on private land not specifically designed for such events including, but not limited to, a carnival or circus, automobile or foot race, rodeo, outdoor concert, play, festival attracting more than five hundred participants or observers, or a tennis tournament.

"Street" means a permanently reserved, public or private right-of-way which affords a principal means of vehicular access to abutting or adjacent property, not including alleys or driveways as defined herein. The service or frontage road of a freeway shall be considered as a street separate from such freeway or highway.

"Structure" means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on or above the ground or the attachment to something having location on or above the ground including swimming pools and patio covers.

"Structural alteration" means any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders.

"Structural wall" means any bearing wall of a building.

"Supportive housing" means housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population, and that is linked to on-site or off-site services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. Supportive housing may be developed as a variety of housing types, including a single-family unit, multifamily development, or community care facility and is subject to the same regulations as that housing type. For example, a supportive housing project of one single-family unit would be subject to the same standards as a single-family home.

"Target population" means persons with low incomes having one or more disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other chronic health conditions, or individuals eligible for services provided under the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act (Division 4.5 (commencing with Section 4500) of the Welfare and Institutions Code) and may include, among other populations, adults, emancipated youth, families, families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system, individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans, and homeless people.

"Temporary" is a term applied to certain uses requiring a zoning permit which are only permitted for a limited time, after which the zoning permit expires.

"Temporary dwelling" means a travel trailer or motorhome which serves as a temporary residence for the owner/builder until the principal dwelling unit is built or occupied.

"Temporary office" means a commercial coach which serves as a temporary office until the principal commercial structure is built or occupied.

"Temporary sales office" means a real estate sales office located in a subdivision.

"Timeshare" means a single-family dwelling unit whether attached or detached which is in common ownership by more than one family or individual, the purpose of which is to provide temporary living accommodations to all owners on a scheduled basis for recreation. A timeshare may be managed separately and rented to non-owners when approved by the common owners.

"Townhouse" means a single-family dwelling in a row of at least three such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit by one or more common fire resistant walls.

"Trailer coach" means a vehicle designed or used for human habitation, including travel trailers, motorhomes, and campers, with a maximum gross occupied ground area of less than four hundred eighty square feet.

"Transitional housing, transitional housing development" means buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six months. Transitional housing may be developed as a variety of housing types, including a single-family unit, multifamily development, or community care facility and is subject to the same regulations as that housing type. For example, a transitional housing project of one single-family unit would be subject to the same standards as a single-family home. A transitional housing project proposed as a twenty-unit subdivision would be subject to the same standards as a residential subdivision. A transitional housing project proposed as a multifamily development would be subject to the same standards as a multifamily project.

"Truck stop" means a place of business primarily engaged in providing service station facilities for cargo vehicles, trailer trucks, and automobiles. Truck stops may include accessory food and lodging services.

"Use" means the purpose for which land or premises of a building thereon is designed, arranged, or intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.

Use, Accessory. See "Accessory Use."

"Use area" means the area occupied by principal use or structure and accessory buildings, structures, and appurtenant outdoor, screened, or covered areas accessory to a permitted use or structure.

Veterinary Clinic, Large Animal. "Large animal veterinary clinic" means any premises used for the on-site care and treatment of large domestic animals including horses, cattle, goats, sheep, and similar animals including holding pens or corrals.

Veterinary Clinic, Small Animal. "Small animal veterinary clinic" means any premises used for the care and treatment of small domestic animals including dogs, cats, birds, and similar animals with all such operations being conducted wholly within a building.

Wholesale Plant Nursery. See "Plant Nursery, Wholesale."

"Winery" means a bonded establishment primarily used for the purpose of processing grapes or other fruit products.

Processing includes, but is not limited to, crushing, fermenting, blending, aging, storage, bottling, and wholesale or retail sales of wine produced or bottled on the premises. Accessory uses include tasting rooms and incidental retail sales of wine related products including, but not limited to, glasses, bottle openers, and previously prepared packaged foods.

Wood Yard, Commercial. "Commercial wood yard" means any premises where large quantities of firewood, whether as whole trees or parts of trees, are imported, openly stored, split, sized, and cut for sale.

Yard. See "Minimum yard."

Yard, Required Front. See "Minimum Yard, Front."

"Zoning administrator" means the community development director or designee. (Ord. 893 §3(13), 2014; Ord. 887 §1(I), 2013; Ord. 880 §2(1), 2010; Ord. 837 §2, 2005; Ord. 821 §1(part), 2003; Ord. 796 Att. A(part), 1999)

Chapter 17.38
CANNABIS CULTIVATION
Sections:

17.38.010    Intent.

17.38.020    Applicability.

17.38.030    Definitions.

17.38.040    Regulation of location.

17.38.050    Development and operational standards.

17.38.060    Enforcement.

17.38.070    Liability.

17.38.010 Intent.
A.    The city council of the city of Lakeport, pursuant to this chapter, hereby intends to regulate the personal cultivation of cannabis, including but not limited to regulations as to location of the cultivation, size of the area used for cultivation, and the use of fencing or other screening and security structures, and in furtherance of the public necessity, convenience and general welfare.

B.    This chapter is established to regulate personal cannabis cultivation in a manner that mitigates potential impacts on surrounding properties and persons, and that is in conformance with the provisions of the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Proposition 215) and the Adult Use of Marijuana Act (Proposition 64).

C.    It is the intent of the city of Lakeport to enforce the provisions of this chapter primarily on the basis of legitimate and verified complaints received from the public related to nuisance conditions and/or other public safety issues. (Ord. 914 §1(part), 2017: Ord. 889 §1(part), 2013. Formerly 17.38.020)

17.38.020 Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all persons described herein whether the activities described herein were established before or after the effective date of this chapter. Chapter 17.36, Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Lots, shall not apply to preexisting land or building uses inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 914 §1(part), 2017: Ord. 889 §1(part), 2013. Formerly 17.38.030)

17.38.030 Definitions.
"Cannabis," or "marijuana," shall include the definition of "cannabis" as set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 26001, subdivision (f), and Health and Safety Code Section 11018, as each may be amended from time to time, and shall be used interchangeably and shall mean all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether for a medical purpose or a nonmedical purpose, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. This includes the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from marijuana. This definition does not mean "industrial hemp" as defined by California Food and Agricultural Code Section 81000, as may be amended, or California Health and Safety Code Section 11018.5, as may be amended.

"Canopy" means the total combined canopy area for all locations on a property where cannabis/medical marijuana is being cultivated, including indoor areas, as measured by the horizontal extent of the plant or combination of plants at the widest point and measured in a straight line.

"Cultivation" means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis and/or marijuana.

"Detached, fully enclosed and secure structure" is a building completely detached from a residence that complies with the California Building Standards Code, as adopted by the city, or if exempt from the permit requirements of the California Building Standards Code, that has a complete roof enclosure supported by connecting walls extending from the ground to the roof, is secure against unauthorized entry, and is accessible only through one or more lockable doors.

"Indoors" means within a fully enclosed and secure structure.

"Medical cannabis" or "medical marijuana" means cannabis or marijuana that has been recommended by a licensed physician in strict accordance with Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.5 through 11362.9, inclusive, commonly referred to as the Compassionate Use Act and the Medical Marijuana Program.

"Outdoor" means any location within the city that is not within a fully enclosed and secure structure.

"Primary caregiver" shall have the same definition as Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7(d), as may be amended.

"Qualified patient" shall have the same definition as Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.7(c) and (f), as may be amended.

"Rear yard" is the rear open space portion of any premises, whether fenced or unfenced.

"Residential structure" is any building or portion thereof legally existing which contains living facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation on a premises or legal parcel located within a residential or agricultural-residential zoning district.

"Solid" means constructed of substantial material (such as wood) that prevents viewing the contents from one side to the other. "Solid" does not include tarpaulins, cloth material, scrap material, bushes, or hedgerows. (Ord. 914 §1(part), 2017: Ord. 889 §1(part), 2013. Formerly 17.38.040)

17.38.040 Regulation of location.
A.    Cannabis cultivation shall be prohibited on any parcel within the city except as an accessory use to a legally established residential structure within a legal accessory structure on a legal parcel within the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-5 and UR zoning districts as well as permitted mixed use--residential units.

B.    Except as provided in subsection C of this section, cannabis cultivation may be undertaken only by person(s) who occupy the residential structure on the parcel proposed for cultivation as their primary residence.

C.    A primary caregiver, as defined, may undertake cultivation of medical cannabis on behalf of his/her qualified patient(s), but only on a parcel containing the primary caregivers or qualified patient’s primary residence.

D.    Cultivation shall only be permitted in a detached, fully enclosed and secure accessory structure and said cultivation area, including the plant canopy, shall be limited to eighty square feet per parcel or residence, whichever is less, or six plants. The cultivated cannabis may not be sold to any other person or organization.

E.    The use of a detached, fully enclosed and secure accessory structure for cultivation of cannabis shall not reduce the required parking required per Chapter 17.23.

F.    Outdoor cultivation shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge for possession of any parcel within any zoning district in the city.

G.    Indoor cultivation within a residential structure shall be unlawful and a public nuisance with regard to any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge for possession of any parcel within any zoning district in the city. (Ord. 914 §1(part), 2017: Ord. 889 §1(part), 2013. Formerly 17.38.050)

17.38.050 Development and operational standards.
A.    From a public right-of-way there shall be no exterior evidence of cannabis cultivation located inside a detached, fully enclosed and secure accessory structure.

B.    Person(s) engaged in cultivation shall reside in the residence located on the parcel containing the detached, fully enclosed and secure accessory structure where the cannabis cultivation occurs, except as provided in Section 17.38.040(C).

C.    Person(s) engaged in cultivation shall not cultivate medical marijuana in any other location within the incorporated city other than in the accessory structure located on the parcel containing his/her primary residence, except as provided in Section 17.38.040(C).

D.    The qualifying residential structure located on the property containing the detached, fully enclosed and secure accessory structure in which cannabis is cultivated shall maintain kitchen, bathrooms, and primary bedrooms for their intended use and shall not be used for cannabis cultivation.

E.    Cannabis cultivation shall not adversely affect the health or safety of nearby residents by creating dust, glare, heat, noise, noxious gases, odor, smoke, traffic, vibration, or other impacts, or be hazardous due to use or storage of materials, processes, products or wastes.

F.    Residential accessory structures used for cultivation shall meet the following criteria:

1.    The structure shall be provided with a locking door or doors.

2.    If a detached, fully enclosed, and secure structure is not feasible and the cultivation building is an unsecured structure then it shall additionally be surrounded by a secure solid six-foot-high fence located within ten feet of the unsecured structure and equipped with a lockable gate.

3.    The structure shall be located in the rear yard portion of the lot and maintain a minimum of a ten-foot setback from the side and rear property lines and from any other building on the parcel.

4.    Any accessory structure utilized for cultivation of cannabis shall be legally constructed with a building permit if it exceeds one hundred twenty square feet of size. No more than eighty square feet of floor area shall be used for the cultivation of cannabis. The plant canopy shall be contained within the eighty square feet of floor area. All electrical and plumbing fixtures shall be installed with a valid building permit from the city. Such building permits will only be issued to the owner of the property. If the resident is proposing to convert an existing accessory structure, or a portion of an existing structure, for cultivation of cannabis, an inspection will be required to ensure compliance with this chapter.

5.    Cannabis cultivation lighting shall comply with the California Building, Electrical and Fire Codes as adopted by the city.

6.    Flammable or volatile gas products or generators shall not be used within any detached structure used for the cultivation of cannabis.

7.    Any detached, fully enclosed and secure structure used for the cultivation of cannabis must have a ventilation and filtration system installed that shall prevent nuisance cannabis plant odors from exiting the interior of the structure. If a permanent, built-in ventilation and filtration system is installed, it shall be subject to the issuance of a building permit, approval by the building official and must be installed prior to commencing cultivation within the detached, fully enclosed and secure structure.

8.    Accessory structures utilized for cultivation shall be ventilated with odor control filters, and shall not create an odor, humidity or mold problem on the subject property or adjacent properties.

9.    Other activities may occur within a detached fully enclosed and secure accessory structure where cannabis is cultivated; provided, that the cultivation area within the structure, including the plant canopy, does not exceed eighty square feet of floor area; and further provided, that the cultivation area is segregated from all other building uses by permitted walls and all other conditions of this chapter are satisfied.

10.    As an alternative to the requirement set forth in subsections (F)(1) through (8) of this section, the cultivation of cannabis may occur in a prefabricated greenhouse structure constructed for nursery or agricultural purpose which does not include any service systems and which has a canopy which does not exceed eighty square feet. Said structure shall be located in an area which is fully enclosed by an opaque fence at least six feet in height. The structure must also meet all applicable permit requirements and shall be secure against unauthorized entry and accessible only through one or more lockable doors. The frame must be constructed of metal and the panels must be polycarbonate or other similar material which is no less than four mm thick. In the alternative, the structure may be a chain link or wire mesh type greenhouse which is overlaid with a one-piece cover made of polyethylene laminate fabric or other similar materials which is no less than eight ml thick. The structure shall be equipped with an odor control filtration and ventilation system(s) adequate to prevent cannabis plant odors from exiting the interior of the structure.

G.    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a limitation on the city’s authority to abate any nuisance which may exist from the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, processing or storage of cannabis plants or any part thereof from any location, indoor or outdoor, including from within a detached, fully enclosed and secure structure. (Ord. 914 §1(part), 2017: Ord. 889 §1(part), 2013. Formerly 17.38.060)

17.38.060 Enforcement.
A.    Right of Entry. Persons designated by resolution as code enforcement officers of the city are authorized to enter upon and inspect private properties to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Reasonable advance notice of any such entry and inspection shall be provided and, before entry, consent shall be obtained in writing from the owner or other person in lawful possession of the property. If consent cannot for any reason be obtained, an inspection warrant shall be obtained from a court of law prior to any such entry and inspection. In those cases where consent is denied, the city may seek to recover the costs it incurs in obtaining a warrant from the property owner and/or person in lawful possession of the property.

B.    Public Nuisance. The maintaining, cultivating or growing of cannabis upon private property within the city, unless in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter, is declared to be a public nuisance as defined in Section 370 of the California Penal Code and Chapter 8.22.

C.    Citable Offense. Every person who, in violation of the provisions of this chapter, maintains, permits or allows cannabis to be grown upon his or her property or premises, and every person occupying, renting or leasing the property or premises of another who maintains, permits or allows cannabis to be grown thereon in violation of this chapter, is guilty of an infraction punishable as set forth in Section 1.08.010. After written notice is provided to any such person of such violation, the continued existence of such violation for each and every day after the service of such notice shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.

D.    Issuance of Citations. All persons designated by resolution as code enforcement officers of the city are authorized to issue citations to persons deemed to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter. Such citations shall be expeditiously processed through use of the administrative citation process or where appropriate through filing an infraction in the appropriate court of law.

E.    Remedies Nonexclusive. The remedies provided herein shall not be the exclusive means of enforcing the provisions of this chapter nor the exclusive means available to the city to address problems associated with the cultivation of cannabis, whether for medical or other purposes. The city shall continue to have available to it the ability to pursue abatement of nuisances and other problems related to cannabis cultivation under California Penal Code Sections 372 and 373a and other applicable provisions of law. The city may also pursue the recovery of its abatement costs in the manner provided by the Lakeport Municipal Code. (Ord. 914 §1(part), 2017: Ord. 889 §1(part), 2013. Formerly 17.38.070)

17.38.070 Liability.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to protect the property owner(s) of record for each legal parcel associated with the cultivation of cannabis, lessees, tenants, and other participants in the cultivation of cannabis, and members of collectives and/or cooperatives associated with the cultivation of cannabis, from prosecution pursuant to any laws that may prohibit the cultivation, sale, and/or possession of controlled substances. Moreover, cultivation, sale, possession, distribution, and use of cannabis remain violations of federal law as of the date of adoption of the ordinance creating this chapter and this chapter is not intended to, and does not, protect any of the above described persons from arrest or prosecution under those federal laws. The property owner(s) of record for each legal parcel associated with the cultivation of cannabis, lessees, tenants, and other participants in the cultivation of cannabis, and members of collectives and/or cooperatives associated with the cultivation of cannabis, assume any and all risk and any and all liability that may arise or result under state and federal criminal laws from the cultivation of cannabis. Further, to the fullest extent permitted by law, any actions taken under the provisions of this chapter by any public officer or employee of the city or the city itself shall not become a personal liability of such person or the liability of the city. (Ord. 914 §1(part), 2017: Ord. 889 §1(part), 2013. Formerly 17.38.080)

Chapter 17.39
DENSITY BONUSES
Sections:

17.39.010    Purpose and application.

17.39.020    Definitions.

17.39.030    Qualifications for density bonus and incentives and concessions.

17.39.040    Continued affordability and density bonus housing standards.

17.39.050    Incentives and concessions.

17.39.060    Waiver/modification of development standards.

17.39.070    Specified density bonus percentages.

17.39.080    Land donation.

17.39.090    Child care facilities.

17.39.100    Condominium conversions.

17.39.110    Parking and consideration of alternative development incentives.

17.39.120    Application and review procedures.

17.39.130    State law amendments.

17.39.010 Purpose and application.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for implementing state density bonus requirements, as set forth in California Government Code Section 65915, as amended, and to increase the production of affordable housing, consistent with the city’s goals, objectives, and policies. (Ord. 891 §2(part), 2014)

17.39.020 Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:

"Affordable housing cost" bears the same meaning as defined in Section 50052.5 of the California Health and Safety Code.

"Affordable housing unit" means a dwelling unit within a housing development which will be rented or sold to and reserved for very low-income households, lower-income households, moderate-income households and/or senior citizens at an affordable housing cost for the respective group(s) in accordance with Section 65915 of the California Government Code and this chapter.

"Affordable rent" means that level of rent defined in Section 50053 of the California Health and Safety Code.

"Applicant" means a developer or applicant for a density bonus pursuant to Section 65915, subdivision (b), of the California Government Code and Section 17.39.030 of this chapter.

"Child care facility" means a child day care facility other than a family day care home, including, but not limited to, infant centers, preschools, extended day care facilities, and school age child care centers.

"Common interest development" bears the same meaning as defined in Section 1351 of the California Civil Code.

"Density bonus" means a density increase over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the applicable zoning ordinance and land use element of the general plan as of the date of application by the applicant to the city.

"Development standard" means site or construction conditions that apply to a housing development pursuant to any ordinance, general plan element, specific plan, charter amendment, or other local condition, law, policy, resolution, or regulation.

"Extremely low-income households" bears the same meaning as defined in Section 50106 of the California Health and Safety Code.

"Housing development" means one or more groups of projects for residential units in the planned development of the city. "Housing development" also includes a subdivision or common interest development, as defined in Section 1351 of the California Civil Code, approved by the city and consisting of residential units or unimproved residential lots and either a project to substantially rehabilitate and convert an existing commercial building to residential use or the substantial rehabilitation of an existing multifamily dwelling, as defined in subdivision (d) of California Government Code Section 65863.4, where the result of the rehabilitation would be a net increase in available residential units.

"Large renter household" means a household with five or more persons. Rental housing units to accommodate large renter households shall have three or more bedrooms.

"Lower-income households" bears the same meaning as defined in Section 50079.5 of the California Health and Safety Code.

"Maximum allowable residential density" means the density allowed under applicable zoning ordinances, or if a range of density is permitted, means the maximum allowable density for the specific zoning range applicable to the subject project.

"Moderate income" or "persons and families of moderate income" means those middle-income families as defined in Section 50093 of the California Health and Safety Code.

"Qualified mobilehome park" means a mobilehome park that limits residency based on age requirements for housing for older persons pursuant to Section 798.76 or 799.5 of the California Civil Code.

"Senior citizen housing development" means senior citizen housing as defined in Sections 51.3 and 51.12 of the California Civil Code.

"Specific adverse impact" means any adverse impact as defined in paragraph (2), subdivision (d), of California Government Code Section 65589.5, upon public health and safety or the physical environment, or on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources, and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the housing development unaffordable to low- and moderate-income households.

"Very low-income households" bears the same meaning as defined in Section 50105 of the Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 893 §3(14), 2014; Ord. 891 §2(part), 2014)

17.39.030 Qualifications for density bonus and incentives and concessions.
A.    The city shall grant one density bonus as specified in Section 17.39.070, and incentives or concessions as described in Section 17.39.050, when an applicant seeks and agrees to construct a housing development, excluding any units permitted by the density bonus awarded pursuant to this chapter, that will contain at least any one of the following:

1.    Ten percent of the total units of the housing development as affordable housing units affordable to lower-income households; or

2.    Five percent of the total units of the housing development as affordable housing units affordable to very low-income households; or

3.    A senior citizen housing development; or

4.    A qualified mobilehome park; or

5.    Ten percent of the total units of a common interest development as affordable housing units affordable to moderate-income households; provided, that all units in the development are offered to the public for purchase subject to the restrictions specified in this chapter.

B.    As used in subsection A of this section, the term "total units" does not include units permitted by a density bonus awarded pursuant to this section or any other local law granting a greater density bonus.

C.    Each applicant who requests a density bonus pursuant to this chapter shall elect whether the bonus shall be awarded on the basis of subsection (A)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of this section. Each housing development is entitled to only one density bonus, which may be selected based on the percentage of either very low-income affordable housing units, lower-income affordable housing units or moderate-income affordable housing units, or the development’s status as a senior citizen housing development or qualified mobilehome park. Density bonuses from more than one category may not be combined. (Ord. 891 §2(part), 2014)

17.39.040 Continued affordability and density bonus housing standards.
A.    An applicant shall agree to, and the city shall ensure, continued affordability of all low- and very low-income units that qualified the applicant for the award of the density bonus for a period of thirty years or a longer period of time if required by the construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program. Rents for affordable housing units for lower-income households shall be set at an affordable rent. Owner-occupied affordable housing units shall be available at an affordable housing cost.

B.    An applicant shall agree to, and the city shall ensure, that the initial occupants of moderate-income units that are directly related to the receipt of the density bonus in a common interest development are persons and families of moderate income and that the units are offered at an affordable housing cost. The local government shall enforce an equity-sharing agreement, unless it is in conflict with the requirements of another public funding source or law. The following shall apply to the equity-sharing agreement:

1.    Upon resale, the seller of the unit shall retain the value of any improvements, the down payment, and the seller’s proportionate share of appreciation. The city shall recapture any initial subsidy and its proportionate share of appreciation, which shall then be used within three years for any of the purposes that promote homeownership as described in subdivision (e) of Section 33334.2 of the California Health and Safety Code.

2.    For purposes of this subdivision, the city’s initial subsidy shall be equal to the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale minus the initial sale price to the moderate-income household, plus the amount of any down payment assistance or mortgage assistance. If upon resale the market value is lower than the initial market value, then the value at the time of the resale shall be used as the initial market value.

3.    For purposes of this subdivision, the city’s proportionate share of appreciation shall be equal to the ratio of the initial subsidy to the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale.

C.    Any contract, deed restriction, or other instrument used to implement subsections A and/or B of this section shall be signed by the applicant and by the city as parties.

D.    All affordable units shall be reasonably dispersed throughout the housing development; shall be proportional in size, bedroom number and location to the market-rate units; and shall be comparable with the market-rate units in terms of the base design, architectural appearance, building materials and finished quality. All affordable units in a housing development shall be constructed concurrently with or prior to the construction of the market-rate units. In the event the city approves a phased project, the affordable units required by this chapter shall be provided within each phase of the residential development unless otherwise approved by the community development director.

E.    Applicants receiving density bonuses shall use best efforts to provide a substantial proportion of any affordable housing units in the housing development to citizens residing or employed within the city. (Ord. 891 §2(part), 2014)

17.39.050 Incentives and concessions.
A.    An applicant for a density bonus may also submit to the city a proposal for specific incentives or concessions in exchange for the provision of affordable housing units in accordance with this chapter. The applicant may also request a meeting with the city’s community development director to discuss such proposal. The city shall grant the concession or incentive requested by the applicant unless the city makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence, of either of the following:

1.    The concession or incentive is not required in order to provide for affordable housing costs or for rents for the targeted units to be set as specified in Section 17.39.040 (i.e., the applicant is unable to demonstrate that the waiver or modification is necessary to make the housing units economically feasible); or

2.    The concession or incentive would have a specific adverse impact.

B.    If the conditions of Section 17.39.030 and subsection A of this section are met by an applicant, the city may grant an applicant applying for incentives or concessions the following number of incentives or concessions:

1.    One incentive or concession for housing developments that include: at least ten percent of the total units affordable to lower-income households; or at least five percent of the total units affordable to very low-income households; or at least ten percent of the total units affordable to persons and families of moderate income in a common interest development.

2.    Two incentives or concessions for housing developments that include: at least twenty percent of the total units affordable to lower-income households; or at least ten percent of the total units affordable to very low-income households; or at least twenty percent of the total units affordable to persons and families of moderate income in a common interest development.

3.    Three incentives or concessions for housing developments that include: at least thirty percent of the total units for lower-income households; or at least fifteen percent for very low-income households; or at least thirty percent for persons and families of moderate income in a common interest development.

C.    A housing development that is eligible for a density bonus and incentives as described under subsections A and B of this section may receive one additional incentive, but may not exceed a total of three incentives when combined with incentives permitted under subsection B of this section, if the housing development provides a minimum of twenty-five percent of its units for extremely low-income households or for the following special needs households: senior households, disabled households, farmworkers, and large renter households.

D.    A housing development that is not otherwise eligible for a density bonus or incentives under Section 17.39.030 may receive one incentive if the housing development provides a minimum of twenty-five percent of its units for the following special needs households: senior households, disabled households, farmworkers, and large renter households.

E.    For the purposes of this chapter, available concessions or incentives may include any of the following:

1.    A reduction in site development standards or a modification of zoning code requirements or architectural design requirements that exceed the minimum building standards approved by the California Building Standards Commission as provided in Part 2.5 (commencing with Section 18901) of Division 13 of the California Health and Safety Code, including, but not limited to, a reduction in setback and square footage requirements and in the ratio of vehicular parking spaces that would otherwise be required that results in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions.

2.    Approval of mixed use zoning in conjunction with the housing development if commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development and if the commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses are compatible with the housing project and the existing or planned development in the area where the proposed housing development will be located.

3.    Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the applicant or the city that result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions.

4.    For purposes of this chapter, the parking ratios set forth in Government Code Section 65915 (and Section 17.39.110) for qualified affordable housing projects shall be deemed a concession or incentive available to the applicant.

F.    This section does not limit or require the provision of direct financial incentives for the housing development, including the provision of publicly owned land, by the city or the waiver of fees or dedication requirements. Nor does any provision of this section require the city to grant an incentive or concession found to have a specific adverse impact.

G.    The granting of a concession or incentive shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment, zoning change, or other discretionary approval.

H.    Applicants seeking a condominium conversion may apply for either a density bonus or an incentive of equivalent financial value (as that term is defined in Government Code Section 65915.5) in accordance with Section 17.39.100 and Government Code Section 65915.5.

I.    The application and review process for a proposal of incentives and concessions is set forth in Section 17.39.120. (Ord. 893 §3(15), 2014; Ord. 891 §2(part), 2014)

17.39.060 Waiver/modification of development standards.
A.    Applicants may, by application, seek a waiver, modification or reduction of development standards that will otherwise preclude or inhibit the utilization of the density bonus on specific sites in a housing development at the densities or with the concessions or incentives permitted by this chapter. The applicant may also request a meeting with the city to discuss such request for waiver/modification. In order to obtain a waiver/modification of development standards, the applicant shall show that (1) the waiver or modification is necessary to make the housing units economically feasible, and (2) that the development standards will have the effect of precluding the construction of a housing development meeting the criteria of Section 17.39.030(A), at the densities or with the concessions or incentives permitted by this chapter.

B.    Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to require the city to waive, modify or reduce development standards if the waiver, modification or reduction would have a specific adverse impact.

C.    The application and review process for a waiver/modification of development standards is set forth in Section 17.39.120. (Ord. 891 §2(part), 2014)

17.39.070 Specified density bonus percentages.
A.    Only housing developments consisting of five or more dwelling units are eligible for the density bonus percentages provided by this section. The amount of density bonus to which the applicant is entitled shall vary according to the amount by which the percentage of affordable housing units exceeds the percentage established in Section 17.39.030(A).

B.    For housing developments meeting the criteria of Section 17.39.030(A)(1), the density bonus shall be calculated as follows:

Percentage Low-Income Units

Percentage Density Bonus

10

20

11

21.5

12

23

13

24.5

14

26

15

27.5

17

30.5

18

32

19

33.5

20

35 (maximum)

C.    For housing developments meeting the criteria of Section 17.39.030(A)(2), the density bonus shall be calculated as follows:

Percentage Very Low-Income Units

Percentage Density Bonus

5

20

6

22.5

7

25

8

27.5

9

30

10

32.5

11

35 (maximum)

D.    For housing developments meeting the criteria of Section 17.39.030(A)(3) and (A)(4), the density bonus shall be twenty percent.

E.    For housing developments meeting the criteria of Section 17.39.030(A)(5), the density bonus shall be calculated as follows:

Percentage Moderate-Income Units

Percentage Density Bonus

10

5

11

6

12

7

13

8

14

9

15

10

16

11

17

12

18

13

19

14

20

15

21

16

22

17

23

18

24

19

25

20

26

21

27

22

28

23

29

24

30

25

31

26

32

27

33

28

34

29

35

30

36

31

37

32

38

33

39

34

40

35 (maximum)

F.    An applicant may elect to accept a lesser percentage of density bonus than that to which the applicant is entitled under this chapter. All density bonus calculations resulting in a fractional number shall be rounded upwards to the next whole number. The granting of a density bonus shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment, zoning change, or other discretionary approval.

G.    For the purpose of calculating a density bonus, the residential units do not have to be based upon individual subdivision maps or parcels. The density bonus shall be permitted in geographic areas of the housing development other than the areas where the units for the lower-income households are located.

H.    The application and review process for a density bonus as provided by this section is set forth in Section 17.39.120. (Ord. 891 §2(part), 2014)

17.39.080 Land donation.
A.    When an applicant for a tentative map, subdivision map, parcel map, or other residential development approval donates land to the city as provided for in this section, the applicant shall be entitled to a fifteen percent increase above the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the applicable zoning ordinance and land use element of the general plan for the entire housing development, as follows:

Percentage Very Low-Income Units (Based upon maximum density allowed on donated land)

Percentage Density Bonus

10

15

11

16

12

17

13

18

14

19

15

20

16

21

17

22

18

23

19

24

20

25

21

26

22

27

23

28

24

29

25

30

26

31

27

32

28

33

29

34

30

35 (maximum)

This increase shall be in addition to any increase in density mandated by Section 17.39.030, up to a maximum combined mandated density increase of thirty-five percent, if an applicant seeks both the increase required pursuant to this section and Section 17.39.030. All density calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole number. Nothing in this section shall be construed to enlarge or diminish the city’s authority to require an applicant to donate land as a condition of development.

B.    An applicant shall be eligible for the increased density bonus described in this section if the city is able to make all the following conditions and findings:

1.    The applicant donates and transfers the land no later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or date of approval of the residential development application.

2.    The developable acreage and zoning classification of the land being transferred are sufficient to permit construction of units affordable to very low-income households in an amount not less than ten percent of the number of residential units of the proposed development.

3.    The transferred land is at least one acre in size or of sufficient size to permit development of at least forty units, has the appropriate general plan designation, is appropriately zoned for development as affordable housing, and is or will be served by adequate public facilities and infrastructure. The land shall have appropriate zoning and development standards to make the development of the affordable units feasible. No later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or date of approval of the development application for the housing development, the transferred land shall have all of the permits and approvals, other than building permits, necessary for the development of very low-income housing units on the transferred land, except that the city may subject the proposed development to subsequent design review to the extent authorized by subdivision (i) of Government Code Section 65583.2 if the design is not reviewed by the local government prior to the time of transfer.

4.    The transferred land and the very low-income units constructed on the land will be subject to a deed restriction ensuring continued affordability of the units consistent with this chapter, which restriction will be recorded on the property at the time of dedication.

5.    The land is transferred to the city or to a housing developer approved by the city. The city may require the applicant to identify and transfer the land to such city-approved developer.

6.    The transferred land shall be within the boundary of the proposed development or, if the city agrees in writing, within one-quarter mile of the boundary of the proposed development.

C.    The application and review process for a donation of land and related density bonus is set forth in Section 17.39.120. (Ord. 891 §2(part), 2014)

17.39.090 Child care facilities.
A.    When an applicant proposes to construct a housing development that includes affordable units as specified in Section 17.39.030 and includes a child care facility that will be located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to such housing development, the city shall grant either of the following if requested by the applicant.

1.    An additional density bonus that is an amount of square feet of residential space that is equal to or greater than the amount of square feet in the child care facility.

2.    An additional concession or incentive that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the child care facility.

B.    A housing development shall be eligible for the density bonus or concession described in this section if the city, as a condition of approving the housing development, requires all of the following to occur:

1.    The child care facility will remain in operation for a period of time that is as long as or longer than the period of time during which the affordable housing units are required to remain affordable pursuant to Section 17.39.040.

2.    Of the children who attend the child care facility, the percentage of children of very low-income households, lower-income households, or moderate-income households shall be equal to or greater than the percentage of affordable housing units that are proposed to be affordable to very low-income households, lower-income households, or moderate-income households.

3.    Notwithstanding any requirement of this section, the city shall not be required to provide a density bonus or concession for a child care facility if it finds, based upon substantial evidence, that the community already has adequate child care facilities.

C.    The application and review process for the provision of child care facilities and related density bonus or concessions or incentives is set forth in Section 17.39.120. (Ord. 891 §2(part), 2014)

17.39.100 Condominium conversions.
Any applicant seeking to convert apartments into condominiums may receive a density bonus or incentives of equivalent financial value (as that term is defined in Government Code Section 65915.5) upon an application made in conjunction with its map application pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act, this code and consistent with Government Code Section 65915.5. Any appeal of any density bonus or incentive of equivalent financial value or review by the planning commission to the city council shall automatically require an appeal of the underlying map to that body. An applicant shall be ineligible for a density bonus or other incentives under this section if the apartments proposed for conversion constitute a housing development for which a density bonus or other incentives or concessions were provided under Government Code Section 65915. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the city to approve a proposal to convert apartments to condominiums. (Ord. 891 §2(part), 2014)

17.39.110 Parking and consideration of alternative development incentives.
A.    Housing developments meeting any of the criteria of Section 17.39.030(A) shall be granted the following maximum parking ratios, inclusive of handicapped and guest parking, which shall apply to the entire development, not just the restricted affordable units, when requested in writing by an applicant:

1.    Zero to one bedroom dwelling unit: one on-site parking space;

2.    Two to three bedrooms dwelling unit: two on-site parking spaces;

3.    Four or more bedrooms: two and one-half parking spaces.

B.    If the total number of spaces required results in a fractional number, it shall be rounded up to the next whole number. For purposes of this subdivision, a development may provide "on-site parking" through tandem parking, but not through on-street parking.

C.     Alternative development incentives, such as a reduction in the total number of required parking spaces, the elimination or reduction in RV/boat trailer parking, and the provision of uncovered parking spaces in lieu of carports and garages, may be requested in writing by the applicant for consideration by the city. The applicant shall provide the city with a written justification statement for each requested alternative development incentive.

D.     Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the developer or the city that will result in identifiable and actual cost reductions including but not limited to fee waivers, expedited permit processing, and modification of requirements for off-site improvements. (Ord. 891 §2(part), 2014)

17.39.120 Application and review procedures.
A.    A written application for a density bonus, incentive, concession, waiver, or modification pursuant to this chapter shall be submitted with the first application for approval of a housing development and processed concurrently with all other applications required for the housing development. The application shall be submitted on a form prescribed by the city and shall include at least the following information:

1.    Site plan showing total number of units, number and location of affordable housing units, and number and location of proposed density bonus units.

2.    Level of affordability of affordable housing units and proposals for ensuring affordability.

3.    Description of any requested incentives, concessions, waivers or modifications of development standards, or modified parking standards. The application shall include evidence that the requested incentives and concessions are required for the provision of affordable housing costs and/or affordable rents, as well as evidence relating to any other factual findings required under Section 17.39.050.

4.    If a density bonus or concession is requested in connection with a land donation, the application shall show the location of the land to be dedicated and provide evidence that each of the findings included in Section 17.39.080 can be made.

5.    If a density bonus or concession/incentive is requested for a child care facility, the application shall show the location and square footage of the child care facilities and provide evidence that each of the findings included in Section 17.39.090 can be made.

B.    An application for a density bonus, incentive or concession pursuant to this chapter shall be considered by and acted upon by the approval body with authority to approve the housing development and subject to the same administrative appeal procedure, if any. In accordance with state law, neither the granting of a concession, incentive, waiver, or modification nor the granting of a density bonus shall be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment, zoning change, variance, or other discretionary approval.

C.    For housing developments requesting a waiver, modification or reduction of a development standard, an application pursuant to this subsection shall be heard by the city planning commission. A public hearing shall be held by the planning commission and the commission shall issue a determination. Pursuant to Government Code Section 65915, the planning commission shall approve the requested waiver/modification or reduction of development standards, unless one of the following conditions applies:

1.    The waiver/modification is not required to make the proposed affordable housing units feasible; or

2.    The waiver/modification will have a specific adverse impact.

The decision of the city planning commission may be appealed to the city council within five business days of the date the decision is made in the manner provided in Lakeport Municipal Code.

D.    Notice of any city determination pursuant to this section shall be provided to the same extent as required for the underlying development approval.

E.     The city will endeavor to expedite the application process to the extent reasonably possible. The approval process may entail a site-specific rezoning, the subdivision of the land, architectural and design review, environmental review and/or other land use applications. These approvals may be dealt with simultaneously, under one application. (Ord. 891 §2(part), 2014)

17.39.130 State law amendments.
This chapter implements the laws for density bonuses and other incentive and concessions available to qualified applicants under Government Code Sections 65915 through 65918. In the event these Government Code sections are amended, those amended provisions shall be incorporated into this chapter as if fully set forth herein. Should any inconsistencies exist between the amended state law and the provisions set forth in this chapter, the amended state law shall prevail. (Ord. 891 §2(part), 2014)

Chapter 17.40
REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
Sections:

17.40.010    Applicability.

17.40.020    Request requirements.

17.40.030    Review authority.

17.40.040    Review procedure.

17.40.050    Findings, decision, and conditions.

17.40.010 Applicability.
A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any person with a disability, their representative or any entity, when the application of a zoning law, building regulation, or other land use regulation, policy or practice acts as a barrier to fair housing opportunities. A person with a disability is a person who has a physical or mental impairment that limits or substantially limits one or more major life activities, anyone who is regarded as having such impairment or anyone who has a record of such impairment. The process for addressing reasonable accommodation requests established by this chapter applies to requests from persons defined as disabled under the Federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (the Acts).

A request for reasonable accommodation may include a modification or exception to the rules, standards and practices for the siting, development, improvement, and use of housing or housing-related facilities that would eliminate regulatory barriers and provide a person with a disability equal opportunity to housing of their choice. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be made in the manner prescribed by Chapter 17.29. (Ord. 893 §3(16)(part), 2014)

17.40.020 Request requirements.
A.    Requests for reasonable accommodation shall include the following information:

1.    The applicant’s name, address and telephone number.

2.    Address of the property for which the request is being made.

3.    The current actual use of the property.

4.    The basis for the claim that the individual is considered disabled under the Acts.

5.    The municipal code provision, zoning ordinance provision, or other regulation or policy from which reasonable accommodation is being requested.

6.    A description of why the reasonable accommodation is necessary to make the specific property accessible to the individual.

B.    Additional Information. If necessary to reach a determination on the request for reasonable accommodation, the reviewing authority may request further information from the applicant consistent with the Acts, specifying in detail the information that is required. In the event that a request for additional information is made, the thirty-day period to issue a decision is stayed until the applicant responds to the request. (Ord. 893 §3(16)(part), 2014)

17.40.030 Review authority.
A.    Community Development Director. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed by the community development director (director), or his or her designee if no approval is sought other than the request for reasonable accommodation.

B.    Other Review Authority. Requests for reasonable accommodation submitted for concurrent review with another discretionary land use application shall be reviewed by the authority reviewing the discretionary land use application. (Ord. 893 §3(16)(part), 2014)

17.40.040 Review procedure.
A.    Director Review. The director, or his designee, shall make a written determination within thirty calendar days and either grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation.

B.    Other Reviewing Authority. The written determination on whether to grant or deny the request for reasonable accommodation shall be made by the authority responsible for reviewing the discretionary land use application in compliance with the applicable review procedure for the discretionary review. (Ord. 893 §3(16)(part), 2014)

17.40.050 Findings, decision, and conditions.
A.    Findings and Decision. The written decision to grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation shall be consistent with the Acts and shall be based on consideration of the following factors:

1.    Whether the housing, which is the subject of the request, will be used by an individual with a disability protected under the Acts.

2.    Whether the request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make specific housing available to an individual with a disability under the Acts.

3.    Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city.

4.    Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the nature of a city program or law, including but not limited to land use and zoning.

5.    Potential impact on surrounding uses.

6.    Physical attributes of the property and structures.

7.    Alternative reasonable accommodations which may provide an equivalent level of benefit.

B.    Conditions of Approval. In granting a request for reasonable accommodation, the reviewing authority may impose any conditions of approval deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the reasonable accommodation would comply with the above findings. (Ord. 893 §3(16)(part), 2014)

Chapter 17.41
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
Sections:

17.41.010    Purpose and intent.

17.41.020    Definitions.

17.41.030    Applicable facilities.

17.41.040    Application procedures in general.

17.41.050    Wireless facility permit application content.

17.41.060    Required findings of approval for wireless permits.

17.41.070    Standards for wireless facilities.

17.41.080    Standard conditions of approval.

17.41.090    Provisions applicable to small wireless facilities.

17.41.100    Appeals.

17.41.110    Independent consultant review.

17.41.120    Maintenance.

17.41.130    Removal of abandoned facilities.

17.41.140    Ownership transfers.

17.41.150    Revocation of a wireless facility permit.

17.41.160    Exception from standards.

17.41.170    Violations.

17.41.180    Severability.

17.41.010 Purpose and intent.
A.    The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare, preserve the aesthetic character of the Lakeport community, and to reasonably regulate the development and operation of wireless communication facilities within the city to the extent permitted under state and federal law.

B.    This chapter establishes clear guidelines and standards and an orderly process for expedited permit application review intended to facilitate the orderly deployment of wireless transmission equipment to provide advanced communication services to the city, its residents, businesses, and community at large.

C.    The regulations in this city are specifically not intended to, and shall not be interpreted or applied to: (1) prohibit or effectively prohibit the provision of personal wireless services; (2) unreasonably discriminate among functionally equivalent service providers; or (3) regulate wireless communications facilities and wireless transmission equipment on the basis of the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such emissions comply with the standards established by the Federal Communications Commission hereinafter also referred to as "FCC."

D.    This chapter shall be interpreted and applied so as to be consistent with the Communications Act of 1996, Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, applicable state laws, and administrative and court decisions and determinations relating to same. (Ord. 921 §2(part), 2019)

17.41.020 Definitions.
This section shall be construed in light of the following definitions:

"Accessory equipment" means any equipment installed, mounted, operated or maintained in close proximity to a wireless communication facility to provide power to the wireless communication facility or to receive, transmit or store signals or information received by or sent from a wireless communication facility.

"Antenna structure" means any antenna, any structure designed specifically to support an antenna or any appurtenances mounted on such a structure or antenna.

"Base station" means the equipment and nontower supporting structure at a fixed location that enable FCC licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network.

"City" means the city of Lakeport.

"Collocation" means the mounting or installation of an antenna on an existing tower, building or structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes.

"Director" means the city of Lakeport community development director or his or her designee.

"Equipment cabinet" means any transmission or other equipment other than an antenna housed within a protective case. An equipment cabinet may be indoors or outdoors, large or small, movable or immovable. Any equipment case with a heat sink or other cooling mechanism for the equipment inside qualifies as an equipment cabinet.

"Nontower support structure" means any structure (whether built for wireless purposes or not) that supports wireless transmission equipment under a valid permit at the time the applicant submits its application.

"Open space" includes (1) land which is designated as an open space district, as defined in Chapter 17.14, (2) land in residential zones upon which structures may not be developed by virtue of a restriction on title, (3) all common areas, public and private parks, slope easements, recreational areas and open portions of recreational facilities, and (4) any other area owned by a homeowners’ association or similar entity.

"Personal communication service" means commercial mobile services provided under a license issued by the FCC.

"RF" means radio frequency.

"Significant gap" as applied to an applicant’s personal communication service or the coverage of its wireless communication facilities is intended to be defined in this section consistently with the use of that term in the Communications Act of 1996 and case law construing that statute. Provided, that neither that Act nor case law construing it requires otherwise, the following guidelines shall be used to identify such a significant gap:

1.    A significant gap may be demonstrated by in-kind call testing.

2.    The commission shall accept evidence of call testing by the applicant and any other interested person and shall not give greater weight to such evidence based on the identity of the person who provides it but shall consider (a) the number of calls conducted in the call test, (b) whether the calls were taken on multiple days, at various times, and under differing weather and vehicular traffic conditions, and (c) whether calls could be successfully initiated, received and maintained in the area within which a significant gap is claimed.

3.    A significant gap may be measured by:

a.    The number of people affected by the asserted gap in service;

b.    Whether a wireless communication facility is needed to merely improve weak signals or to fill a complete void in coverage; and

c.    Whether the asserted gap affects a state highway or an arterial street which carries significant amounts of traffic.

"Small wireless facility" refers to a small wireless facility as defined by the FCC and that meets the following requirements:

1.    The small wireless facilities:

a.    Are mounted on structures fifty feet or less in height including their antennas, or

b.    Are mounted on structures no more than ten percent taller than other adjacent structures, or

c.    Do not extend existing structures on which they are located to a height of more than fifty feet or by more than ten percent, whichever is greater;

2.    Each antenna associated with the deployment, excluding associated antenna equipment, is no more than three cubic feet in volume;

3.    All other wireless equipment associated with the structure, including the wireless equipment associated with the antenna and any preexisting associated equipment, is no more than twenty-eight cubic feet in volume;

4.    The facilities do not require antenna structure registration under 47 CFR Section 17.1 et seq.;

5.    The facilities are not located on tribal lands; and

6.    The facilities do not result in human exposure to radio frequency radiation in excess of the applicable safety standards specified in 47 CFR Section 1.1307(b).

"Stealth facility" means a wireless communication facility designed and constructed to be integrated into a building or other structure, or placed on or within a building or other structure, so that no portion of any equipment cabinet, transmission equipment, or any other apparatus associated with facility’s function is visible from publicly accessible areas.

"Transmission equipment" means any equipment that facilitates transmission for any FCC licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas and other relevant equipment associated with and necessary to their operation, including coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and back-up power supply.

"Wireless" means any FCC authorized wireless communications service.

"Wireless communication facility" or "wireless facility" or "facility" means any facility that transmits and/or receives electromagnetic waves, including, but not limited to, commercial wireless communications antennas and other types of transmission equipment for the transmission or receipt of such signals, towers or similar structures supporting said equipment, equipment cabinets and connectors, pedestals, meters, tunnels, vaults, splice box, surface location marker, equipment, equipment buildings, parking areas and other related improvements used, or designed to be used, to provide wireless transmission of voice, data, images or other information. The term also means any facility or transmission equipment used to provide any FCC authorized wireless communications service including, but not limited to, personal wireless services defined by the Communications Act of 1996 and licensed by the FCC, including, but not limited to, the types commonly known as cellular, personal communications services ("PCS"), specialized mobile radio ("SMR"), enhanced specialized mobile radio ("ESMR"), paging, ground based repeaters for satellite radio services, micro-cell antennas, distributed antenna systems ("DAS") and similar systems.

"Wireless tower" means any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any FCC licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities. (Ord. 921 §2(part), 2019)

17.41.030 Applicable facilities.
This section applies to all proposed new or modified wireless communication facilities, as follows:

A.    New Facilities. All permit applications received after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter must comply with this chapter.

B.    Changes to Existing Facilities. All permit applications which in any manner whatsoever seek approval to modify a previously approved facility received after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter must comply with this chapter.

C.    Exemptions. This section shall not apply to:

1.    City-owned municipal wireless communications facilities.

2.    Amateur radio facilities that are under seventy feet in height and are owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or are used exclusively for receive-only antennas.

3.    Over-the-air receiving devices, as defined by the FCC at 47 CFR Section 1.4000, with a maximum diameter of one meter (thirty-nine inches) for residential installations, and two meters (seventy-eight inches) for nonresidential installations, and designed, installed, and maintained in compliance with the FCC and the California Public Utilities Commission (hereinafter referred to as the "CPUC") regulations. (Ord. 921 §2(part), 2019)

17.41.040 Application procedures in general.
This chapter applies to all proposed new or modified wireless communication facilities, as follows:

A.    New Facilities. All applications for approval of the installation of new wireless communication facilities in the city must be approved by a wireless facility permit by the planning commission at a public hearing in compliance with this chapter and upon recommendation from the director. No new wireless communication facility shall be installed until the applicant or operator has obtained: (1) a wireless facility permit in compliance with this chapter; (2) an encroachment permit from the public works department (if applicable); and (3) any other permit required by applicable provisions of this code.

B.    Changes to Existing Facilities. All permit applications which in any manner whatsoever seek approval to modify a previously approved facility received after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter must be approved by a wireless facility permit by the planning commission at a public hearing for substantial modifications, or the director for minor modifications, in compliance with this chapter. All modifications to an existing personal wireless communications facility shall be subject to the approval of: (1) a wireless facility permit; in addition to (2) an encroachment permit from the public works department (if applicable); and (3) any other permit required by applicable provisions of this code.

C.    All wireless communication facilities for which applications were received by the city but not approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall comply with the regulations and guidelines of this chapter.

D.    Exemptions. This chapter shall not apply to any city-owned municipal wireless communications facilities. (Ord. 921 §2(part), 2019)

17.41.050 Wireless facility permit application content.
A.    Applications for the approval of wireless facility permits for wireless communication facilities shall include, but are not necessarily limited to, an application fee and the following information:

1.    A clear and complete written analysis that explains how the proposed design complies with the applicable design standards under this chapter to the maximum extent feasible. A complete design justification must identify all applicable standards under this chapter and provide a factually detailed reason why the proposed design either complies or the requirement is preempted by applicable state or federal law; and

2.    Scaled visual simulations showing the proposed facility superimposed on photographs of the site and surroundings, to assist the commission in assessing the visual impacts of the proposed facility and its compliance with the provisions of this chapter; and

3.    For new facilities, the plans shall include (in plan view and elevations) a scaled depiction of the maximum permitted increase as authorized by Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, 47 U.S.C. Section 1455 using the proposed project as a baseline; and

4.    A siting analysis which identifies a minimum of two other feasible locations within or without the city which could serve the area intended to be served by the facility, unless the applicant provides compelling technical reasons for providing fewer than the minimum. The alternative site analysis shall include at least one collocation site; and

5.    An affirmation, under penalty of perjury, that the proposed installation will be FCC compliant, in that it will not cause members of the general public to be exposed to RF levels that exceed the levels deemed safe by the FCC; and

6.    A statement signed by a person with legal authority to bind the applicant attesting under penalty of perjury to the accuracy of the information provided in the application; and

7.    A noise study, prepared by a qualified engineer, for the proposed wireless communication facility including, but not limited to, equipment, such as air conditioning units and back-up generators; and

8.    A written statement of the applicant’s willingness to allow other carriers to collocate on the proposed wireless communication facility wherever technically and economically feasible and aesthetically desirable; and

9.    Such other information as the director shall establish from time to time pursuant to the Permit Streamlining Act, Government Code Section 65940, or to respond to changes in law or technology.

B.    An application for a wireless communication facility in a public right-of-way for which the applicant claims entitlement under Public Utilities Code Section 7901 shall be accompanied by evidence satisfactory to the director that the applicant is a telephone corporation or has written authorization to act as an agent for a telephone corporation.

C.    Applications for the approval of wireless communication facilities within the public right-of-way shall include certification that the facility is for the use of a telephone corporation or state the basis for its claimed right to enter the right-of-way. If the applicant has a certificate of public convenience and necessity (CPCN) issued by the CPUC, it shall provide a copy of its CPCN.

D.    Minor Modification Application Content. All applications for a wireless facility permit for a proposed minor modification to an existing wireless facility which the applicant contends is subject to 47 U.S.C. Section 1455 must include the following items:

1.    Application Form. The city’s standard application form, available on the city’s website or from the planning department, as may be amended.

2.    Application Fee. An application fee as established by the city council by resolution.

3.    Independent Consultant Deposit. An independent consultant fee deposit, if required by the city council by resolution, to reimburse the city for its costs to retain an independent consultant to review the technical aspects of the application.

4.    Site and Construction Plans. Complete and accurate plans, drawn to scale, signed, and sealed by a California-licensed engineer, land surveyor, and/or architect, which include the following items:

a.    A site plan and elevation drawings for the facility as existing and as proposed with all height and width measurements explicitly stated.

b.    A depiction, with height and width measurements explicitly stated, of all existing and proposed transmission equipment.

c.    A depiction of all existing and proposed utility runs and points of contact.

d.    A depiction of the leased or licensed area of the site with all rights-of-way and easements for access and utilities labeled in plan view.

e.    For proposed collocations or modifications to wireless towers, the plans must include scaled plan views and all four elevations that depict the physical dimensions of the wireless tower as it existed on February 22, 2012, or as approved if constructed after February 22, 2012. For proposed collocations or modifications to base stations, the plans must include scaled plan views and all four elevations that depict the physical dimensions of the base station as it existed on February 22, 2012, or as approved if constructed after February 22, 2012.

f.    A demolition plan.

5.    Visual Simulations. A visual analysis that includes: (a) scaled visual simulations that show unobstructed before-and-after construction daytime and clear-weather views from at least four angles, together with a map that shows the location of each view angle; (b) a color and finished material palette for proposed screening materials; and (c) a photograph of a completed facility of the same design and in roughly the same setting as the proposed wireless communication facility.

6.    Statement Asserting That Section 6409 Applies. A written statement asserting that the proposed collocation or modification is an "eligible facilities request" and does not result in a substantial change in the physical dimensions of the facility’s wireless tower or base station, as defined by Section 6409, 47 U.S.C. Section 1455, and justifying that assertion. The written statement shall identify and discuss each required finding for approval of a wireless facility minor modification permit and explain the facts that justify the request for the director to make each finding.

7.    Prior Permits. True and correct copies of all previously issued permits, including all required conditions of approval and a certification by the applicant that the proposal will not violate any previous permit or conditions of approval or why any violated permit or conditions do not prevent approval under 47 U.S.C. Section 1455 and the FCC’s regulations implementing this federal law.

8.    Affirmation of Radio Frequency Standards Compliance. An affirmation, under penalty of perjury, that the proposed installation will be FCC compliant, because it will not cause members of the general public to be exposed to RF levels that exceed the levels deemed safe by the FCC.

9.    Structural Analysis. A structural analysis, prepared, signed, and sealed by a California-licensed engineer, that assesses whether the proposed wireless communications facility complies with all applicable building codes.

10.    Noise Study. A noise study, prepared, signed, and sealed by a California-licensed engineer, for the proposed wireless communication facility including, but not limited to, equipment, such as air conditioning units and back-up generators; or a written statement signed and sealed by a California-licensed engineer indicating that the proposed modification(s) will not alter the existing noise levels or operational equipment which creates noise.

11.    Other Permits. An application for a wireless facility minor modification permit shall include all permit applications with all required application materials for each and every separate permit required by the city for the proposed collocation or modification to an existing personal wireless communications facility, including a building permit, an encroachment permit (if applicable), and an electrical permit (if applicable).

12.    Other Information. Such other information as the city may require, as specified in publicly available materials, including information required as stated on the city’s website. (Ord. 921 §2(part), 2019)

17.41.060 Required findings of approval for wireless permits.
A.    Wireless Facility Permit Findings for New or Substantially Modified Wireless Facility Permits. No wireless facility permit for a proposed new or substantial modification to a wireless communication facility may be approved unless the planning commission finds, at a public hearing for which notice was provided under the standards set forth in Government Code Sections 65090 and 65091, as follows:

1.    The applicant has demonstrated by clear and convincing evidence that the new or substantially modified wireless facility is necessary to close a significant gap in the applicant’s wireless service coverage. Such evidence shall include in-kind call testing of existing facilities within the area the applicant contends is a significant gap in coverage to be served by the facility.

2.    The applicant has demonstrated by clear and convincing evidence that no feasible alternate site exists that would close a significant gap in the operator’s wireless service coverage which alternative site is a more appropriate location for the facility under the standards of this section.

3.    The proposed new or substantially modified wireless facility complies with all design standards and other requirements of this section, including the requirement that new or substantially modified facilities be camouflaged.

4.    The proposed new or substantially modified wireless facility is consistent with the general plan and any other applicable provisions of this code.

5.    Public notice of the proposed facility was provided under the standards set forth in Government Code Sections 65090 and 65091.

B.    Additional Findings for New or Substantially Modified Wireless Facility Permits in the Public Rights-of-Way. In addition to the findings required in subsection (A)(1) of this section, no proposed new or substantially modified wireless communication facility within a public right-of-way may be approved unless the following findings are made by the planning commission:

1.    The proposed facility has been designed to blend with the surrounding environment, with minimal visual impact on the public right-of-way.

2.    The proposed facility will not have an adverse impact on the use of the public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, the safe movement and visibility of vehicles and pedestrians.

C.    Application Review Periods. Under federal and state law, the city must act on an application for a wireless facility permit for new facilities within one hundred fifty days, and must act on an application for a wireless facility permit for substantial modifications to existing facilities which the applicant does not contend are protected by 47 U.S.C. Section 1455, within ninety days, after the applicant submits the application for a wireless facility permit, unless tolled due to issuance of any notice of incomplete filing or by mutual agreement between the city and the applicant. Under federal and state law, failure to act on a wireless facility permit application within these timelines, excluding tolling periods, may result in the permit being deemed granted by operation of law. In that case, the applicant must still comply with the standard conditions of approval in this section.

D.    Findings Required for Approval of Minor Modifications to Existing Wireless Facilities. An applicant seeking approval of a collocation or modification to an existing wireless communication facility which the applicant contends is within the protection of 47 U.S.C. Section 1455, and qualifies as a minor or not substantial modification, must apply for and receive approval of a wireless facility permit for a minor modification in compliance with this section. This subsection is intended to comply with the city’s obligations under federal law, which provides that the city "may not deny, and shall approve any eligible facilities request for a modification of an existing wireless tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station." (47 U.S.C. Section 1455(a)(1), adopted as Section 6409 of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, Pub. L No. 112-96, 126 Stat. 156.) This subsection sets forth standards for the city to review an application for a wireless facility minor modification permit submitted by an applicant who asserts that a proposed collocation or modification to an existing personal wireless communications facility is covered by this federal law. The city’s review of these applications is structured to comply with the requirements of 47 U.S.C. Section 1455 and the FCC’s regulations implementing this federal law, adopted on December 17, 2014, and codified at 47 CFR Section 1.40001 et seq. This subsection is intended to promote the public’s health, safety, and welfare, and shall be interpreted consistent with the Federal Communications Act of 1996 (Pub. L. No. 104-104, 110 Stat. 56), 47 U.S.C. Section 1455, and applicable FCC regulations and court decisions considering these laws and regulations. Under federal law, the city must approve or deny an application for a wireless facility permit for a minor modification, together with any other city permits required for a proposed wireless facility minor modification, within sixty days after the applicant submits the application for a wireless facility permit which the applicant contends is protected by 47 U.S.C. Section 1455, unless tolled due to issuance of any notice of incomplete filing or by mutual agreement between the city and the applicant. Under federal law, failure to act on a wireless facility permit application for a minor modification within the sixty-day review period, excluding tolling period, may result in the permit being deemed granted by operation of law. In that case, the applicant must still comply with the standard conditions of approval in this section.

1.    The director must approve an application for a wireless facility permit for a minor modification that is a collocation or modification to an existing wireless tower on private property which the applicant contends is within the protection of 47 U.S.C. Section 1455 only if each of the following findings can be made:

a.    The applicant proposes a collocation or modification to a structure constructed and maintained with all necessary permits in good standing for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any FCC licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities;

b.    The proposed collocation or modification does not increase the height of the existing wireless communication facility above its lowest height on February 22, 2012, or as approved if constructed after February 22, 2012, by more than ten percent or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed twenty feet, whichever is greater;

c.    The proposed collocation or modification does not increase the width of the facility by more than twenty feet or the width of the tower at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater;

d.    The proposed collocation or modification does not involve the installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, not to exceed four;

e.    The proposed collocation or modification does not involve any excavation outside the lease or license area of the facility, including any access or utility easements;

f.    The proposed collocation or modification does not defeat any existing concealment, stealth, or camouflage elements of the support structure; and

g.    The proposed collocation or modification does not violate any prior conditions of approval, except as may be preempted by Section 6409, 47 U.S.C. Section 1455(a).

2.    The director must approve an application for a wireless facility permit for a minor modification that is a collocation or modification to an existing base station on private property which the applicant contends is within the protection of 47 U.S.C. Section 1455 only if each of the following findings can be made:

a.    The applicant proposes a collocation or modification to a structure constructed and maintained with all necessary permits in good standing, whether built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any FCC licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities or not, that currently supports existing wireless transmission equipment;

b.    The proposed collocation or modification does not increase the height of the existing wireless communication facility above its lowest height on February 22, 2012, or as approved if constructed after February 22, 2012, by more than ten percent or ten feet, whichever is greater;

c.    The proposed collocation or modification does not increase the width of the facility by more than six feet;

d.    The proposed collocation or modification does not involve the installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, not to exceed four;

e.    The proposed collocation or modification does not involve any excavation outside the lease or license area of the facility, including any access and utility easements;

f.    The proposed collocation or modification does not defeat any existing concealment, stealth, or camouflage elements of the support structure; and

g.    The proposed collocation or modification does not violate any prior conditions of approval, except as may be preempted by Section 6409, 47 U.S.C. Section 1455(a).

3.    The director must approve an application for a wireless facility permit for a minor modification that is a collocation or modification to an existing wireless tower or base station in the public right-of-way only which the applicant contends is within the protection of 47 U.S.C. Section 1455 if each of the following findings can be made:

a.    The applicant proposes a collocation or modification to either (i) a structure constructed and maintained with all necessary permits in good standing for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any FCC licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities or (ii) a structure constructed and maintained with all necessary permits in good standing, whether built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any FCC licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities or not, that currently supports existing wireless transmission equipment;

b.    The proposed collocation or modification does not increase the height of the existing wireless communication facility above its lowest height on February 22, 2012, or as approved if constructed after February 22, 2012, by more than ten percent or ten feet, whichever is greater;

c.    The proposed collocation or modification does not increase the width of the facility by more than six feet;

d.    The proposed collocation or modification does not involve the installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, not to exceed four;

e.    The proposed collocation or modification does not involve either (i) the installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground, if none already exist, or (ii) the installation of ground equipment cabinets that are more than ten percent larger in height or overall volume than any existing ground cabinets;

f.    The proposed collocation or modification does not involve any excavation outside the area in proximity to the existing ground-mounted equipment in the public right-of-way;

g.    The proposed collocation or modification does not defeat any existing concealment, stealth, or camouflage elements of the existing structure; and

h.    The proposed collocation or modification does not violate any prior conditions of approval, except as may be preempted by Section 6409, 47 U.S.C. Section 1455(a). (Ord. 921 §2(part), 2019)

17.41.070 Standards for wireless facilities.
A.    All new wireless facilities shall be concealed. The installation of an uncamouflaged wireless facility is prohibited. All new facilities and substantial changes to existing facilities shall include appropriate stealth and concealment techniques given the proposed location, design, visual environment, and nearby uses and structures. Stealth and concealment techniques do not include incorporating faux-tree designs of a kind substantially different than the surrounding live trees. All new architectural features proposed to conceal transmission equipment shall be designed to mimic the existing underlying structure, shall be proportional to the existing underlying structure, and shall use materials in similar quality, finish, color, and texture as the existing underlying structure.

B.    All vents, exhausts and similar features for undergrounded equipment shall be flush to grade to the maximum extent feasible; all above-grade vents, exhausts or similar features shall be designed to blend with the environment to the maximum extent feasible.

C.    All wireless facility antennas, mounting hardware, and cabling shall be covered or painted to match the color and texture of the building, tower, or pole on which it is mounted. Equipment cabinets, service panels, and service connections shall be screened by solid walls, landscaping, or berms. Screening shall blend with or enhance the surrounding context in terms of scale, form, texture, materials, and color. Any wireless facility shall be concealed as much as possible by blending into the natural and physical environment. All gates shall be opaque.

D.    Wireless facilities should be collocated with existing wireless facilities, if within one thousand five hundred feet of an existing visible wireless facility, unless the city determines that the particular design proposed would not create excessive visual clutter or would otherwise create harms the city cannot ameliorate.

E.    A wireless facility located in the public rights-of-way:

1.    Shall, with respect to its pole-mounted components, be located in a concealed manner on an existing or replaced utility pole; or

2.    Shall be located in a concealed wireless facility consistent with other existing natural or manmade features in the rights-of-way near the location where the wireless facility is to be located; or

3.    Shall, with respect to its pole-mounted components, be located in a concealed wireless facility on a new utility pole, if there are no reasonable alternatives, and the applicant is authorized to construct new utility poles.

F.    The ground-mounted components of a wireless facility shall, whether in or outside of the rights-of-way:

1.    To the extent the structures are utility boxes within the meaning of this code, be reviewed and subject to the same approvals as utility boxes installed by other communications companies; and

2.    Shall be located flush to grade where necessary to avoid incommoding the public or creating a hazard; and

3.    To the extent permitted above ground, shall otherwise be appropriately screened, landscaped and camouflaged to blend in with the surroundings, and nonreflective paints shall be used. All ground-mounted outdoor transmission equipment and associated enclosures or shelters shall be screened. All wires, cables, and any other connections shall be completely concealed from public view to the maximum extent feasible.

G.    Unless it is determined by the city that there is no less intrusive alternative available to close a significant gap in the service provided by a wireless facility, or it is determined that the city is legally required to approve an application, the director may not approve an application for a wireless facility where the application proposes a design that would require extensions from any support structure inconsistent in size with the extensions otherwise permitted under the code.

H.    A wireless facility and all subsequent modifications shall be designed and located to minimize the impact on the surrounding neighborhood, and to maintain the character and appearance of the city, consistent with other provisions of the code. To that end, wireless facilities should:

1.    Employ the least intrusive design for the proposed location in terms of size, mass, visual and physical impact, and effects on properties from which the wireless facility is visible; and

2.    Accommodate collocation consistent with the other design requirements of this section; and

3.    Be consistent with the general plan.

I.    Without limiting the foregoing, all portions of a wireless facility affixed to a support structure shall be designed to blend in or be screened from view in a manner consistent with the support structure’s architectural style, color and materials when viewed from any part of the city. Wireless facilities shall be covered, painted and textured or otherwise camouflaged to match the color and texture of the support structure on which they are mounted. Where the support structure is a building, the wireless facility, including without limitation base station cabinets, remote transmitters and receivers, and antenna amplifiers, shall be placed within the building or mounted behind a parapet screened from public view unless that is not feasible. If the director determines that such in-building placement is not feasible, the equipment shall be roof-mounted in an enclosure or otherwise screened from public view as approved by the community development director.

J.    Wireless facilities shall not be lighted except with the authorization of the director. The director may permit lighting at the lowest intensity necessary:

1.    For proximity-triggered or timer-controlled security lighting; or

2.    To comply with regulations for the illumination of any flag attached to a wireless facility; or

3.    Where such lighting is required by the director to protect public health or welfare, or as part of the camouflage for a particular design which includes street or decorative lighting as integral to the design and as approved by the director.

K.    No facilities may bear any signage or advertisement(s) other than signage required by law or expressly permitted or required by the city. No advertising signage shall be displayed on any wireless facility except for government-required signs shown in the wireless facility permit application. Additionally site identification, address, warning and similar information plates may be permitted where approved by the director.

L.    The wireless facility shall not incommode the public (including, without limitation, persons with disabilities) in its use of any structure, or any portion of the rights-of-way.

M.    All new facilities and substantial changes to existing facilities shall comply with the applicable height limit for the facility’s zone.

N.    At no time shall transmission equipment or any other associated equipment (including but not limited to heating and air conditioning units) at any wireless communication facility emit noise that exceeds the applicable limit(s) established in this code.

O.    All facilities shall at all times comply with all applicable federal, state, and local building codes, electrical codes, fire codes, and any other code related to public health and safety.

P.    All wireless towers shall be designed and situated in a manner that utilizes existing natural or manmade features (including but not limited to topography, vegetation, buildings, or other structures) to visually conceal the wireless tower to the maximum extent feasible.

Q.    All accessory equipment associated with the operation of a wireless communication facility shall be located within a building enclosure or underground vault that complies with the development standards of the zoning district in which the accessory equipment is located.

R.    Ground-mounted equipment shall be located so as not to cause: (1) any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic; (2) inconvenience to the public’s use of a public right-of-way; or (3) safety hazards to pedestrians and motorists. In no case shall ground-mounted equipment, walls, or landscaping be less than eighteen inches from the front of the curb.

S.    No facility shall be built so as to cause the right-of-way in which the facility is located to fail to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act. (Ord. 921 §2(part), 2019)

17.41.080 Standard conditions of approval.
All facilities subject to a wireless facility permit approved under this chapter, including any facilities for which a wireless facility permit is deemed approved by operation of law, shall be subject to the following conditions:

A.    Facilities shall not bear any signs or advertising devices other than legally required certification, warning, or other required seals or signage, or as expressly authorized by the city.

B.    Abandonment.

1.    Wireless communication facilities that are no longer operating shall be removed at the expense of the applicant, operator, or owner no later than ninety days after the discontinuation of use. Disuse for ninety days or more shall also constitute a voluntary termination by the applicant of any land use entitlement under this code or any predecessor to this code.

2.    The director shall send a written notice of the determination of nonoperation to the owner and operator of the wireless communication facility, who shall be entitled to a hearing on that determination before the city manager or a hearing officer appointed by the city manager; provided, that written request for such a hearing is received by the city clerk within ten days of the date of the notice. No further appeal from the decision of the city manager may be had other than pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. Upon a final decision of the city manager or the running of the time for a request for a hearing without such a request, the operator shall have ninety days to remove the facility.

3.    The operator of a facility shall notify the city in writing of its intent to abandon a permitted site. Removal shall comply with applicable health and safety regulations. Upon completion of abandonment, the site shall be restored to its original condition at the expense of the applicant, operator, or owner.

4.    All facilities not removed within the required ninety-day period shall be in violation of this code. In the event the city removes a disused facility upon the failure of the applicant, operator, or owner to timely do so, the applicant, operator, and owner shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of all costs and expenses the city incurs for the removal of the facilities, including legal fees and costs.

C.    The applicant, operator of a facility and property owner (when applicable) shall defend, indemnify and hold the city and its elective and appointed boards, commissions, officers, agents, consultants and employees harmless from and against all demands, liabilities, costs (including attorneys’ fees), or damages arising from the city’s review and approval of the design, construction, operation, location, inspection or maintenance of the facility.

D.    Removal of Unsafe Facilities. If, at any time after ten years of the issuance of a building permit or encroachment permit, or any shorter period permitted by Government Code Section 65964(b), any wireless communication facility becomes incompatible with public health, safety or welfare, the applicant or operator of the facility shall, upon notice from the city and at the applicant’s or operator’s own expense, remove that facility. Written notice of a determination pursuant to this subsection shall be sent to the owner and operator of the wireless communication facility, who shall be entitled to a hearing on that determination before the city manager or a hearing officer appointed by the city manager; provided, that written request for such a hearing is received by the city clerk within ten days of the date of the notice. No further appeal from the decision of the city manager may be had other than pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. Upon a final decision of the city manager or the running of the time for a request for a hearing without such a request, the operator shall have ninety days to remove the facility.

E.    Prior to the issuance of a building permit or encroachment permit, the applicant or owner/operator of the facility shall pay for and provide a performance bond, which shall be in effect until all facilities are fully and completely removed and the site reasonably returned to its original condition. The purpose of this bond is to cover the applicant’s or owner’s/operator’s of the facility obligation under the conditions of approval and the city code. The bond coverage shall include, but not be limited to, removal of the facility, maintenance obligations and landscaping obligations. The amount of the performance bond shall be set by the director on a case-specific basis and in an amount reasonably related to the obligations required under this code and all conditions of approval, and shall be specified in the conditions of approval.

F.    An applicant shall not transfer a permit to any person or entity prior to completion of construction of a wireless communication facility.

G.    The applicant shall submit as-built photographs of the facility within ninety days of installation of the facility, detailing the installed equipment.

H.    A wireless communication facility approved by a wireless facility permit may operate only until the tenth anniversary of the date it is first placed into service, unless that sunset date is extended by additional term(s) not to exceed ten years pursuant to a wireless facility permit issued. There is no limit to the number of times the sunset date for a facility may be extended.

I.    Any approved wireless communication facility within a public right-of-way shall be subject to such conditions, changes or limitations as are from time to time deemed necessary by the public works director to: (1) protect the public health, safety, and welfare; (2) prevent interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic; or (3) prevent damage to a public right-of-way or any property adjacent to it. Before the director of public works imposes conditions, changes, or limitations pursuant to this subsection, he or she shall notify the applicant or operator, in writing, by mail to the address set forth in the application or such other address as may be on file with the city. Such change, new limitation or condition shall be effective twenty-four hours after deposit of the notice in the United States mail.

J.    The applicant or operator of a wireless communication facility in the public rights-of-way shall not move, alter, temporarily relocate, change, or interfere with any existing public facility, structure or improvement without the prior written consent of the city, and the owner in the circumstance where the owner is not the city. No structure, improvement or facility owned by the city shall be moved to accommodate a wireless communication facility unless: (1) the city determines, in its sole and absolute discretion, that such movement will not adversely affect the city or surrounding residents or businesses; and (2) the applicant or operator pays all costs and expenses related to the relocation of the city’s facilities. Every applicant or operator of any wireless communication facility shall assume full liability for damage or injury caused to any property or person by his, her, or its facility. Before commencement of any work pursuant to an encroachment permit issued for any wireless communication facility within a public right-of-way, an applicant shall provide the city with documentation establishing to the city’s satisfaction that the applicant has the legal right to use or interfere with any other facilities within the public right-of-way to be affected by applicant’s facilities.

K.    In addition to any other conditions of approval permitted under federal and state law and this code that the director deems appropriate or required under this code, all wireless facility permits for minor modifications subject to 47 U.S.C. Section 1455, including any minor modifications for which a wireless facility permit is deemed approved by operation of law, shall include the following conditions of approval:

1.    No Automatic Renewal. The grant or approval of a wireless facility minor modification permit shall not renew or extend the underlying permit term.

2.    Compliance with Previous Approvals. The grant or approval of a wireless facility minor modification permit shall be subject to the conditions of approval of the underlying permit, except as may be preempted by Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act, 47 U.S.C. Section 1455.

3.    As-Built Plans. The applicant shall submit to the director an as-built set of plans and photographs depicting the entire personal wireless communications facility as modified, including all transmission equipment and all utilities, within ninety days after the completion of construction.

4.    Indemnification. To the fullest extent permitted by law, the applicant and any successors and assigns shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless city, its employees, agents and officials, from and against any liability, claims, suits, actions, arbitration proceedings, regulatory proceedings, losses, expenses or costs of any kind, whether actual, alleged or threatened, including, but not limited to, actual attorney fees, litigation expenses and court costs of any kind without restriction or limitation, incurred in relation to, as a consequence of, arising out of or in any way attributable to, actually, allegedly or impliedly, in whole or in part, related to the wireless facility minor modification permit and the issuance of any permit or entitlement in connection therewith. The applicant shall pay such obligations as they are incurred by city, its employees, agents and officials, and in the event of any claim or lawsuit, shall submit a deposit in such amount as the city reasonably determines necessary to protect the city from exposure to fees, costs or liability with respect to such claim or lawsuit.

5.    Compliance with Applicable Laws. The applicant shall comply with all applicable provisions of this code, any permit issued under this code, and all other applicable federal, state, and local laws. Any failure by the city to enforce compliance with any applicable laws shall not relieve any applicant of its obligations under this code, any permit issued under this code, or all other applicable laws and regulations.

6.    Compliance with Approved Plans. The proposed project shall be built in compliance with the approved plans on file with the planning department.

7.    Violations. The facility shall be developed, maintained, and operated in full compliance with the conditions of the wireless facility minor modification permit, any other applicable permit, and any law, statute, ordinance or other regulation applicable to any development or activity on the site. Failure of the applicant to cease any development or activity not in full compliance shall be a violation of these conditions. Any violation of this code, the conditions of approval for the wireless facility minor modification permit, or any other law, statute, ordinance or other regulation applicable to any development or activity on the site may result in the revocation of this permit. The remedies specified in this chapter shall be cumulative and the city may resort to any other remedy available at law or in equity and resort to any one remedy shall not cause an election precluding the use of any other remedy with respect to a violation.

8.    In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction invalidates or limits, in part or in whole, 47 U.S.C. Section 1455, such that such statute would not mandate approval for the collocation or modification granted or deemed granted under a wireless facility minor modification permit, such permit shall automatically expire twelve months from the date of that opinion.

9.    The grant, deemed-grant or acceptance of wireless facility minor modification permit shall not waive and shall not be construed or deemed to waive the city’s standing in a court of competent jurisdiction to challenge 47 U.S.C. Section 1455 or any wireless facility minor modification permit issued pursuant to 47 U.S.C. Section 1455 or this code.

L.    Annual Monitoring Fee. The owner or operator of a facility subject to a permit under this chapter shall pay to the city an annual monitoring fee as established in the city’s master fee schedule. The fee shall be used to recover the city’s costs to inspect, review, and monitor compliance with the conditions of the permit. (Ord. 921 §2(part), 2019)

17.41.090 Provisions applicable to small wireless facilities.
Unless modified by this section, all provisions of this chapter shall apply to small wireless facilities.

A.    Requirements for Small Wireless Facilities Permits. This section governs applications for small wireless facilities permits.

1.    Purpose. This section is intended to comply with the city’s obligations under 47 CFR Section 1.6001 et seq., which implements 47 U.S.C. Sections 332(c)(7) and 1455. This section creates a process for the city to review an application for a small wireless facility permit submitted by an applicant who asserts that a proposed collocation of a small wireless facility using an existing structure or the deployment of a small wireless facility using a new structure, and the modifications of such small wireless facilities, is covered by federal law and to determine whether the city must approve the proposed collocation or deployment.

2.    Applicability. An applicant seeking approval of a collocation to a structure or a deployment to a new structure which the applicant contends is within the protection of 47 U.S.C. Section 1455 shall apply for the following at the same time: (a) a small wireless facility permit; (b) an encroachment permit from the public works department (if required by applicable provisions of this code); and (c) any other permit required by applicable provisions of this code including a building permit, an electrical permit, or a tree report under Chapter 17.21.

3.    Application Content. All applications for a small wireless facility permit must include the following items:

a.    Application Form. The city’s standard application form, available on the city’s website or from the planning and building department, as may be amended.

b.    Application Fee. An application fee as established by the city council by resolution.

c.    Independent Consultant Deposit. An independent consultant fee deposit, if required by the city council by resolution, to reimburse the city for its costs to retain an independent consultant to review the technical aspects of the application.

d.    Site and Construction Plans. Complete and accurate plans, drawn to scale, signed, and sealed by a California-licensed engineer, land surveyor, and/or architect, which include the following items:

i.    A site plan and elevation drawings for the facility as existing and as proposed with all height and width measurements explicitly stated.

ii.    A depiction, with height and width measurements explicitly stated, of all existing and proposed transmission equipment.

iii.    A depiction of all existing and proposed utility runs and points of contact.

iv.    A depiction of the leased or licensed area of the site with all rights-of-way and easements for access and utilities labeled in plan view.

v.    For proposed collocation or deployment to wireless towers, the plans must include scaled plan views and all four elevations that depict the physical dimensions of the wireless tower as it existed on the plans for the original tower.

vi.    A demolition plan.

e.    Visual Simulations. A visual analysis that includes: (i) scaled visual simulations that show unobstructed before-and-after construction daytime and clear-weather views from at least four angles, together with a map that shows the location of each view angle; (ii) a color and finished material palate for proposed screening materials; and (iii) a photograph of a completed facility of the same design and in roughly the same setting as the proposed wireless communication facility.

f.    Statement Asserting That 47 CFR Section 1.6001 et seq. Applies. A written statement asserting that the proposed collocation or deployment is subject to 47 CFR Section 1.6001 et seq.

g.    Prior Permits. True and correct copies of all previously issued permits, including all required conditions of approval and a certification by the applicant that the proposal will not violate any previous permit or conditions of approval or why any violated permit or conditions do not prevent approval under 47 U.S.C. Section 1455 and the FCC’s regulation implementing this federal law.

h.    Affirmation of Radio Frequency Standards Compliance. An affirmation, under penalty of perjury, that the proposed installation will be FCC compliant, because it will not cause members of the general public to be exposed to RF levels that exceed the MPE levels deemed safe by the FCC. A copy of the fully completed FCC form "A Local Government Official’s Guide to Transmitting Antenna RF Emission Safety: Rules, Procedures, and Practical Guidance: Appendix A" titled "Optional Checklist for Determination of Whether a Facility is Categorically Excluded" for each frequency band of RF emissions to be transmitted from the proposed facility upon the approval of the application. All planned radio frequency emissions on all frequency bands must be shown on the Appendix A form(s) attached to the application. All planned radio frequency emissions are to be entered on each Appendix A form only in wattage units of "effective radiated power."

i.    Structural Analysis. A structural analysis, prepared, signed, and sealed by a California-licensed engineer, for the proposed small wireless facility including, but not limited to, equipment, such as air conditioning units and back-up generators; or a written statement signed and sealed by a California-licensed engineer indicating that the proposed facility will not alter the existing noise levels or operational equipment which creates noise.

j.    Other Permits. An application for a small wireless facility permit shall include all permit applications with all required application materials for each and every separate permit required by the city for the proposed collocation or deployment, including a building permit, an encroachment permit (if applicable) and an electrical permit (if applicable).

4.    Application Review. Each application for a new or modified small wireless facility permit shall be reviewed by the director. The city must approve or deny an application for a small wireless facility permit, together with any other city permits required for a proposed small wireless facility, within sixty days after the applicant submits an application to collocate a small wireless facility using an existing structure, and within ninety days after the applicant submits an application to deploy a small wireless facility using a new structure. The director shall provide written notice to all property owners within five hundred feet of the site of a proposed small wireless facility upon approval of an application for a small wireless facility permit.

5.    Tolling Period. Unless a written agreement between the applicant and the city provides otherwise, the application is tolled when the city notifies the applicant within ten days of the applicant’s submission of the application that the application is materially incomplete and identifies the missing documents or information. The shot clock may again be tolled if the city provides notice within ten days of the application’s resubmittal that it is materially incomplete and identifies the missing documents or information. For an application to deploy small wireless facilities, if the city notifies the applicant on or before the tenth day after submission that the application is materially incomplete, and identifies the missing documents or information and the rule or regulation creating the obligation to submit such documents or information, the shot clock date calculation will restart at zero on the date the applicant submits a completed application.

6.    Standards Governing Approval by Director.

a.    The director shall approve or deny an application to collocate a small wireless facility using an existing structure by evaluating the following standards:

i.    The existing structure was constructed and maintained with all necessary permits in good standing.

ii.    The existing structure is fifty feet or less in height, including any antennas, or the existing structure is no more than ten percent taller than other adjacent structures.

iii.    Each antenna associated with the deployment, excluding associated antenna equipment, is no more than three cubic feet in volume.

iv.    All other wireless equipment associated with the structure, including the wireless equipment associated with the antenna and any preexisting associated equipment serving the facility, is no more than twenty-eight cubic feet in volume.

v.    The small wireless facilities do not extend the existing structure on which they are located to a height of more than fifty feet or by more than ten percent, whichever is greater.

vi.    The small wireless facility does not require an antenna structure registration under Part 47 CFR Section 17.1 et seq.

vii.    The small wireless facility is not located on tribal lands, as defined under 36 CFR Section 800.16(x).

viii.    For collocations not located within the public right-of-way, the proposed collocation shall be consistent with the standards of Sections 17.41.070 and 17.41.080.

ix.    For collocations located within the public right-of-way, the proposed collocation shall be consistent with the standards of Sections 17.41.070 and 17.41.080, except that Sections 17.41.070(D) and 17.41.080(I) and (J) do not apply.

x.    The proposed collocation would be in the most preferred location and configuration within two hundred fifty feet from the proposed site in any direction or the applicant has demonstrated with clear and convincing evidence in the written record that any more-preferred location or configuration within two hundred fifty feet would be technically infeasible, applying the preference standards of this section.

xi.    The proposed collocation is designed as a stealth facility, to the maximum feasible extent.

b.    The director must approve an application to deploy a small wireless facility using a new structure only if each of the following findings can be made:

i.    The new structure was constructed and maintained with all necessary permits in good standing;

ii.    The new structure is fifty feet or less in height, including any antennas, or the new structure is no more than ten percent taller than other adjacent structures;

iii.    Each antenna associated with the deployment, excluding associated antenna equipment, is no more than three cubic feet in volume;

iv.    All other wireless equipment associated with the facility, including the wireless equipment associated with the antenna and any preexisting equipment associated with the facility, is no more than twenty-eight cubic feet in volume;

v.    The small wireless facility does not require an antenna structure registration under Part 47 CFR Section 17.1 et seq.;

vi.    The small wireless facility is not located on tribal lands, as defined under 36 CFR Section 800.16(x);

vii.    For new structures not located within the public right-of-way, the proposed facility shall be consistent with the standards of Sections 17.41.070 and 17.41.080;

viii.    For new structures located within the public right-of-way, the proposed facility shall be consistent with Sections 17.41.070 and 17.41.080, except that Sections 17.41.070(D) and 17.41.080(I) and (J) do not apply;

ix.    The proposed project would be in the most preferred location and configuration within two hundred fifty feet from the proposed site in any direction or the applicant has demonstrated with clear and convincing evidence in the written record that any more-preferred location or configuration within two hundred fifty feet would be technically infeasible, applying the preference standards of this section;

x.    The proposed project is designed as a stealth facility, to the maximum feasible extent.

c.    Small Cell Location and Configuration Preferences. The city prefers that small wireless facilities in the public right-of-way or in the equivalent right-of-way on homeowners’ association owned lands and private streets be configured on the following support structures, in order of preference from most to least preferred: (i) existing or replacement street light standard; (ii) existing or replacement concrete or steel utility pole; (iii) existing or replacement wood utility pole; (iv) new street light standard; (v) new utility pole. The city prefers that small wireless facilities outside the public right-of-way be configured on the following support structures, in order of preference from most to least preferred: (i) on existing, approved wireless facility support structures operating in compliance with this code; (ii) on existing buildings or nontower structures; (iii) on existing or replacement utility poles or towers; (iv) in new towers meeting the height requirements of the applicable FCC regulations.

7.    Conditions of Approval for Small Wireless Facility Permits. In addition to any other conditions of approval permitted under federal and state law and this code that the director deems appropriate or required under this code, all small wireless facility permits under this section shall include the following conditions of approval:

a.    No Automatic Renewal. The grant or approval of a small wireless facility permit shall not renew or extend the underlying permit term.

b.    Compliance with Previous Approvals. The grant or approval of a small wireless facility permit shall be subject to the conditions of approval of the underlying permit.

c.    As-Built Plans. The applicant shall submit to the director an as-built set of plans and photographs depicting the entire small wireless facility as modified, including all transmission equipment and all utilities, within ninety days after the completion of construction.

d.    Indemnification. To the fullest extent permitted by law, the applicant and any successors and assigns shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its employees, agents and officials from and against any liability, claims, suits, actions, arbitration proceedings, regulatory proceedings, losses, expenses or costs of any kind, whether actual, alleged or threatened, including, but not limited to, actual attorney fees, litigation expenses and court costs of any kind without restriction or limitation, incurred in relation to, as a consequence of, arising out of or in any way attributable to, actually, allegedly or impliedly, in whole or in part, related to the wireless facility minor modification permit and the issuance of any permit or entitlement in connection therewith. The applicant shall pay such obligations as they are incurred by the city, its employees, agents and officials, and in the event of any claim or lawsuit, shall submit a deposit in such amount as the city reasonably determines necessary to protect the city from exposure to fees, costs or liability with respect to such claim or lawsuit.

e.    Compliance with Applicable Laws. The applicant shall comply with all applicable provisions of this code, any permit issued under this code, and all other applicable federal, state, and local laws. Any failure by the city to enforce compliance with any applicable laws shall not relieve any applicant of its obligations under this code, any permit issued under this code, or all other applicable laws and regulations.

f.    Compliance with Approved Plans. The proposed project shall be built in compliance with the approved plans on file with the planning and building department.

g.    Violations. The small wireless facility shall be developed, maintained, and operated in full compliance with the conditions of the small wireless facility permit, any other applicable permit, and any law, statute, ordinance or other regulation applicable to any development or activity on the site. Failure of the applicant to cease any development or activity not in full compliance shall be a violation of these conditions. Any violation of this code, the conditions of approval for the wireless facility minor modification permit, or any other law, statute, ordinance or other regulation applicable to any development or activity on the site may result in the revocation of this permit. The remedies specified in this section shall be cumulative and the city may resort to any other remedy available at law or in equity and resort to any one remedy shall not cause an election precluding the use of any other remedy with respect to a violation.

h.    In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction invalidates or limits, in part or in whole, 47 U.S.C. Section 1455, such that such statute would not mandate approval for the collocation or deployment granted or deemed granted under a wireless facility minor modification permit, such permit shall automatically expire twelve months from the date of that opinion.

i.    The grant, deemed-grant or acceptance of a small wireless facility permit shall not waive and shall not be construed or deemed to waive the city’s standing in a court of competent jurisdiction to challenge 47 U.S.C. Section 1455 or any small wireless facility permit issued pursuant to 47 U.S.C. Section 1455 or this code.

8.    Small Wireless Facility Permit Denial without Prejudice.

a.    Grounds for Denial without Prejudice. The director may deny without prejudice an application for a small wireless facility permit in any of the following circumstances:

i.    The director cannot make all findings required for approval of a small wireless facility permit;

ii.    The proposed collocation or deployment would cause the violation of an objective, generally applicable law protecting public health or safety;

iii.    The proposed collocation or deployment involves the removal and replacement of an existing facility’s entire supporting structure; or

iv.    The proposed collocation or deployment does not qualify for mandatory approval under 47 U.S.C. Section 1455, as may be amended or superseded, and as may be interpreted by any order of the FCC or any court of competent jurisdiction.

b.    Procedures for Denial without Prejudice. All small wireless facility permit application denials shall be in writing and shall include: (i) the decision date; (ii) a statement that the city denies the permit without prejudice; (iii) a short and plain statement of the basis for the denial; and (iv) that the applicant may submit the same or substantially the same permit application in the future.

c.    Submittal after Denial without Prejudice. After the director denies a small wireless facility permit application, and subject to the generally applicable permit application submittal provisions in this chapter, an applicant shall be allowed to:

i.    Submit a new small wireless facility permit application for the same or substantially the same proposed collocation or deployment; or

ii.    Submit an appeal of the director’s decision to the city council in accordance with Section 17.41.100.

d.    Costs to Review a Denied Permit. The city shall be entitled to recover the reasonable costs for its review of any small wireless facility permit application. In the event that the director denies a small wireless facility permit application, the city shall return any unused deposit fees within sixty days after a written request from the applicant. An applicant shall not be allowed to submit a small wireless facility permit application for the same or substantially the same proposed modification unless all costs for the previously denied permit application are paid in full.

B.    Nothing in this section shall modify the existing standards for non-small wireless facility applications.

C.    Nothing in this section shall limit the city’s authority to negotiate different standards for small wireless facility applications. (Ord. 921 §2(part), 2019)

17.41.100 Appeals.
A.    Within fifteen calendar days following the date of any decision by the director or planning commission on a wireless facility permit application, any person or entity may appeal the decision to the city council. The city council may call for the review of a decision by the director or planning commission by a majority vote.

B.    Where an appeal is timely filed, the city manager shall prepare a staff report regarding the original decision and shall submit the report to the city council along with the written notice of appeal submitted by the appellant, and shall make the written record available to the city council.

C.    The appeal before the city council shall be a public hearing and shall be appropriately noticed. The appellant shall bear all costs for the appeal.

D.    The city council shall hear the appeal at a regular city council meeting or at a special meeting of the city council called for the purpose of hearing the appeal, after allowing for sufficient time for the city manager to prepare the written report and compile the written record. To prevent applicants from withholding information or otherwise abusing the appeal process, the city council has the discretion but is not required to hear additional evidence, and may decide the matter solely on the record that was before the director or planning commission.

E.    The city council may accept or reject, wholly or in part, or may modify, the decision made by the director or planning commission. If the decision of the city council regarding the wireless facility permit appeal is to deny the wireless facility permit or conditionally approve the wireless facility permit, the city council shall direct the city manager to prepare written findings referencing substantial evidence in the city’s written administrative record and such written findings shall be provided to the city council for adoption. The applicant and any appellant on the application shall receive a copy of the final written decision approved by the city council. (Ord. 921 §2(part), 2019)

17.41.110 Independent consultant review.
A.    Selection by Director. The director may select and retain with the approval of the city manager one or more independent consultants with expertise in communications satisfactory to the director and the city manager in connection with any permit review and evaluation.

B.    Scope. The independent consultant shall review the project aspects that involve technical or specialized knowledge and may address:

1.    Whether the applicant submitted a complete and accurate application;

2.    Whether the facts and materials presented in a particular application tend to support certain statements or analyses in the application;

3.    Compliance with any applicable regulations;

4.    Any other specific technical or specialized issues requested by the city; and/or

5.    Presence or absence of a significant gap in service coverage, as appropriate.

C.    Independent Consultant Fee Deposit. The applicant shall pay the cost for any independent consultant fees, along with applicable overhead recovery, through a deposit, estimated by the director, paid at the time the applicant submits an application. The applicant shall pay all consultant fees before the city may act on a permit application. In the event that such costs or fees do not exceed the deposit amount, the city shall refund any unused portion within sixty days after the final building permit is released or, if no final building permit is released, within sixty days after the city receives a written request from the applicant. (Ord. 921 §2(part), 2019)

17.41.120 Maintenance.
A.    All wireless communication facilities must comply with all standards and regulations of the FCC, and any other state or federal government agency with the authority to regulate wireless communication facilities.

B.    The site and the wireless communication facility, including all landscaping, fencing, and related transmission equipment, must be maintained in a neat and clean manner and in accordance with all approved plans.

C.    All graffiti on wireless communication facilities must be removed at the sole expense of the permittee within forty-eight hours of notification.

D.    A wireless communication facility located in the public right-of-way may not unreasonably interfere with the use of any city property or the public right-of-way by the city, by the general public or by other persons authorized to use or be present in or upon the public right-of-way. Unreasonable interference includes disruption to vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and interference with any other city or public utilities.

E.    If any FCC, CPUC or other required license or approval to provide communication services is ever revoked, the permittee must inform the director of the revocation within ten days of receiving notice of such revocation. (Ord. 921 §2(part), 2019)

17.41.130 Removal of abandoned facilities.
A.    Any facility whose permit has expired or whose permit has been terminated by the city or that is not operated for a continuous period of one hundred eighty days shall be deemed abandoned, and the owner of the facility shall remove the facility within ninety days of receipt of notice from the director notifying the owner of the abandonment.

B.    If the facility is not removed within the ninety-day period, the director may remove the facility at the permittee’s, facility owner’s, or landowner’s expense pursuant to the city’s abatement procedures.

C.    If there are two or more users of the permitted facility, this provision shall not become effective until all applicable permits have expired or have terminated or all users cease using the facility.

D.    As a condition of approval for permit issuance, the applicant shall provide a separate demolition bond for the duration of the permit, and in the form and manner of surety as determined by the director and approved as to form by the city attorney, with provision for inspection and city removal of the facility in the event of failure to perform by the responsible parties as defined by this chapter. (Ord. 921 §2(part), 2019)

17.41.140 Ownership transfers.
Upon transfer of an approved wireless communication facility or any rights under the applicable permit or approval, the permittee of the facility must within thirty days of such transfer provide written notification to the director of the date of the transfer and the identity of the transferee. The director may require submission of any supporting materials or documentation necessary to determine that the facility is in compliance with the existing permit or approval and all of its conditions including, but not limited to, statements, photographs, plans, drawings, and analysis by a qualified engineer demonstrating compliance with all applicable regulations and standards of the city, FCC, and CPUC. (Ord. 921 §2(part), 2019)

17.41.150 Revocation of a wireless facility permit.
A.    A wireless facility permit may be revoked if the permittee is not in compliance with permit conditions, if the permit conditions are not enforceable, or for a failure to comply with any provision of the code relating to the permit, or relating to the wireless facility associated with the permit ("default event"). By way of example and not limitation, a refusal to timely remove facilities located in the rights-of-way where required in connection with a public works project would be a default event.

B.    The city manager may revoke a wireless facility permit only after:

1.    Written notice of the default event has been provided to the wireless facility permit holder.

2.    The wireless facility permit holder has been afforded a reasonable opportunity to cure and comply with its permit, or demonstrate that no default event occurred.

3.    If the wireless facility permit holder fails to cure, the city council, or designee, shall conduct a noticed public hearing where the wireless facility permit holder shall be afforded an opportunity to speak and be heard and to provide written material prior to the hearing. If the city council or its designee, after the public hearing, finds that the wireless facility or the wireless facility permit holder has violated any law regulating the wireless facility or has failed to comply with the requirements of this chapter, the wireless facility permit, any applicable agreement or any condition of approval, the city council may revoke the permit.

4.    Upon revocation, the city council may require the removal of the wireless facility or take any other legally permissible action or combination of actions necessary to protect the health and welfare of the city. (Ord. 921 §2(part), 2019)

17.41.160 Exception from standards.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, one or more specific exceptions to the standards contained within this chapter may be granted if a denial of an exception would prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of wireless communications services by the applicant within the meaning of 47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7) or if the denial of the exception is otherwise preempted or prohibited by state or federal law or regulations. The city may grant an exception, on such terms as the city may deem appropriate, in cases where the city determines that the grant of an exception is necessary to comply with state and federal law or regulations. Prior to the issuance of an exception, the applicant shall be required to submit to the director a written explanation setting forth clear and convincing evidence that the location or locations and the design of the facility are necessary to close a significant gap in service coverage, that there is no feasible alternate location or locations, or design, that would close this significant gap in coverage or reduce this significant gap in coverage to less than significant, and that the facility is the least intrusive means to close a significant gap or to reduce it to less than a significant gap in coverage. Exceptions shall be subject to the review and approval by the planning commission at noticed public hearings. The burden is on the applicant to prove significant gaps and least intrusive means as required herein. (Ord. 921 §2(part), 2019)

17.41.170 Violations.
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements will be deemed guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof will be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars. Each such person, firm, partnership, or corporation will be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or any portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm, partnership, or corporation, and will be deemed punishable therefor as provided in this chapter. The remedies specified in this chapter shall be cumulative and the city may resort to any other remedy available at law or in equity and resort to any one remedy shall not cause an election precluding the use of any other remedy with respect to a violation. (Ord. 921 §2(part), 2019)

17.41.180 Severability.
In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction holds any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase in this chapter unconstitutional, preempted, or otherwise invalid, the invalid portion shall be severed from this chapter and shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city hereby declares that it would have adopted each section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase in this chapter irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases in this chapter might be declared unconstitutional, preempted, or otherwise invalid. (Ord. 921 §2(part), 2019)

Chapter 17.52
SIGNS
Sections:

17.52.010    Purpose of provisions.

17.52.020    Use limitations generally.

17.52.030    Definitions.

17.52.040    General requirements and restrictions.

17.52.050    Development standards for signs.

17.52.060    Interpretation of provisions--Authority.

17.52.070    Permit--Required.

17.52.080    Building permit requirements.

17.52.090    Permit--Application--Fee.

17.52.100    Permit--Exemptions.

17.52.110    Nonconforming signs.

17.52.120    Removal of signs.

17.52.130    Variances.

17.52.140    Appeals.

17.52.150    Violation--Penalty.

17.52.010 Purpose of provisions.
The purpose of this chapter is to:

A.    Provide standards for the regulation of the height, size, location and appearance of signs in order to safeguard and enhance property values;

B.    Protect public and private investments in building and open spaces;

C.    Preserve and improve the appearance of the city as a place in which to live and to work and as an attraction to our visitors;

D.    Encourage sound sign practices as a tool to business for informing the public;

E.    Reduce hazards to motorists and pedestrians; and

F.    Promote the retention of the special character and aesthetic appearance of the city. (Ord. 590 (part), 1980)

17.52.020 Use limitations generally.
The use of a sign shall be limited to naming the business, the nature of the use being conducted on the premises, or the service, major product or interest being offered for sale or lease thereon, and governed by the regulations set out in this chapter. (Ord. 590 (part), 1980)

17.52.030 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined in this section:

A.    "Appurtenant sign" means any sign which directs attention to an occupancy, business, service or entertainment conducted or sold or offered only upon the premises where the sign is maintained; also known as an "on-premises sign."

B.    "Area" of a sign means the entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem or any figure or similar character excluding the necessary supports on which such sign is placed; plus the area of the background panel on which the grouping of letters or symbols is painted or mounted if not directly on a building face. Individual letters and symbols shall be measured by parallel lines encompassing each line. All sides or edges of a sign used for advertising purposes shall also be used for calculating total allowable sign area.

C.    "Attached sign" means any sign which is supported by a building, awning or structure, other than a sign structure which is supported wholly by the ground. Any roof sign, as defined in this section, shall be considered an attached sign.

D.    "Building line" means a line established by ordinance beyond which no building may extend. A building line may be a property line.

E.    "Bulletin board" means a sign of permanent character, but with movable letters, words or numerals, also known as a marquee.

F.    "Detached sign" means any sign freestanding which is not an attached sign, as defined in this section.

G.    "Development or construction sign" means a sign listing the architect, engineer, planner, contractor or other person or firm participating in the development or construction or financing of the project on the premises on which the sign is located. Such sign must be removed within five days of final inspection.

H.    "Directional sign" means signs placed so as to direct flow of traffic onto or off of a premises (i.e., "enter," "exit," "welcome," "thank you") which contain no identification or advertising thereon. These signs shall not be counted in total sign size allowance. Directional signs shall not exceed two square feet each.

I.    "Face of building" means the general outer surface of a main exterior wall of a building, including an awning surface.

J.    "Height of sign" is the vertical distance from the uppermost point used in measuring the area of a sign to the foundation grade directly below such point.

K.    "Major center" is a commercially zoned and developed parcel with multiple occupancy having gross leasable store area in excess of fifty thousand square feet.

L.    "Minor center" is a commercially zoned and developed parcel with multiple occupancy having gross leasable store area which is less than fifty thousand square feet.

M.    "Multiple occupancy" means a parcel of land as designated in the current Assessor’s Parcel Map Book whereon two or more separate, independently owned and operated commercial or professional occupancies are contained.

N.    "Nonappurtenant sign" means any sign off-premises to the location of the advertised business and which does not qualify as "appurtenant" under subsection (A) of this section.

O.    "Occupant" means one who occupies a building or group of buildings devoted to a single enterprise, but does not refer to individual tenants that may share division of a building or buildings.

P.    "Pedestrian sign" means a sign not exceeding three square feet in total area and not less than eight feet from the ground not to exceed ten feet in height suspended under a marquee, porch, walkway cover or similarly suspended not to exceed a three-foot projection from the wall of a building, placed approximately perpendicular to the wall of the adjoining building, intended to be viewed by pedestrians in the vicinity of an entrance to a building, containing only the identification of the building or occupant. Pedestrian signs shall be unlighted. Brackets for suspension shall be decorative in nature and not exceed six inches in distance from the sign.

Q.    "Real estate sign" means a sign advertising the sale, rental or lease of the premises on which the sign is maintained including a subdivision sign.

R.    "Roof line" means the upper edge of any building wall or parapet for a flat roof structure, or the roof ridge line for any gable roof structure.

S.    "Sign" is anything placed, erected, constructed, posted, painted, printed, tacked, nailed, glued, stuck, carved or otherwise fastened, affixed or made visible for out-of-door advertising purposes in any manner whatsoever, on the ground or on any tree, wall, bush, post, pole, fence, building, structure or anything whatsoever. "Sign" does not include the following:

1.    Official notice issued by any court, public body or officer;

2.    Notices posted by any public officer in the performance of a public duty or by any person in giving legal notice;

3.    Directional, warning or informational signs or structures required or authorized by law or by federal, state or city authority.

T.    "Temporary sign" means and includes any sign, banner, pennant, valance or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard or other light material, not to exceed twenty percent of total street frontage window area or forty square feet, whichever is less, intended to be displayed for a limited period of time not to exceed thirty days.

U.    "Large individual retail building" means a building on a commercially zoned parcel designed to be used primarily for the retail sale of goods and merchandise having gross leasable floor area in excess of fifty thousand square feet. (Ord. 884 §1(A), 2012; Ord. 590 §100, 1980)

17.52.040 General requirements and restrictions.
General sign provisions shall apply to all zoning districts within the city, unless otherwise stated or clarified:

A.    Nonappurtenant signs shall not be allowed in any district.

B.    Pedestrian signs shall be limited to one per entrance.

C.    No sign shall be designed or located specifically to be seen from Highway 29.

D.    Attached signs may have a maximum four-foot projection, from the vertical face of the building, but are not to encroach within two feet from back of curbline. Signs shall not exceed roof line of the appurtenant building.

1.    Preexisting permanent attached or freestanding signs will be grandfathered in, providing they must submit an eight inch by ten inch black and white photograph, a set of dimensions and a document for recordation at the owner’s expense. These will be on file at the City Hall. The signs will be checked to make sure they do not present a safety hazard, and will be repaired and/or cleaned up as warranted. Owners will sign a waiver of responsibility so the city will not be liable for signs extending out over public property.

2.    Sign owners will be permitted to repair portions or all of said signs, provided they are exact copies.

3.    Projecting signs shall be located within the center one-third of the building face or frontage.

E.    Flashing, scintillating, animated or revolving signs shall be allowed only for public information.

F.    Real estate signs shall be limited to one per frontage of the premises offered for sale or lease, shall not exceed nine square in total area, and shall be removed within fifteen days after close of escrow, lease or rental.

G.    No sandwich signs shall be allowed in any district, except that temporary sandwich signs shall be allowed on private property.

H.    No vehicle shall be parked on any street or be visible from a street which has attached thereto any commercial advertising sign except a sign painted upon or permanently affixed to or designed for use on the body for identification, including magnetic signs.

I.    No freestanding sign shall exceed thirty-five feet maximum height, from the median elevation of the nearest roadway or foundation of the structure, and shall be subject to review and approval by the planning commission.

J.    Service stations may exhibit stamp signs, credit card signs and other miscellaneous signs, all to be placed flat on a wall or window of the main service building, in no case to exceed a total twenty-square-feet miscellaneous sign area. Service stations may also exhibit one detached posterboard-type sign, single or double-faced, permanently fixed or placed in concrete, within a landscaped area, not to exceed fifteen square feet in area for each side.

K.    No sign of any type shall be placed on any utility pole, traffic directional pole or public property, unless specifically allowed under separate section of this chapter.

L.    Illuminated signs shall be allowed in any commercial district.

M.    General Requirements for Subdivision Signs.

1.    Signs advertising any subdivision (including parcel map divisions) being developed in the city of Lakeport shall conform to the following:

a.    Each subdivision being developed shall be allowed one single-sided identification sign on private property within the subdivision at the entrance of the project.

b.    The subdivision sign shall not be displayed prior to the date of recordation of the subdivision or parcel map. Unless otherwise approved by the community development director, the subdivision sign shall be removed within three years from the date of issuance of the first building permit within the subdivision, or within thirty. days from the time that seventy-five percent of the lots or dwellings in the subdivision have been sold, whichever time period is the least.

c.    The subdivision sign shall be limited to a maximum of thirty-two square feet. Subdivision signs in excess of nine square feet shall be subject to the issuance of a building permit prior to placement. The subdivision sign shall not exceed seven feet in height inclusive of flags, pennants and similar appendices.

d.    No subdivision sign shall be erected in any manner so as to obstruct the view or conflict with any traffic sign, signal or device; nor shall a subdivision sign be located in a manner that will obstruct the view of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.

e.    Subdivision signs advertising subdivisions being developed outside of the city limits are prohibited.

f.    Subdivision signs shall not be lighted or illuminated.

2.    Off-site signs intended to direct the public to property being offered for sale, lease, or rent within a subdivision (including parcel map divisions) being developed shall be subject to the following provisions:

a.    There shall be no more than two off-site signs directing the public to the subdivision being developed.

b.    Off-site subdivision signs shall be limited to four square feet in sign area and shall not exceed a height of four and one-half feet measured from the ground surface at the sign base.

c.    Off-site subdivision signs shall be approved by the community development department prior to their placement.

d.    There shall be no more than one off-site subdivision sign at any one location in the city at any one time.

e.    No off-site subdivision signs shall be placed in the city road right-of-way which shall include the travel lanes, gutters, sidewalks, and road shoulders. All off-site subdivision signs shall be placed on private property and shall be subject to the issuance of written approval of the owner of the property on which the sign is to be located. A copy of the written property owner consent shall be provided to the city prior to the placement of any off-site subdivision sign.

f.    No off-site subdivision sign shall be erected in any manner that will obstruct the view of traffic or conflict with any traffic sign, signal or device.

g.    Off-site subdivision signs shall not be lighted or illuminated.

3.    Real estate sale, lease, or rent signs on individual lots shall be limited to one per frontage of the premises offered for sale, shall not exceed six square feet in total area, and shall be removed within fifteen days after the close of escrow, lease or rental. Larger signs may be approved by the community development department depending upon the size of the parcel, amount of street frontage, proposed placement location, and other factors.

N.    Sign Removal. The community development director, upon a finding that there is a violation of the provisions of the Lakeport Sign Ordinance, may cause the immediate removal of any sign unlawfully placed or located on public or private property. The director shall notify in writing the owner of such sign, if the owner is known, that the sign will be held at City Hall, and that it may be stored or destroyed if not claimed by the owner within ten business days after the date of said notice. In the event that the owner does not claim the sign within ten business days, the director may destroy or otherwise dispose of such sign.

O.    General Requirements for Signs Serving Large Shopping Centers and Large Individual Retail Businesses. These regulations have been established for the purpose of maintaining a consistent sign design program for new large individual retail buildings and major shopping centers (larger than fifty thousand square feet of gross leasable floor area) located in commercial zoning districts.

1.    Prior to sign installation, the developer, owner or responsible party of a newly proposed large individual retail building or major shopping center shall submit to the city of Lakeport community development department ten copies of a detailed sign plan indicating the location, size, layout, design, color, illumination, materials and method of attachment of all proposed signage. All submitted plans shall be in color and shall be accompanied by a digital copy provided in a format acceptable to the city.

2.    The sign plan shall be reviewed by the city planning commission for consistency with the sign ordinance. Approval or disapproval of the sign plan shall be the sole right of the city. While it is intended that all signs serving the large retail building or major shopping center conform to the requirements set forth in the sign ordinance, deviations may be approved upon a finding by the planning commission that said deviation(s) will result in a more aesthetically pleasing appearance or is necessary to respond to a particularly unique situation. The burden of proof for establishing the need for a deviation shall be the responsibility of the applicant. All signs serving the large individual retail building or major shopping center shall conform to the approved sign plan.

3.    If the sign plan is approved, the developer, owner or responsible party shall obtain all required building department permits and pay applicable fees prior to sign installation.

4.    Conformance with Existing Sign Ordinance. All city sign ordinance (Chapter 17.52) requirements dealing with temporary and/or prohibited signs shall apply to large individual retail buildings or major shopping centers.

5.    Sign Style. All tenant signs serving new large individual retail buildings or major shopping centers shall be self-illuminated individual channel letters, five inches deep, with face comprised of sunlight resistant acrylic or an approved comparable material. However, signs for large individual retail buildings or major shopping centers having architectural features that would preclude the use of individual channel letters shall be evaluated by the planning commission on a case-by-case basis.

a.    Signs serving existing large individual retail buildings or major shopping center tenants may be added or replaced with similar types of signage subject to review and approval by the community development department.

6.    Sign Construction. All signs and their installation shall comply with all applicable building and electrical codes.

7.    Sign Types.

a.    Type A--Building Mounted. For individual tenants of a major shopping center with less than five thousand square feet of gross leasable floor area, the maximum letter height shall be twenty-four inches with the maximum sign length not to exceed seventy-five percent of the leased lineal frontage. Total sign square footage allowed shall be one and one-half square feet per each lineal foot of leased store frontage. Individual tenants shall be permitted only one sign for each interior store frontage with a maximum of two signs total.

b.    Type B--Building Mounted. For individual tenants of a major shopping center with at least five thousand but not more than ten thousand square feet of gross leasable floor area, the maximum letter height shall be thirty-six inches with the maximum sign length not to exceed seventy-five percent of the leased lineal frontage. Total sign square footage allowed shall be one and one-half square feet per each lineal foot of leased store frontage. Individual tenants shall be permitted only one sign for each interior store frontage with a maximum of two signs total.

c.    Type C--Building Mounted. For individual tenants of a major shopping center with more than ten thousand square feet of gross leasable floor area, or for large individual retail buildings in excess of fifty thousand square feet of gross leasable floor area, the maximum letter height shall be five feet with the maximum sign length not to exceed seventy-five percent of the primary frontage. Total sign square footage allowed shall be one and one-half square feet per each lineal foot of the primary store frontage. One primary sign is permitted; however, additional ancillary or directional signage may be allowed upon the finding of the planning commission that they are secondary in nature, are aesthetically appropriate and respond to a particularly unique situation.

d.    Type D. Each tenant within a major shopping center shall be permitted one illuminated double-faced under canopy sign not to exceed twelve inches by four feet (four square feet). Under canopy signs shall be mounted so that there is eight feet of clearance from the bottom of the sign to the sidewalk or walkway.

e.    Type E. Low profile monument signs may be allowed in lieu of a single freestanding sign for the entire major shopping center or for a large individual retail building with said signs to be approved by the planning commission on a case-by-case basis. Large individual retail buildings shall be allowed to install a single freestanding sign consistent with the freestanding sign that is allowed to serve large shopping centers as outlined in this chapter. Additional small freestanding directional signs may be allowed on a case-by-case basis. (Ord. 884 §1(B), 2012; Ord. 793 §§I, II, 1998; Ord. 590 §200, 1980)

17.52.050 Development standards for signs.
The maximum number, area and height of signs permitted in the various zoning districts for various land uses are as set out in this section.

TABLE OF MAXIMUM NUMBER, AREA AND HEIGHT OF SIGNS PERMITTED IN VARIOUS ZONING DISTRICTS FOR VARIOUS LAND USES

District

Use

Type

Use Permit?

Bldg. Permit?

Max. No. of Signs for Any 1 Use

Max. Area of Signs (sq. ft.)

Max. Height for Attached Signs

Max. Height for Detached Signs (ft.)

Special Regs. and Exceptions

R-1

Dwellings

ident.

no

no

1 per sheet

4

roofline (not to exceed 16 ft.)

8, excluding driveway arch signs

nonilluminated except st. nos.

 

Resthomes

ident.

no

yes

1

10

8 ft.

8

" "

 

Churches, schools

ident.

no

yes

1

32

roofline

8

" "

 

 

bulletin board

no

yes

1

20

roofline

8

" "

 

Misc.

real estate

 

 

 

See Sec. 17.52.040(F)

 

 

 

 

 

development

no

no

--

32

below roof

4

Sec. 17.52.030(G)

R-3 through R-5

Multiple dwelling complexes

ident.

no

yes

1

30 for complex

8 ft.

8

 

R-3

Convalescent hosp.

ident.

no

yes

1

30

roofline

8

 

 

Mobile home park

ident.

no

yes

1

30

roofline

8

 

R-4

Professional offices

ident. (multiple occupancy)

no

yes

1 for each st. frontage (only 1 freestanding)

35 for one, not more than 60 for two

roofline

10

 

 

 

readerboards

no

no

1 for each occupant

2 each name, not to exceed 40

roofline

 

 

R-5

Hotel, motel or resort

ident.

no

yes

1 per st. frontage (but only 1 freestanding)

100, but not more than 50 on any one sign

roofline

20

 

 

Campground

ident.

no

yes

1

50

roofline

20

 

 

Bar, restaurant

ident

yes

yes

1 per st. frontage (only 1 freestanding)

100 but not more than 50 on any one sign

roofline

20

 

 

Comb. rental, retail, prof. (multiple occupancy)

ident.

yes

yes

1 per st. frontage (only 1 freestanding)

100. but not more than 50 on any one sign

roofline

20

 

 

 

individual

no

yes

1

20

8 ft.

 

 

PC

P-C

ident.

no

yes

1 per st. frontage

30 per sign

8 ft.

8

 

C-1, C-2, C-3 and M-I

Offices

See applicable item in R-4 subsection

 

Retail (individual)

ident.

no

yes

1 per st. frontage (only 1 freestanding)

100, not more than 50 on any one sign

roofline

25

Sec. 17.52.040(I)

 

Major center

ident. (freestanding)

no

yes

1

300 including marquee

N/A

35; see Sec. 17.52.040(I)

 

 

Minor center

ident. (freestanding w/readerboards)

no

yes

1

150

N/A

25

See Sec. 17.52.040(I)

 

Misc.

real estate

See Sec. 17.52.040(F)

20

roofline

8

 

 

 

 

 

development

no

no

-

32

below roof

8

 

Any

Service station

ident.

no

yes

1 per st. frontage (only 1 freestanding)

100, but not more than 50 on any one sign

roofline

20

See Sec. 17.52.040(3)

(Ord. 590 (part), 1980)

17.52.060 Interpretation of provisions--Authority.
When an interpretation is needed on definition or intent of this chapter, the planning commission shall consider same and pass upon a resolution of interpretation for determination of the ambiguity. (Ord. 590 §702, 1980)

17.52.070 Permit--Required.
A.    Except as provided in this chapter, no sign shall be painted or erected in the city, nor shall a sign be modified in structure, without a sign permit issued by the planning department.

B.    No permit shall be issued unless the sign or signs both conform to the general regulations of this chapter and has received design review, if required, and approval as also prescribed in this chapter.

C.    Normal maintenance of any sign requires no permit.

D.    Any person not satisfied with the decision of sign approval or denial by the planning department may appeal the decision to the planning commission. (Ord. 590 §501, 1980)

17.52.080 Building permit requirements.
A building permit shall be required for any sign which, in the opinion of the building official, constitutes a structure or structural alteration. An electrical permit shall be required for any sign to be served by new electricity. All sign installations shall be by a city license holder. (Ord. 590 §502, 1980)

17.52.090 Permit--Application--Fee.
All permit applications for sign permits shall be signed by a licensed contractor or by an owner/builder accepting responsibility for the work to be done. Any sign requiring an electrical permit or having a value over two hundred dollars will be signed on the permit application by a contractor with an active state license to perform such work. (Ord. 590 §503, 1980)

17.52.100 Permit--Exemptions.
The following signs do not require a permit:

A.    Individual, professional or business signs in residential zones not to exceed four square feet in total area for home occupations as allowed in this title;

B.    Real estate signs as set forth in Section 17.52.040(F) of this chapter;

C.    Names of buildings or dates of erection of buildings or historical data when cut in a masonry surface or constructed of bronze material;

D.    Public utility or directional or warning signs and other such emergency signs, including wording painted on streets;

E.    Temporary signs or in-window signs of a temporary nature displayed per Section 17.52.030(T) of this chapter;

F.    Any and all signs, lights, banners, flags or other advertising devices placed on an occupant’s property for a maximum of thirty consecutive days to announce the opening of a new business, and including approved signs on existing businesses for annual sales. The planning department shall review and approve plans for such signing to ensure that it offers no hazard to the safe movement of traffic and also that it does not block permanent identification signs on neighboring properties.

G.    Holiday lights, decorations and displays, or special event banners, provided such lights, decorations and displays are removed within thirty days after the holiday or event;

H.    Name signs for private homes;

I.    Street signs and address numbers. (Ord. 590 §504, 1980)

17.52.110 Nonconforming signs.
All signs in all zones which do not meet the requirements of this chapter shall become nonconforming as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 590 §300, 1980)

17.52.120 Removal of signs.
Signs which advertise a business or activity which has relocated or ceased to operate shall be completely removed within ninety days from the time of relocation or cessation. (Ord. 590 §301, 1980)

17.52.130 Variances.
Where practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships and results inconsistent with the general purpose of this chapter may occur from the strict application of provisions of this chapter, a variance may be granted as provided in Chapter 17.26. Economic hardships shall not be considered a practical difficulty, unnecessary hardship or a result which is inconsistent with the general practice of this chapter. (Ord. 590 §400, 1980)

17.52.140 Appeals.
A.    The planning commission shall have the power to hear and decide appeals based on the enforcement or interpretation of the provisions of this chapter.

B.    In case the applicant is not satisfied with the action of the planning commission on his appeal, he may within five working days appeal in writing to the city council.

C.    Notice shall be given to the planning commission of such appeal, and a report shall be submitted by the commission to the city council, setting forth the reasons for the action taken by the commission. Such report shall be submitted in writing or by representation at the hearing.

D.    The city council shall render its decision within forty-five days after the filing of such appeal. (Ord. 590 §700, 1980)

17.52.150 Violation--Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 590 S600, 1980)