LANCASTER - MUNICIPAL CODE 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances of
the City of Lancaster, California 
____________ 
Beginning in 2009,
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 
  
> 
PREFACE 
The Lancaster, California Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company in 1995, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Municipal Code Corporation, its successor in interest. 
During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company under the direction of Barbara A. Howard, CMC/AAE city clerk; David R. McEwen, city attorney; Mary Wagner, attorney; and Jerry Ramirez, attorney. 
The Code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the Code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with 2009, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance No. 1064 , adopted May 14, 2019. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
This code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this code. 
Numbering System. 
The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this Code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each part is represented in the code section number. For example, Section 2.04.020 is Section .020, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use. 
Chapter. 
Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, can be added between 2.04, and Chapter 2.08. 
Section. 
Each section of the code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
There are many tables of contents in this code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
Beginning with 2009, a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross referenced to the code comparative table and disposition list appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
When a code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" code references in the new code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new code section in the column labeled "Herein." 
As of 2009, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
To find a specific ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
Beginning with 2009, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
Beginning with 2009, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. The Instruction Sheet will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will ensure that the code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
When originally published, the pages of this code were consecutively numbered. As of April, 2009, when new pages are inserted with amendments, the pages will follow a "Point Numbering System". (Example: 32, 32.1, 32.2, 32.2.1, 32.2.2., 33). Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) will be left unnumbered but the number will be "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com . 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS  
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 
 
1.01.010 - Title—Citation—Reference. 
This code shall be known as the "Lancaster Municipal Code" and it shall be sufficient to refer to this code as the "Lancaster Municipal Code" in any prosecution for the violation of any provision hereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the "Lancaster Municipal Code." References may be made to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the "Lancaster Municipal Code" and such references shall apply to those titles, chapters, sections or subsections as they appear in this code. 
(Ord. 724 § 2 (part), 1996)  
1.01.020 - Reference to specific ordinances. 
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within this code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. 
(Ord. 724 § 2 (part), 1996)  
1.01.030 - Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code. 
The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance No. 711, which was duly passed and approved by the city council on September 18, 1995. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance No. 711, but prior to adoption of the new code, are adopted and made a part of the new code: Ordinance Nos. 708, 710 and 713 through 721. 
(Ord. 724 § 2 (part), 1996)  
1.01.040 - Effect of code on past actions and obligations. 
The adoption of this code does not affect prosecutions for ordinance violations committed prior to the effective date of this code, does not waive any fee or penalty due and unpaid on the effective date of this code, and does not affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit posted, filed or deposited pursuant to the requirements of any ordinance. 
(Ord. 724 § 2 (part), 1996)  
1.01.050 - Constitutionality. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. 
(Ord. 724 § 2 (part), 1996)  
1.01.060 - References to the previous code. 
This code supersedes and replaces the former "Lancaster Municipal Code" adopted by the city council pursuant to Ordinance No. 2, on December 5, 1977. References in city forms, documents and regulations to the chapters and sections of the former city code shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. 
(Ord. 724 § 2 (part), 1996)  
1.01.070 - Distribution of code. 
Not less than three copies of this code and one copy of each code incorporated herein by reference shall be filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the city clerk. Additional copies shall be prepared in looseleaf form and mounted to withstand heavy usage in such binders as the city clerk may prescribe. Copies of this code shall be distributed as determined by the city clerk. 
(Ord. 724 § 2 (part), 1996)  
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
1.04.010 - Provisions governing construction. 
Unless the provisions or the context otherwise require, these general provisions, rules of construction and definitions shall govern the construction of this code. The provisions of this code and all proceedings under it are to be construed with a view to effect its objectives and to promote justice. 
(Prior code § 1-3.1)  
1.04.020 - Effect of headings. 
Article and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any article or section of this code. 
(Prior code § 1-3.2)  
1.04.030 - Reference to acts or omissions within this city. 
This code shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within the territorial limits of the city and to that territory outside of the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of the Constitution, or any law, or by reason of ownership or control of such property. 
(Prior code § 1-3.3)  
1.04.040 - Prohibited acts, including causing, permitting or suffering. 
Whenever in this code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing such act or omission. 
(Prior code § 1-3.4)  
1.04.050 - Acts by deputy. 
Whenever a power is granted to or duty is imposed upon a public officer or employee the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy of such officer or employee or by a person otherwise duly authorized, pursuant to law or ordinance or by an officer of the county of Los Angeles, or by a deputy or employee of such officer when by contract with the city of Lancaster such officer is obligated and has agreed to perform certain duties on behalf of the city, unless this code expressly provides otherwise. 
(Prior code § 1-3.5)  
1.04.060 - Writing—What it includes. 
Writing includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this code, it shall be made in writing in the English language unless it is expressly provided otherwise. 
(Prior code § 1-3.6)  
1.04.070 - Reference applies to amendments. 
Whenever a reference is made to any portion of this code, or to any ordinances of this city, the reference applies to all amendments and additions now or hereafter made unless otherwise specifically indicated. 
(Prior code § 1-3.7)  
1.04.080 - Service of notice. 
Whenever a notice is required to be given under this code, unless different provisions herein are otherwise specifically made, such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified, at his last known business or residence address as the same appears in the public records of the city or other records pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post office. 
(Prior code § 1-3.8)  
1.04.090 - Proof of notice. 
Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of the city, or by affidavit of any person over the age of eighteen (18) years, which shows service in conformity with this code, or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned. 
(Prior code § 1-3.9)  
1.04.100 - Tenses. 
The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future, the present, except that no provisions of this code shall be effective on an ex post facto basis. 
(Prior code § 1-3.10)  
1.04.110 - Gender. 
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. 
(Prior code § 1-3.11)  
1.04.120 - Number. 
The singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular. 
(Prior code § 1-3.12)  
1.04.130 - Shall/must and may. 
"Shall" and "must" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. 
(Ord. 684 § 1, 1995: prior code § 1-3.13)  
1.04.140 - Definitions. 
As used in this code: 
"City" means the city of Lancaster, or the area within the territorial limits of the city and such territory outside the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision. 
"Council" means the city council of the city. "All its members" or "all councilmembers" means the total number of councilmembers holding office. 
"County" means the county of Los Angeles. 
"Goods" means and includes wares or merchandise. 
"Law" denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the state of California, the ordinances of the city, and when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
"Month" means a calendar month. 
"Oath" means and includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
"Office" means the use of the title of any officer, employee, office or ordinance and shall also mean such officer, employee, office or ordinance of the city of Lancaster. 
"Operate" means and includes carry on, keep, conduct or maintain. 
"Owner," applied to a building or land, means and includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
"Person," as used in this code or in any ordinance or code adopted hereby, means and includes any natural person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business, trust, company, club, joint venture, joint stock company or corporation, and any municipal, political or governmental corporation, district, body or agency, other than the city of Lancaster or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them. 
"Personal property" means and includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt. 
"Preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
"Property" means and includes real and personal property. 
"Real property" means and includes lands, tenements and hereditament. 
"Sale" means and includes any sale, exchange, barter or offer for sale. 
"Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for use of pedestrians. 
"State" means the state of California. 
"Street" means and includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, parkways, curbs, or other public ways in the city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property as designated by any law of this state. 
"Tenant" or "occupant," applied to any building or land, means and includes any person who occupies the whole or a part of such buildings or land, whether alone or with others. 
"Year" means a calendar year. 
(Ord. 684 § 2, 1995: prior code § 1-3.14)  
1.04.150 - Interpretation. 
Whenever in any ordinance, statute, or other matter which is adopted by reference, unless the context requires otherwise the following references shall be given the following meanings: 
"Board of supervisors" means the city council of the city of Lancaster. 
"County" means the city of Lancaster. 
"County officer" means the appropriate or designated officer of the city of Lancaster. 
"County of Los Angeles" means the city of Lancaster. 
"Unincorporated territory" means the incorporated territory of the city of Lancaster. 
(Prior code § 1-3.15)  
1.04.160 - Interpretation of language. 
All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(Ord. 684 § 3 (part), 1995: prior code § 1-3.16)  
1.04.170 - Acts by agents. 
When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. When an act is required to be done by the city manager, the same may be performed by the city manager's designee unless otherwise indicated. 
(Ord. 684 § 3 (part), 1995: prior code § 1-3.17)  
1.04.180 - Computation of time. 
Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. 
(Ord. 684 § 3 (part), 1995: prior code § 1-3.18)  
1.04.190 - Repeal shall not revive any ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. 
(Ord. 684 § 3 (part), 1995: prior code § 1-3.19)  
Chapter 1.08 - CODE ENFORCEMENT 
 
1.08.010 - Code enforcement. 
A.  Authority to Arrest. Pursuant to Penal Code Section 836.5, a public officer or employee shall be authorized to make arrests without a warrant, whenever the public officer or employee has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a violation in his or her presence of any ordinance of the city of Lancaster which the public officer or employee has the duty to enforce. 
B.  Authority to Arrest for Infractions and Misdemeanors. Public officers or employees shall be authorized to make an arrest for the violation of any provisions of this code, regardless of whether the violation constitutes an infraction or a misdemeanor. 
C.  Authority to Issue Notice to Appear. In any case in which a person is arrested pursuant to subsection A of this section and the person arrested does not demand to be taken before a magistrate, the public office or employee making the arrest shall prepare a written notice to appear and release the person on his promise to appear in accordance with Penal Code Section 853.6 et seq. as it currently exists and may be amended. 
(Ord. 694 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 1-2.3)  
1.08.020 - Procedures and rules governing issuance of citations. 
The city manager shall designate in writing those persons who are deemed to be public officers and employees for purposes of Section 1.08.010, and shall be authorized to establish rules and procedures governing the conduct of public officers and employees in the exercise of their duties to enforce the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 694 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 1-2.4)  
Chapter 1.12 - GENERAL PENALTY 
 
1.12.010 - Violations. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this code. Any person violating this code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor unless: 
A.  The violation is classified as an infraction in the Lancaster Municipal Code in which case the person shall be guilty of an infraction; or 
B.  A public officer or employee designated in Section 1.08.010 issues a citation charging the offense as an infraction; or 
C.  A public officer or employee designated in Section 1.08.010 at his or her discretion issues an administrative citation for the violation pursuant to the provisions, procedures, and penalties as contained in Chapter 1.16. 
(Ord. 809 (part), 2002: Prior code § 1-2.1)  
1.12.020 - Penalty for violation. 
A.  Misdemeanors. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this code, is punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the Los Angeles County Jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
B.  Infractions. Any person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this code, is punishable by (1) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year; (3) a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year. 
C.  Continuing Violations. Each day or any portion thereof that a person violates any provision of this code, including without limitation, the maintenance of a building, structure or use in violation of this code, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 711 § 1, 1995; prior code § 1-2.2)  
Chapter 1.16 - ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES 
 
1.16.010 - Title and purpose. 
A.  This chapter shall be cited as the Administrative Remedies Ordinance. 
B.  The city council finds there is a need for an alternative method of enforcement for violations of this code. The city council finds an appropriate method of enforcement is through an administrative citation process. 
C.  The procedures established in this chapter shall be in addition to criminal, civil or any other legal remedy established by law which may be pursued to address violations of this code. 
(Ord. 809 (part), 2002)  
1.16.020 - Administrative citations authorized. 
Any person violating provisions of this code may be issued an administrative citation by an enforcement officer as provided in Sections 1.16.060, 1.16.070 and 1.16.080 of this code. 
(Ord. 809 (part), 2002)  
1.16.030 - Enforcement generally. 
The city manager or his designated representatives and enforcement officers shall diligently enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 809 (part), 2002)  
1.16.040 - Definitions. 
A.  "City" means the city of Lancaster. 
B.  "Code" means the Lancaster Municipal Code, the Lancaster Zoning Code, or any law, rule, regulation, or code which is adopted by reference. 
C.  "Enforcement officer" means any person authorized to enforce violations of this code. 
D.  "Hearing officer" means any person appointed by the city manager to preside over the administrative hearings provided for in Section 1.16.090 of this code. 
E.  "Party" means any natural person, firm, association, business, trust, organization, corporation, partnership, company or any other entity which is recognized by law as the subject of rights or duties. 
F.  "Penalty" shall include "civil penalty" and shall mean the amount assessed for violation of this code pursuant to the administrative citation. 
G.  "Person" means any natural person, firm, association, business, trust, organization, corporation, partnership, company or any other entity which is recognized by law as the subject of rights or duties. 
H.  "Respondent" means any person or entity who is the registered owner, property owner, legal owner, driver, operator, tenant, lessee or is otherwise liable for penalties in accordance with the applicable section of this code, and who contests or disputes liability for civil penalties. 
I.  "Responsible person" shall mean an owner of any property, a person who is responsible for control of the property or the condition of the property or a person who is responsible for repair or maintenance of the property. 
(Ord. 809 (part), 2002)  
1.16.050 - Use of administrative citations—Separate violations. 
A.  Any person violating any provision of this code may be issued an administrative citation by an enforcement officer as provided in this chapter. 
B.  Each and every day a violation of any provision of this code exists constitutes a separate and distinct offense. Each section of this code which is violated constitutes a separate violation for any day at issue. 
C.  A civil penalty for violations of any provision set forth in this code may be assessed by means of an administrative citation issued by the enforcement officer and shall be payable directly to the city. 
D.  Civil penalties assessed by means of an administrative citation shall be due thirty (30) days from the date of the citation and will be collected in accordance with the procedures specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 809 (part), 2002)  
1.16.060 - Procedures for administrative citations. 
A.  Upon discovering or observing any violation of this code for which a civil penalty has been prescribed, the enforcement officer may issue an administrative citation to the violator or property owner in the manner prescribed in Section 1.16.070 of this code. The administrative citation shall be issued on a form prescribed by the city manager. 
B.  Any party responsible for a violation of this code shall be provided a notice of violation prior to the issuance of an administrative citation. The notice of violation shall specify the action required to correct or otherwise remedy the violation(s). Not less than twenty-four (24) hours shall be allowed from the date of the notice of violation for the party to correct or otherwise remedy the violation. The enforcement officer shall assign a specific reasonable period within which to correct or otherwise remedy each violation. The enforcement officer shall consider the cost of abatement or correction, the time required to obtain permits for correction, the time needed to obtain estimates, drawings and contracts for correction, time required for physical relocation of personal property and the time required to review submittals in determining the reasonable warning period to be assigned for each violation. 
C.  Failure to comply with any portion of a notice of violation may result in the issuance of an administrative citation. 
D.  The enforcement officer shall identify the responsible party. A responsible party shall be deemed to be the business or property owner or the person who is in immediate control of the premises or activity which constitutes a violation of this code. 
E.  Once the party responsible for the violation is identified, the enforcement officer may issue an administrative citation to that person or entity. 
(Ord. 809 (part), 2002)  
1.16.070 - Service of citation. 
A.  Service of an administrative citation may be accomplished as follows: 
1.  Personal service. The enforcement officer may obtain the signature of the responsible party to establish personal service of the citation. If the responsible party refuses or otherwise fails to sign the administrative citation, the lack of signature shall in no way affect the validity of the citation or the proceedings. 
2.  The enforcement officer may post the citation by affixing the citation to a surface in a conspicuous place on the property. Conspicuous posting of the citation is not required when personal service is accomplished or when conspicuous posting poses a hardship or is excessively expensive. Failure of a posted notice to remain in place after posting shall in no way affect the validity of the citation or the proceedings. 
3.  The enforcement officer may serve the citation by first class mail as follows: 
a.  The administrative citation shall be mailed to the responsible party or property owner(s) by first class mail, postage prepaid, with a declaration of service under penalty of perjury. 
b.  A declaration of service shall be made by the person mailing the administrative citation showing the date and manner of service by mail and reciting the name and address of the citation addressee. 
c.  The failure of any responsible party to receive a properly addressed citation shall not affect the validity of the notice. 
d.  Service of the administrative citation in the manner described above shall be effective on the date of mailing. 
(Ord. 809 (part), 2002)  
1.16.080 - Contents of administrative citation. 
The administrative citation shall include all the following: 
A.  A brief description of the violation; 
B.  Date and location of the violation(s) and the approximate time the violation(s) was observed; 
C.  Code section(s) violated; 
D.  Description of corrective action required; 
E.  A statement explaining that each day constitutes a new violation; 
F.  The amount of civil penalty imposed for the violation(s); 
G.  A statement advising that the fine shall be paid to the city within thirty (30) days from the date on the administrative citation, procedure for payment, and the consequences of failure to pay; and 
H.  A statement describing the responsible party's rights of appeal. 
(Ord. 809 (part), 2002)  
1.16.090 - Appeal of administrative citation. 
A.  Persons receiving an administrative citation may appeal it within ten (10) calendar days from the date the citation is served. The appeal must be in writing and must indicate a return address. It must be accompanied by the penalty amount, specifying the basis for the appeal in detail, and must be filed with the city as indicated in the administrative citation. If the deadline falls any day city hall is closed, then the deadline shall be extended until the next regular business day. 
B.  As soon as practicable after receiving the written notice of appeal, the city agency shall fix a date, time and place for hearing before a hearing officer. Written notice of the time and place for the hearing may be served by first class mail, at the return address indicated on the written appeal. Service of the appeal notice must be made at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing to the party appealing the citation. 
C.  The failure of any person with an interest in the property, or other responsible party, to receive such properly addressed notice of the hearing shall not affect the validity of any proceedings under this chapter. Service by first class mail, postage prepaid shall be effective on the date of mailing. 
D.  Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of this section shall constitute a waiver of that person's rights to administrative determination of the merits of the citation and the amount of the penalty. If no appeal is filed, the citation shall be deemed a final administrative order. 
E.  A hearing officer shall be designated by the city manager for all appeal hearings under this chapter. The respondent may request the city manager recuse a hearing officer for reasons of actual prejudice against the party's cause. The hearing officer shall conduct an orderly fair hearing and accept evidence on which persons would commonly rely in the conduct of their ordinary business affairs as follows: 
1.  A valid citation shall be prima facie evidence of the violation; 
2.  The hearing officer shall accept testimony by declaration under penalty of perjury relating to the violation and the appropriate means of correcting the violation; 
3.  The owner, agent, person responsible for the violation, or any other interested person may present testimony or evidence concerning the violation and the means and time frame for correction. 
F.  The city manager shall establish all appropriate administrative regulations for implementing this chapter, conducting hearings and rendering decisions pursuant to this section. 
G.  The hearing officer may reduce, waive or conditionally reduce the penalties stated in a citation or any late fees assessed if mitigating circumstances are shown and the hearing officer states specific grounds for reduction or waiver in the written decision. The hearing officer may impose conditions and deadlines for correction of violations or payment of outstanding penalties. 
H.  The failure of the appellant or duly authorized representative to appear at the hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of the fine and a failure to exhaust the appellant's administrative remedies. 
I.  The hearing officer shall make findings based on the record of the hearing and make a written decision based on the findings. The city shall preserve all exhibits submitted by the parties and shall serve the decision by first class mail on the respondent within ten (10) working days after the hearing. The decision of the hearing officer dismissing the citation is final and conclusive. The decision of the hearing officer affirming the citation is final and conclusive, subject only to review by the superior court in accordance with state law pursuant to an appeal to superior court filed by the appellant within twenty (20) days of the date that the citation is deemed a final administrative order. There are no appeals to the city council. 
(Ord. 809 (part), 2002)  
1.16.100 - Penalties assessed. 
A.  The penalty amount shall be assessed at a rate as adopted by resolution of the city council. 
B.  If the violator or property owner fails to correct the violation, subsequent administrative citations may be issued for the same violation(s). 
C.  Payment of the penalty shall not excuse the failure to correct the violation nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city. 
D.  All penalties assessed shall be payable to the city. 
E.  The failure of any person to pay a penalty assessed by administrative citation within the time specified on the citation pursuant to Section 1.16.080(g) shall result in the assessment of an additional late fee. The amount of the late fee shall be one hundred (100) percent of the total amount of the administrative penalty owed. 
F.  The failure of any person to pay a penalty assessed by administrative citation with the time specified on the citation constitutes a debt to the city. To enforce that debt, the city may file a civil action, impose a special assessment as set forth below, or pursue any other legal remedy to collect such money. 
G.  The city may impose a special assessment against the property that is the subject of a citation if the citation has been issued to the property owner. The city shall record a notice of lien in the office of the county recorder when the special assessment procedure is used. When so made and confirmed, the cost shall constitute a lien on that property for the amount of the assessment. After confirmation and recordation, a copy shall be turned over to the Los Angeles county tax collector. At that point, it will be the duty of the tax collector to add the amounts of the respective assessments to the next regular property tax bills levied against the lots and parcels of land for municipal purposes. Those amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary property taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and procedures under foreclosure and sale as provided for with ordinary municipal taxes. Or, after recording, the lien may be foreclosed by judicial or other sale in the manner and means provided by law. 
(Ord. 809 (part), 2002)  
1.16.110 - Allocation of administrative penalties. 
Penalties collected in the manner described in this section shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. 809 (part), 2002)  
1.16.120 - Civil or criminal actions not affected. 
Any administrative citation pursuant to this section shall not prejudice or adversely affect any other action, civil or criminal, that may be brought to abate the public nuisance or violation or to seek compensation for damages suffered. A civil or criminal action may be brought concurrently with any other process regarding the same public nuisance or violation. 
(Ord. 809 (part), 2002)  
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL  
Chapter 2.04 - CITY COUNCIL 
 
2.04.010 - Council meeting place. 
The permanent meeting place for the city council is established as the council chamber of the Lancaster city hall, or in such other place within the city limits to which said meeting may be adjourned. If by reason of fire, flood, or other emergency, including anticipated overcrowding of the council chamber, it shall be unsafe to meet in the regular council chamber, the meeting may be held for the duration of the emergency at such other place as is designated by the mayor, or, if he/she should fail to act, by three members of the city council. 
(Prior code § 2-4.1)  
2.04.020 - Selection of vice mayor. 
At the first regular meeting following the presentation of the canvass of returns, the mayor shall appoint one (1) council member as vice mayor, subject to approval of a majority of the city council. The vice mayor shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and may be removed from the appointed position at the discretion of the mayor, subject to approval of a majority of the city council. All vacancies for the position of vice mayor shall be filled in accordance with the appointment procedure set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 717 § 1, 1995: prior code § 2-4.2) 
(Ord. No. 922, § 1, 5-26-2009; Ord. No. 998, § 1, 6-24-2014; Ord. No. 1033, § 7, 9-26-2017 )  
2.04.030 - City council salaries. 
According to the provisions of Government Code Section 36516, the city council salary is established at six hundred dollars ($600.00) per month and in accordance with provisions of Government Code Section 36516.1, the salary of the mayor is established at six hundred dollars ($600.00) per month inclusive of the amount received as member of the city council. 
The mayor and each city council member shall be eligible to participate in any continuing education and/or tuition reimbursement program the city offers to city employees in the same manner and pursuant to the same rules as city employees, except that the mayor and each city council member shall be eligible for a maximum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per fiscal year in reimbursements. Any amount reimbursed to or for the benefit of the mayor or a city council member pursuant to the city's tuition reimbursement program shall be in addition to the salary provided in the preceding paragraph and shall be considered compensation as authorized by Section 203 of the city's Charter. 
(Ord. 717 § 2, 1995: Ord. 683 § 2, 1995: prior code § 2-4.3) 
( Ord. No. 1031, § 1, 9-12-2017 )  
2.04.040 - Vacancies. 
A.  A vacancy shall exist on the city council or in the office of the mayor, and shall be declared by the city council, upon the occurrence of any of the events enumerated in the provisions of the California Government Code pertaining to vacancies in public offices. 
B.  Within ninety (90) days of the city council declaring a vacancy on the city council pursuant to this section, the mayor, with the consent of the city council, shall fill such vacancy by appointment. The person appointed to fill a vacant council seat holds office until the end of the former council member's term, at which time it will be filled by election. 
C.  In the event the office of the mayor is declared by the city council to be vacant, the powers and duties of the mayor shall immediately and automatically transfer to and vest in the council member serving as the vice-mayor pursuant to Section 2.04.020, who shall serve as acting mayor until the next general municipal election. The acting mayor shall appoint a person, subject to approval of a majority of the city council, who shall serve as a council member until the next general municipal election. The powers and duties of the mayor shall remain vested in the acting mayor until the next general municipal election, at which time the office of mayor will be filled by election. The person elected to the office of mayor shall hold the office for a full term. 
D.  To the extent consistent with the terms of the city's charter and this Section 2.04.040, provisions of the California Government Code pertaining to filling vacancies in public offices shall apply. 
(Ord. 734, § 1, 1997; Ord. 717, § 3, 1995; Ord. 683, § 3, 1995; prior code, § 2-4.4) 
(Ord. No. 967, § 1, 7-12-2011; Ord. No. 998, § 2, 6-24-2014)  
2.04.050 - Filing fee required for candidates for elective offices. 
A.  Amount. A filing fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) is established for candidates' nomination papers for elective offices at municipal elections held in the city. 
B.  Payment. The filing fee shall be paid to the city clerk by each candidate for an elective office at the time the candidate's nomination paper is filed with the city clerk. 
C.  Disposition. The city clerk shall pay to the city treasurer all fees received which shall be deposited in the general fund. 
(Prior code § 2-4.5)  
2.04.060 - Local expense allowance. 
Members of the city council shall be entitled to receive six hundred dollars ($600.00) each month, as an allowance for expenses incurred when fulfilling the duties of the elected office, including using their personal automobile for local travel for official business. As used in this section, "local travel" means travel by personal automobile within the boundaries of the city and within fifteen (15) miles thereof. The city council hereby determines that such monthly allowance represents the actual and necessary expenses incurred by the mayor and city council members in the performance of official duties." 
(Prior code § 2-4.14) 
(Ord. No. 1017, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1017, § 1, adopted December 13, 2016, amended § 2.04.060 to read as set out herein. Previously § 2.04.060 was titled "Local travel expense reimbursement."  
2.04.070 - Election campaigns, voluntary expenditure ceiling. 
A.  Pursuant to Government Code Section 85400(c), a voluntary expenditure ceiling is established for each candidate for each election to city elective office in an amount not to exceed seventy-five cents ($0.75) per resident. 
B.  Prior to accepting any contributions, each candidate for city elective office shall file with the city clerk a statement of acceptance or rejection of the voluntary expenditure ceiling established herein. 
C.  No candidate for city elective office who accepts the voluntary expenditure ceiling established herein and no controlled campaign committee of such a candidate shall make campaign expenditure in excess of the voluntary expenditure ceiling established herein. 
D.  Each candidate who rejects the voluntary expenditure ceiling established by this chapter shall be subject to the contribution limit set forth in Government Code Section 85301, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
E.  Each candidate who accepts the voluntary expenditure ceiling established in this section shall be subject to the contribution limit set forth in Government Code Section 85402, and not the contribution limit set forth in Government Code Section 85301, as either section may be amended from time to time. In addition, as to each such candidate, the city clerk shall provide notification to voters that the candidate has accepted the voluntary expenditure ceiling established herein, as required by Government Code Section 85602 and applicable regulations adopted pursuant to that section. 
F.  Except as provided herein, the provisions of the California Political Reform Act of 1974, the California Political Reform Act of 1996, Government Code Sections 81000, et seq., and applicable regulations adopted pursuant to such acts, as the same may be amended from time to time, shall govern the interpretation and application of this chapter. 
G.  The penalties and remedies for violations of this section shall be those set forth in the provisions of the California Political Reform Act of 1974, the California Reform Act of 1996, Government Code Sections 81000, et seq., and applicable regulations adopted pursuant to such acts. 
(Ord. 734 § 2, 1997)  
2.04.080 - Deputy mayor. 
The mayor, with the concurrence of the city council, may appoint a deputy mayor to assist the mayor in carrying out the mayor's public ceremonial functions and to attend, on behalf of the mayor, meetings of private, public and civic organizations and other entities. The deputy mayor shall not have any authority to take any official actions on behalf of the mayor or city council without specific written authorization from the mayor and/or council. The deputy mayor shall be paid a monthly honorarium of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) and eligibility for individual health insurance through the city's group health insurance plan. The deputy mayor shall not in any way supersede the authority of any council member present at a meeting of a civic organization or other entity. Any council member present at a meeting of a civic organization or other entity shall be the official representative of the city in the absence of the mayor or vice mayor. 
(Ord. No. 944, § 1, 6-22-2010; Ord. No. 986, § 3, 2-12-2013; Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 9-12-2017 )  
2.04.090 - Mayor emeritus. 
The mayor, with the concurrence of a majority of the city council, may appoint one or more persons who have previously served as mayor of the city to act as a mayor emeritus. A mayor emeritus may represent the city during ceremonial and other events, when the mayor and/or city council members cannot attend. A mayor emeritus shall not have any authority to take any official actions on behalf of the mayor or city council without specific written authorization from the mayor and/or city council. A mayor emeritus shall serve for a term of two years from the date of appointment or until a successor has been appointed and approved. A mayor emeritus may be reappointed for additional terms. 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 11, 2-10-2015)  
Chapter 2.08 - CITY MANAGER 
 
2.08.010 - Office created. 
The office of the city manager is created and established. The city manager shall be appointed by the city council wholly on the basis of his administrative and executive ability and qualifications, and shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the city council. 
(Prior code § 2-1.1)  
2.08.020 - Councilmember—Eligibility. 
No person elected as a councilman of the city shall, subsequent to such election, be eligible for appointment as city manager until one year has elapsed after such councilmember shall have ceased to be a member of the city council. 
(Prior code § 2-1.2)  
2.08.030 - Bond. 
An executed corporate surety bond shall be furnished to the city manager to be approved by the city council in such sum as may be determined by the city council and shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the city manager as herein prescribed. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the city. 
(Prior code § 2-1.3)  
2.08.040 - Temporary manager. 
The city manager shall appoint, subject to the approval of the city council, one of the other officers or department heads of the city to serve as manager pro tem during any temporary absence or disability of the city manager. In case of the absence or disability of the city manager, and his failure to so appoint a manager pro tem, the city council may designate some qualified city employee to perform the duties of the city manager during the period of absence or disability of the city manager; subject, however, to such person furnishing a corporate surety bond conditioned upon faithful performance of the duties required to be performed, as set forth in Section 2.08.060. 
(Prior code § 2-1.4)  
2.08.050 - Compensation. 
The city manager shall receive such compensation and expense allowances as the city council shall from time to time determine and fix by resolution, and the compensation and expenses shall be a proper charge against such funds of the city as the city council shall designate. 
The city manager shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by him in the performance of his duties or incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the city under direction of the city council. Reimbursement shall only be made, however, when a verified itemized claim, setting forth the sums expended for such business for which reimbursement is requested, has been presented to the city council for approval. 
(Prior code § 2-1.5)  
2.08.060 - Powers and duties. 
The city manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the city, under the direction and control of the city council except as otherwise provided in this chapter. He shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city which are under his control. In addition to his general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be his duty and he shall have all the powers set forth in the following subsections: 
A.  Law Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the city manager to enforce all laws and ordinances of the city and to see that all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the city council are faithfully observed. 
B.  Authority Over Employees. It shall be the duty of the city manager, and he shall have the authority to control, order and give directions to all heads of departments and to subordinate officers and employees of the city under his jurisdiction through their department heads. 
C.  Power of Appointment, Etc. It shall be the duty of the city manager to appoint, remove, promote and demote any and all officers and department heads of the city except the city treasurer and the city attorney, who shall be appointed directly by the council. The city manager shall appoint, remove, promote and demote any and all city employees except as aforesaid, subject to such personnel policies and procedures as may be adopted by the city council. Not less than three business days prior to the effective date of any appointment made by the city manager with respect to department heads and other positions designated by the city council by resolution, the city manager shall provide written notice of such appointment to each member of the city council. 
D.  Reorganization of Offices, Etc. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the city manager to recommend to the city council such reorganization of offices, positions, departments or units under his direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the city's business. 
E.  Ordinances. It shall be the duty of the city manager to recommend to the city council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he deems necessary or expedient. 
F.  Attendance at Council Meetings. It shall be the duty of the city manager to attend all meetings of the city council unless excused therefrom, except when his removal is under consideration. 
G.  Financial Reports. It shall be the duty of the city manager to keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial conditions and needs of the city. 
H.  Budget. It shall be the duty of the city manager to prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to the city council for its approval. 
I.  Purchasing Agent. It shall be the duty of the city manager and he shall be responsible for the purchase of all supplies for all of the three departments or divisions of the city. No expenditures shall be submitted or recommended to the city council except on report and approval of the city manager. 
J.  Investigations. It shall be the duty of the city manager to make investigations into the affairs of the city and any department or division thereof, and any contract or the proper performance of any obligation of the city. 
K.  Public Utilities—Franchises. It shall be the duty of the city manager to investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the city, and to see that all franchise permits granted by the city are faithfully performed and observed. 
L.  Public Buildings. It shall be the duty of the city manager to exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks and all other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the city council. 
M.  Hours of Employment. It shall be the duty of the city manager to devote his entire working time to the duties of his office in the interests of the city, except as authorized in personnel resolutions. 
N.  Additional Duties. It shall be the duty of the city manager to perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other action of the city council. 
O.  Council-Manager Relations. The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city manager, except for the purpose of inquiry; and neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager. The city manager shall take his orders and instructions from the city council only when sitting in a duly held meeting of the city council, and no individual councilman shall give any orders, or instructions to the city manager. Nothing in this section, however, shall prevent any member of the city council from discussing with the city manager any matter of general public interest or concern relative to the proper operations of the city; of the needs, problems or projects thereof. 
P.  Departmental Cooperation. It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers and the city treasurer and city attorney to assist the city manager in administering the affairs of the city efficiently, economically and harmoniously so far as may be consistent with their duties as prescribed by law and ordinances of the city. 
Q.  Attendance at Commission Meetings. The city manager may attend any and all meetings of commissions, boards or committees hereafter created by the city council, upon his own volition or upon direction of the city council. At such meetings which the city manager attends, he shall be heard by such commissioners, boards or committees as to all matters upon which he wishes to address the members thereof, and he shall inform the members as to the status of any matter being considered by the city council, and he shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the members of all commissions, boards or committees appointed by the city council. 
R.  Removal of Manager. The removal of the city manager shall be only upon a majority vote of the whole council of the city, seated in regular council meeting; subject, however, to the provisions of this subsection. In case of his intended removal by the city council, the city manager shall be furnished with a written notice stating the council's intention to remove him and the reason therefor, at least thirty (30) days before the effective date of his removal. 
1.  Hearing. Within seven days after the delivery to the city manager of such notice, he may, by written notification to the city clerk, request a hearing before the city council. Thereafter, the city council shall fix a time for the hearing which shall be held at its usual meeting place, but before the expiration of the thirty (30) day time period, at which the city manager shall appear and be heard, with or without counsel. 
2.  Suspension Pending Hearing. After furnishing the city manager with written notice of intended removal, the city council may suspend him from duty, but his compensation shall continue until his removal by resolution of the city council passed subsequent to the aforesaid hearing unless written waiver therefor by the city manager has been filed with the city clerk. 
3.  Discretion of Council. In removing the city manager, the city council shall use its uncontrolled discretion and its action shall be final and shall not depend upon any particular showing or degree of proof at the hearing; the purpose of which is to allow the city manager to present to the city council his grounds of opposition to his removal prior to its action. 
4.  Limitation on Removal. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section hereinbefore enumerated, the city manager shall not be removed from office during or within a period of ninety (90) days next succeeding any general municipal election held in the city at which election a member of the city council is elected, except for cause when the manager may be asked to vacate his office while his salary continues for the aforestated ninety (90) day period; the purpose of this provision being to allow any newly elected members of the city council or a reorganized city council to observe the actions and ability of the city manager in the performance of the powers and duties of his office. After the expiration of the ninety (90) day period aforementioned, the provisions of the preceding action as to the removal of the city manager shall apply and be effective, with the exception of the "for cause" provision. 
S.  Execute Contracts. It is and shall be the duty of the city manager to execute contracts, agreements, deeds, leases and other documents as authorized, delegated and/or instructed by the city council. 
T.  Promulgation of Regulations. The city manager or his/her designee is authorized to promulgate rules, regulations, policies and procedures to implement the provisions of this code. 
(Ord. 683 § 1, 1995; prior code § 2-1.6) 
(Ord. No. 998, § 3, 6-24-2014)  
Chapter 2.12 - CITY OFFICES 
 
2.12.010 - Assessor and tax collector. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 51501 of the Government Code of the state of California, the assessment and tax collection duties performed by the city assessor and tax collector are transferred to the assessor and tax collector of the county of Los Angeles. 
(Prior code § 2-4.25)  
2.12.020 - City clerk—Duties. 
Any applications required to be filed with the city or fees required to be paid to the city, pursuant to the provisions of this code, shall be filed with or paid to the city clerk or the deputy city clerk unless otherwise by this code provided. 
(Prior code § 2-4.30)  
2.12.030 - City clerk—Bond. 
The city clerk and/or the deputy city clerk upon the entry to his duties of office shall execute a bond to the city in conformity with bonds of public officers, and in conformity with the provisions of the Government Code of the state of California relating thereto, in a sum as may be set by the city council. 
(Prior code § 2-4.31)  
2.12.040 - Finance director—City treasurer. 
The director of finance appointed by the city manager shall be designated as the treasurer of the city. The finance director shall perform all of the duties of the Treasurer as set forth in the California Government Code, including, but not limited to, those set forth in Chapter 3 of Part 3 of Division 3 of Title 4 of the California Government Code (commencing with Section 41001) as it may be amended from time to time. The finance director, upon the entry of office shall execute a bond to the city in conformity with bonds of public officers, and in conformity with the provisions of the Government Code of the state of California relating thereto, in a sum as may be set by the city council. 
(Ord. 842 § 1, 2005: prior code § 2-4.32)  
2.12.050 - Removal of papers or documents from the city offices. 
No person unless authorized by the city clerk, mayor or city attorney, shall remove any papers or documents from the city offices. 
(Prior code § 2-4.33)  
2.12.060 - Bonds for city officers. 
A.  In accordance with Section 36518 of the Government Code of the state of California, bonds shall be required of city officers and employees in penal sums as follows: 
1.  City clerk: one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00); 
2.  Deputy or assistant city clerk or clerks: one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00); 
3.  City treasurer: one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00); 
4.  Deputy city treasurer: one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00); 
5.  City manager: one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00); 
6.  Any assistant city manager or deputy city manager: one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
B.  All other officers and employees of this city shall be covered by an honesty position bond issued by a surety company authorized to do business in the state of California, for the faithful performance of the duties of their respective offices or employment, in the aggregate penal sum of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for all such employees. If any person fills two or more of the above-described offices, then only one bond shall be required for such person in an amount equal to the greatest sum required for any of such offices held. 
C.  Premiums. The premiums for such bonds shall be paid from the city's general fund. 
(Prior code § 2-4.36)  
2.12.065 - Insurance policy as alternative to official bond. 
A.  As an alternative to any bond required by this chapter, a government crime insurance policy or employee dishonesty insurance policy, including faithful performance, may be provided. 
B.  Pursuant to Sections 1463 and 1481 of the California Government Code, an insurance policy procured pursuant to this section may be used as a master bond as though it were an official bond. 
C.  An insurance policy procured pursuant to this section must provide coverage to the same extent, in the same amount and on substantially similar terms as the bonds required by Section 2.12.060 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 867 § 1, 2007)  
2.12.070 - Compensation—Officers and employees.* 
The salaries and compensation of officers and employees of the city shall be as fixed and determined by resolution of the city council, except those fixed in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 2-3.1) 
* For salary grades and ranges, wages, compensation and fees of all officers and employees of the city, see annual salary ordinance of the city. Such ordinances are not included in this code, but are saved from repeal in the adopting ordinance.  
2.12.080 - Compensation—City clerk. 
The office of city clerk may be consolidated with that of city manager and in such case the city clerk shall not receive a salary. However, the city council shall by resolution establish the salary of the officer who shall be both city manager and city clerk. 
(Prior code § 2-3.2)  
2.12.090 - California Public Employees' Retirement System—Contract and amendment authorized. 
A contract and an amendment to the contract between the city council of the city of Lancaster, California, and the Board of Administration, California Public Employees' Retirement System is authorized, a copy of the amendment being attached to the ordinance codified in this section, marked "Exhibit A," and by such reference made a part hereof as though herein set out in full. The mayor of the city council is authorized, empowered, and directed to execute this amendment for and on behalf of the agency. 
(Prior code § 2-3.3)  
Chapter 2.16 - REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
 
2.16.010 - Preamble. 
Pursuant to Section 33100 of the Health and Safety Code of the state of California, there is in the city a public body, corporate and politic, known as the redevelopment agency of the community; and pursuant to Section 33101 of the Health and Safety Code of the state of California, said redevelopment agency is not permitted to transact any business or exercise any powers unless the city council of the city by ordinance declares that there is a need for said agency to function in the community; and the city council of the city has found that there exists within said city blighted areas, which constitute either physical, social or economic liabilities and which may require redevelopment in the interest of health, safety, and general welfare of the people of said city. 
(Prior code § 2-7.30)  
2.16.020 - Need for redevelopment agency established. 
There is a need for a redevelopment agency to function in this community, and such agency is permitted to transact any business and to exercise any powers conferred thereon by the provisions of the Community Redevelopment Law (Part 1, commencing with Section 33000, of Division 24 of the Health and Safety Code of the state of California). 
(Prior code § 2-7.31)  
2.16.030 - City council to serve as redevelopment agency. 
Pursuant to Section 33200 of the Health and Safety Code of the state of California, the city council of the city finds that the appointment of the city council as the members of the agency will serve the public interest and promote the public safety and welfare in an effective manner and, therefore, the city council of the city is declared to be the redevelopment agency, and all the rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities which are vested by the Community Redevelopment Law in such an agency shall be vested in said city council, except as otherwise provided by the Community Redevelopment Law. 
(Prior code § 2-7.32)  
Chapter 2.24 - PLANNING COMMISSION 
 
2.24.010 - Creation. 
There is created a planning commission for the city composed of at least five and not to exceed seven commissioners who shall be residents of the city and selected in a manner to provide representation from the entire city. These commissioners shall be appointed by the city council of the city and shall serve with compensation to be established by the city council. No commissioner shall be a member of the Lancaster city council. In the selection of any commissioner to the planning commission, the city council may take into consideration a candidate's community service and compatibility with other commissioners. 
(Ord. 899 § 2 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
2.24.020 - Administration. 
The planning commission is vested with the duty of making decisions on conditional use permits, tentative tract/parcel maps and other land use applications, advising city council on general plan amendments, zoning changes and zoning code amendments, and other duties as authorized, delegated and/or instructed by the city council. 
(Ord. 899 § 2 (Exh. A (part)), 2008) 
(Ord. No. 998, § 4, 6-24-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 998, § 4, adopted June 24, 2014, amended the title of § 2.24.020 to read as set out herein. Previously § 2.24.020 was titled administration and enforcement.  
2.24.030 - Term of office. 
All commissioners of the planning commission shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to approval of a majority of the city council. Each commissioner's term shall be concurrent with the term of the appointing mayor and shall be automatically extended in the event the appointing mayor is re-elected as mayor. Nothing contained in this section is intended to preclude the reappointment of any planning commissioner upon the expiration of his or her term and all commissioners of the planning commission shall serve at the will of the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. 899 § 2 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
2.24.040 - Chairman and vice-chairman. 
The commissioners of the Lancaster planning commission shall, by election, select their own chairman to preside over their meetings, and their own vice-chairman, to preside in the absence of the chairman. 
(Ord. 899 § 2 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
2.24.050 - Vacancy on the planning commission. 
Any vacancy occurring on the planning commission shall be filled by an appointment made by the mayor, subject to approval of a majority of the city council. Any person appointed to fill such vacancy shall serve for the remainder of the term of the commissioner whose office has been vacated. 
(Ord. 899 § 2 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
2.24.060 - Removal from office. 
Whenever, in the opinion of the mayor or upon a vote of a majority of the city council, the best interests of the city shall be served thereby, any commissioner of the planning commission may be removed from office by the mayor or by a majority vote of the city council. 
(Ord. 899 § 2 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
2.24.070 - Absence from meetings. 
If a commissioner is absent without cause from three (3) regular meetings of the planning commission during any calendar year, the mayor, subject to approval of a majority of the city council, may deem said commissioner's appointment immediately terminated, and may fill the vacancy in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 899 § 2 (Exh. A (part)), 2008) 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 1, 2-10-2015)  
2.24.080 - Meetings. 
The planning commission shall hold one regular meeting per month, which meeting shall be held at the Lancaster City Hall Council Chamber located at 44933 North Fern Avenue, Lancaster, California. The timing and date of such meeting shall be established by resolution of the planning commission. 
(Ord. 899 § 2 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
2.24.090 - Expenses. 
The commissioners of the Lancaster city planning commission shall be entitled to reimbursement for all necessary and proper expenses incurred by them in the performance of their duties as members of said planning commission. 
(Ord. 899 § 2 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
Chapter 2.26 - LOBBYIST REGISTRATION 
 
2.26.010 - Definitions. 
The following phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as defined in this section: 
"Activity expense" means any expense incurred or payment made by a city lobbyist, city lobbying firm, or city lobbyist employer or arranged by a city lobbyist, city lobbying firm or city lobbyist employer, which benefits in whole or in part any city official or a member of the immediate family of a city official, regardless of whether the expense or payment is reimbursed by the person on whose behalf the city lobbying services are performed. Activity expenses include gifts, honoraria, consulting fees, salaries, and any other form of compensation, but do not include campaign contributions. 
"City" means the city of Lancaster, the Lancaster redevelopment agency, the Lancaster housing authority or the Lancaster financing authority. 
"City lobbying firm" means any corporation, partnership, company, limited liability company, syndicate or other business entity, including an individual city lobbyist, which receives or becomes entitled to receive any compensation or economic consideration, other than reimbursement for reasonable travel expenses, for the purpose of influencing official action on behalf of any other person, if either (1) any partner, owner, officer or employee of the business entity is a city lobbyist, or a substantial or regular portion of the activities for which the business entity receives compensation or (2) economic consideration is for the purpose of influencing official action. No business entity shall be considered a city lobbying firm by reason of activities expressly exempted from the definition of city lobbyist set forth in this section. 
"City lobbyist" means any individual who is employed, contracts or otherwise receives compensation or other economic consideration, other than reimbursement for reasonable travel expenses, to communicate directly, or through agents, employees or subcontractors, with any city official for the purpose of influencing official action, if a substantial or regular portion of the activities for which he or she receives such compensation or other economic consideration is for the purpose of influencing official action. Provided, however, a city lobbyist shall not include: 
1.  An elected or appointed public official or public employee when acting in his or her official capacity as an elected or appointed public official or public employee; 
2.  Any newspaper or other periodical of general circulation, book publisher, radio or television station (including any individual who owns, publishes, or is employed by any such newspaper or periodical, radio or television station) which in the ordinary course of business publishes news items, editorials, or other comments, or paid advertisements, which directly or indirectly urge official action if such newspaper, periodical, book publisher, radio or television station or individual, engages in no further or other activities in connection with urging official action other than to appear before the city council in support of or in opposition to such action; 
3.  An individual licensed or regulated by a state-controlled entity or organization and whose attempts to influence official action are limited solely to actions taken as an attorney, real estate broker, engineer or architect representing a client with respect to any official action; 
4.  An individual or entity who represents a duly organized not-for-profit charitable, religious, civic, patriotic or community service organization; or 
5.  An individual or entity whose activity is limited to acting on behalf of an applicant for a permit or license to provide translation services. 
"City lobbyist employer" means a person or entity, other than a city lobbying firm, who, for compensation or economic consideration other than reimbursement for reasonable travel expenses, continuously employs or contracts for a period of one year or more the services of a city lobbyist or city lobbying firm, for the purpose of influencing official action. 
"City official" means any elected or appointed city officer, member, employee or consultant (who qualifies as a public official within the meaning of the Political Reform Act) of the city, who, as part of his or her official duties, participates in the consideration of any official action of the city other than in a purely clerical, secretarial or ministerial capacity. 
"Gift" means any payment to the extent that consideration of equal or greater value is not received and includes a rebate or discount in the price of anything of value unless the rebate or discount is made in the regular course of business to members of the public without regard to official status. Any person claiming a payment is not a gift due to consideration received has the burden of proving that such consideration is of equal or greater value. Provided, however, the term "gift" shall not include: 
1.  Informational material such as books, reports, pamphlets, calendars, or periodicals, except that no payment for travel or reimbursement for any expenses shall be deemed informational material; 
2.  Gifts which are not used and which, within thirty (30) days after receipt, are returned to the donor or delivered to a charitable organization without being claimed as a charitable contribution for tax purposes; 
3.  Gifts from an individual's spouse, child, parent, grandparent, grandchild, brother, sister, parent-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, nephew, niece, aunt, uncle or first cousin, or the spouse of any such person, except that a gift from any such person shall be considered a gift if the donor is acting as an agent or intermediary for any person not covered by this paragraph; 
4.  Campaign contributions required to be reported under Fair Political Practices Act; 
5.  Any devise or inheritance; or 
6.  Personalized plaques and trophies with an individual value of less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
"Influencing official action" means promoting, supporting, influencing, modifying, opposing or delaying any official action by any means, including but not limited to the provision or use of information, statistics, studies or analyses. 
"Official action" means the drafting, introduction, consideration, modification, enactment or defeat of any ordinance, resolution or motion, or the granting or denial of any contract, amendment, application, appeal, permit, petition, grant, license or franchise. "Official action" does not include the following: 
1.  A request for advice or for an interpretation of laws, regulations, city approvals or policies, or a direct response to an enforcement proceeding with the city; and 
2.  Any ministerial action. 
(Ord. 884 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
2.26.020 - City lobbyist registration. 
Unless included either as part of the registration of a city lobbying firm filed pursuant to Section 2.26.030, or as part of the registration of a city lobbyist employer filed pursuant to Section 2.26.040, each city lobbyist, within ten (10) days of first becoming a city lobbyist, shall file with the city clerk a registration statement containing the following information: 
A.  A recent three-inch by four-inch photograph of the city lobbyist; 
B.  The city lobbyist's full name, business address and telephone number; 
C.  A statement that the lobbyist has read and understands the prohibitions contained in Sections 2.26.130 and 2.26.140; and 
D.  Such other information required by the city, as determined from time to time by the city council, consistent with the provisions and purposes of this chapter. 
Each lobbyist required to file a registration statement under this chapter shall be charged a registration fee in the amount to be established by city council resolution. 
(Ord. 884 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
2.26.030 - City lobbying firm registration. 
Each city lobbying firm, within ten (10) days of first becoming a city lobbying firm, shall file with the city clerk a registration statement containing the following information: 
A.  The full name, business address and telephone number of the city lobbying firm; 
B.  A list of the city lobbyists who are partners, owners, officers, or employees of the city lobbying firm; 
C.  The city lobbyist registration statement(s) required by Section 2.26.020 for each city lobbyist in the city lobbying firm; 
D.  For each person or other entity with whom the city lobbying firm contracts for the city lobbying firm to provide city lobbying services: 
1.  The full name, business address and telephone number of the contractor; 
2.  The contractor's written, signed authorization permitting the city lobbying firm to represent the interests of the contractor; 
3.  The time period of the contract; 
4.  If the contractor is an individual, the name and address of his or her employer, if any, or his or her principal place of business if he or she is self-employed, and a description of the business activity in which the contractor or his or her employer is engaged; 
5.  If the contractor is a business entity, a description of the business activity in which it is engaged; 
6.  If the contractor is an industry, trade or professional association, a description of the industry, trade or profession it represents, including a specific description of any portion or faction of the industry, trade or profession which the association exclusively or primarily represents and, if the association has not more than fifty (50) members, the names of the members; 
7.  If the contractor is not an individual, business entity, or industry trade or professional association, a statement of the contractor's nature and purposes, including a description of any industry, trade, profession, or other group with a common economic interest which the contractor principally represents or from which its membership or financial support is principally derived; 
8.  The city lobbying interests of the contractor. 
E.  The name and title of a partner, owner or officer of the city lobbying firm who is responsible for filing statements and reports and keeping records required by this chapter on behalf of the city lobbying firm; 
F.  Such other information required by the city, as determined from time to time by the city council, consistent with the provisions and purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 884 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
2.26.040 - City lobbyist employer registration. 
Each city lobbyist employer, within ten (10) days of first becoming a city lobbyist employer, shall file with the city clerk a registration statement containing the following information: 
A.  The full name, business address, and telephone number of the city lobbyist employer; 
B.  A list of the city lobbyists who are employed by the city lobbyist employer; 
C.  The city lobbyist registration statement(s) required by Section 2.26.020 for each city lobbyist employed by the city lobbyist employer; 
D.  If the city lobbyist employer is an individual, the name and address of his or her principal place of business and a description of the business activity in which he or she is engaged; 
E.  If the city lobbyist employer is a business entity, a description of the business activity in which it is engaged; 
F.  If the city lobbyist employer is an industry, trade or professional association, a description of the industry, trade or profession it represents, including a specific description of any portion or faction of the industry, trade or profession which the association exclusively or primarily represents and, if the association has not more than fifty (50) members, the names of the members; 
G.  If the city lobbyist employer is not an individual, business entity, or industry, trade or professional association, a statement of the city lobbyist employer's nature and purposes, including a description of any industry, trade, profession, or other group with a common economic interest which the city lobbyist employer principally represents or from which its membership or financial support is principally derived; 
H.  The city lobbying interests of the city lobbyist employer; 
I.  Such other information required by the city, as determined from time to time by the city council, consistent with the provisions and purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 884 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
2.26.050 - Registration amendments and termination. 
A.  Within ten (10) days of any change in any of the registration information reported pursuant to Sections 2.26.020, 2.26.030 or 2.26.040, and before any attempt to influence official action on behalf of any previously unreported person or entity occurs, a city lobbyist, city lobbying firm or city lobbyist employer shall file with the city clerk an amended registration statement providing such revised registration information. 
B.  When a city lobbyist, city lobbying firm or city lobbyist employer ceases all activities related to influencing official action it shall file a notice of termination with the city clerk within twenty (20) days after such cessation. The city lobbyist, city lobbying firm or city lobbyist employer ceasing lobbying activities shall file with the notice of termination a final annual report providing the information required by Sections 2.26.060, 2.26.070 or 2.26.080, whichever is applicable, covering the period of time from April 1st to the date lobbying activity is ceased. 
(Ord. 884 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
2.26.060 - Annual reports—City lobbyists. 
Unless included either as part of a city lobbying firm annual report filed pursuant to Section 2.26.070 or as part of a city lobbyist employer annual report filed pursuant to Section 2.26.080, no later than April 1st of each year or upon filing a notice of termination as set forth in Section 2.26.050 above, each city lobbyist shall file with the city clerk a report of all activity expenses of the city lobbyist during the past year, including, for each such activity expense, the name and position of the beneficiary and of the payee if different than the beneficiary, and a description of the activity expense and its value. If the city lobbyist engaged in no activity as a city lobbyist during the past year, the report shall so indicate. 
(Ord. 884 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
2.26.070 - Annual reports—City lobbying firms. 
No later than April 1st of each year or upon the filing of a notice of termination as set forth in Section 2.26.050 above, each city lobbying firm shall file with the city clerk a report containing the information set forth in subsections A through F below, regarding the city lobbying firm activities during the past year. If the city lobbying firm engaged in no activity as a city lobbying firm during the past year, the report shall so indicate. 
A.  The full name, business address, and telephone number of the city lobbying firm; 
B.  The full name, business address, and telephone number of each person who contracted with the city lobbying firm for city lobbying services, a description of the specific city lobbying interests of the person, and the total payments, including fees and the reimbursement of expenses, received from the person for city lobbying services; 
C.  The total amount of all payments received for city lobbying services; 
D.  All activity expenses incurred by the city lobbying firm including, for each activity expense, the name of each person who made or arranged the activity expense, the name and position of the beneficiary and of the payee if different than the beneficiary, and a description of the activity expense and its value; 
E.  If the city lobbying firm subcontracts with another city lobbying firm or city lobbyist for city lobbying services: 
1.  The full name, address, and telephone number of the subcontractor, 
2.  The name of the person for whom the subcontractor was retained to lobby, 
3.  The total amount of payments made to the subcontractor; 
F.  The name and title of each partner, owner and employee of the city lobbying firm who, on at least three separate occasions during the past year, engaged in direct communication with city officials for the purpose of influencing official action on behalf of a person who contracts with the city lobbying firm for city lobbyist services. 
(Ord. 884 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
2.26.080 - Annual report—City lobbyist employers and others. 
No later than April 1st of each year or upon the filing of a notice of termination as set forth in Section 2.26.050 above, each city lobbyist employer shall file with the city clerk a report containing the information set forth in subsections A through E below, regarding the city lobbyist employer's activities during the past year. If the city lobbyist employer engaged in no activity as a city lobbyist employer during the past year, the report shall so indicate. Each person or entity who is not otherwise obligated to file an annual report as a city lobbyist, city lobbying firm or city lobbyist employer, but who directly or indirectly expends two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) or more to influence official action during the past year, shall also file a report containing the information set forth in subsections A through E below, no later than April 1st of each year: 
A.  The full name, business address, and telephone number of the filer; 
B.  The total amount of all payments made to a city lobbying firm; 
C.  The total amount of all payments made to city lobbyists employed by the filer; 
D.  All activity expenses incurred by the filer including, for each activity expense, the name of each person who made or arranged the activity expense, the name and the position of the beneficiary and of the payee if different than the beneficiary, and a description of the activity expense and its value; 
E.  The total of all other payments to influence official action, including overhead expenses, and all payments to employees who spend ten (10) percent or more of their compensated time in any one month in activities related to influencing official action. 
(Ord. 884 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
2.26.090 - Annual campaign contribution reports. 
No later than April 1st of each year or upon the filing of a notice of termination as set forth in Section 2.26.050 above, each city lobbyist, city lobbying firm and city lobbyist employer shall file with the city clerk an annual report containing the date, amount, and the name of the recipient of each contribution (as that term is defined in Section 2.24.020(A)(1) of this code) to an elected city official or candidate for elective city office where the total contribution was one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more during the past year. Said report may be made as a part of an annual report filed pursuant to Sections 2.26.060, 2.26.070 or 2.26.080, whichever is applicable. 
(Ord. 884 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
2.26.100 - Funding for reports and studies. 
Each city lobbyist, city lobbying firm and city lobbyist employer who submits any study, analysis or other report to any city official for the purpose of influencing official action, shall, along with the presentation of such study, analysis or other report, disclose in writing the identity of each person, firm or other entity who in whole or in part funded the development of such study, analysis or other report, and the amount of funding provided by each such person, firm or entity. 
(Ord. 884 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
2.26.110 - General prohibitions. 
A.  No city lobbyist or city lobbying firm shall do any of the following: 
1.  Do anything with the purpose of placing any city official under personal obligations to the city lobbyist, the city lobbying firm, or the city lobbyist employer; 
2.  Make a gift or gifts or act as an agent or intermediary in the making of any such gift or arrange for the making of any such gift by any other person to any city official aggregating more than fifty dollars ($50.00) in any calendar month or the amount specified in Government Code Section 89503 in any calendar year; 
3.  Enter into any arrangement for the purpose of employing or otherwise compensating any city official for any purpose; 
4.  Deceive or attempt to deceive any city official with regard to any material fact pertinent to any pending or proposed official action; 
5.  Cause or influence the introduction of any matter for consideration by the city as official action for the purpose of thereafter being employed to influence the occurrence or nonoccurrence of such official action; 
6.  Attempt to create a fictitious appearance of public favor or disfavor of any proposed official action or to cause any communication to be sent to any city official in the name of any fictitious person or in the name of any real person without the consent of such person; 
7.  Represent, either directly or indirectly, that the city lobbyist or city lobbying firm can control the official action of any city official; and 
8.  Accept or agree to accept any payment in any way contingent upon success by the city lobbyist or city lobbying firm in influencing official action. 
B.  No city official shall do any of the following: 
1.  Accept a gift or gifts from a city lobbyist or city lobbyist firm aggregating more than fifty dollars ($50.00) in any calendar month or the amount specified in Government Code Section 89503 in any calendar year; 
2.  Accept employment with or, enter into any arrangement for the purpose of providing services to, any city lobbyist or city lobbyist firm for any purpose. 
(Ord. 884 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
2.26.120 - Duties of city clerk/public records. 
A.  The information provided in registration statements and annual reports filed pursuant to this chapter shall be compiled by the city clerk and shall be forwarded to the city council and city manager not later than May 15th of each year. 
B.  All statements and reports filed with the city clerk shall be preserved by the city clerk for a period of five years from the date of filing. Such statements and reports required to be filed pursuant to this chapter shall be a public record subject to disclosure under the provisions of the California Public Records Act. 
(Ord. 884 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
2.26.130 - Recordkeeping. 
City lobbyists, city lobbying firms, and city lobbyist employers who receive payments, make payments or incur expenses or expect to receive payments, make payments or incur expenses in connection with activities which are reportable pursuant to this chapter shall keep such detailed accounts, records, bills and receipts as are necessary to allow them to make timely accurate reports of their activities as required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 884 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
2.26.140 - Filing fees. 
A.  Each city lobbyist, city lobbying firm and city lobbyist employer or other person or entity filing a registration statement pursuant to Sections 2.26.020, 2.26.030 or 2.26.040 shall pay a filing fee as may be established by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
B.  Each city lobbyist, city lobbying firm and city lobbyist employer or other person or entity filing an amended registration statement pursuant to Section 2.26.050 shall pay a filing fee as may be established by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
C.  Each city lobbyist, city lobbying firm and city lobbyist employer or other person or entity filing an annual report pursuant to Sections 2.26.060, 2.26.070 or 2.26.080 shall pay a filing fee as may be established by resolution of the city council from time to time. Notwithstanding the above, any city lobbyist, city lobbying firm or city lobbyist employer who files its registration statement with the city clerk within thirty (30) days of April 1st shall not be required to pay the annual report filing fee for that year. This provision shall not be construed to relieve any city lobbyist, city lobbying firm or city lobbyist employer from the obligation to file an annual report by April 1st, regardless of when a registration statement is filed. 
D.  If any such filing is made beyond its due date and after an investigation the city clerk concludes that the filer is in violation of any provision of this chapter, in addition to the regular filing fee set forth in this section, there shall be an additional fee as may be established by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
E.  No filing fee shall be required for filing a notice of termination or a final annual report as provided in Section 2.26.050 above. 
(Ord. 884 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
2.26.150 - Appearance before legislative body—Disclosure. 
A city lobbyist, representative of a city lobbying firm or city lobbyist employer, or other person subject to the requirements of this chapter shall, whenever appearing at a public meeting before the city council, planning commission or any other legislative body of the city for the purpose of influencing official action as a city lobbyist, or a representative of a city lobbying firm or city lobbyist employer, shall (i) publicly disclose to the legislative body his or her identity, (ii) publicly disclose his or her firm or employer, (iii) publicly disclose that he or she is appearing before the legislative body as a city lobbyist or representative of a city lobbying firm or city lobbyist employer, and (iv) publicly disclose the subject for which he or she is performing lobbying activity. 
(Ord. 884 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
2.26.160 - Enforcement. 
A.  Any person may file a charge with the city clerk that any city lobbyist, city lobbying firm, city lobbyist employer or other person or entity has violated any provision of this chapter. Upon receiving a charge that a person or entity has violated this chapter, the city clerk shall refer the alleged violation to the city council and city manager. 
B.  The city council shall set a hearing on the alleged violation and provide the alleged violator with not less than ten (10) days written notice prior to the hearing date. If the city council finds, after a public hearing where the alleged violator may be heard, that a violation of this chapter has occurred, the council may impose the following sanctions: 
1.  Each person who has failed to comply with the requirements of this chapter shall be refused permission to address the city council or any city commission, except on his or her own behalf, during such period as such failure to comply with this chapter continues; 
2.  Each person or entity on whose behalf the city lobbyist, city lobbying firm, city lobbyist employer or other person or entity acted in violation of this chapter shall be denied the city contract, amendment, application, permit, appeal, petition, grant, license or franchise which was the objective of the city lobbying activities performed in violation of this chapter; 
3.  Each person or entity who has failed to comply with the requirements of this chapter shall be liable in a civil action brought by the city for an amount up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each such failure to comply; 
4.  The registration of each city lobbyist, city lobbying firm or city lobbyist employer who fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter shall be terminated and such city lobbyist, city lobbying firm or city lobbyist employer shall not be permitted to again register as a city lobbyist, city lobbying firm or city lobbyist employer until such person has satisfied all other penalties imposed under this section. 
C.  In addition to the above sanctions, the city attorney may institute such legal action at such time as he or she deems necessary to prosecute, enjoin, or to redress a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  The city council may develop rules for the administration of this chapter by ordinance or resolution consistent with the provisions and purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 884 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
2.26.170 - Applicability of other laws. 
Nothing in this chapter shall exempt any city lobbyist, city lobbying firm, city lobbyist employer or other person subject to this chapter from, or excuse such person's noncompliance with applicable provisions of any other laws of the state or any other jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 884 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
Chapter 2.28 - YOUTH COMMISSION 
 
2.28.010 - Creation. 
There is created a youth commission for the city, composed of one (1) or more commission members from each of the high schools located in the city and the adjacent unincorporated area known as Quartz Hill. Selection of commission members will be made by each respective school and approved by a majority of the city council. The commission may appoint one (1) ad hoc member from each of the middle schools located within the city. Such ad hoc members shall not have voting privileges. 
(Ord. 736 § 1, 1997: Ord. 700 § 3 (part), 1995; Ord. 644 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 2-7.60) 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 2, 2-10-2015)  
2.28.020 - Purpose. 
The primary function of the youth commission is to act in an advisory capacity to the city council on any community issue or project having a direct or indirect affect on youth and to plan and implement projects to address a youth need or youth problem area in the community. 
(Ord. 700 § 3 (part), 1995; Ord. 644 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 2-7.61)  
2.28.030 - Terms of office of members—Filling vacancies eligibility. 
A.  Each commission member's term shall be one (1) year from the date of city council approval. Notwithstanding said term, a commission member shall serve until a successor has been approved. The city council may approve the reappointment of a commission member for additional terms. 
B.  All vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose office is vacant and shall be selected by the respective school whose member has vacated the position. The new appointee shall be approved by a majority of the city council. 
C.  Individuals shall attend and be members of the student body of their respective appointing high school. If an existing commission member drops out of school, his/her position as commissioner will be considered vacated and filled in the manner prescribed. If an existing commission member graduates from high school during his/her term, he/she will be permitted to fill out the remaining portion of his/her term of appointment. 
(Ord. 700 § 3 (part), 1995; Ord. 644 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 2-7.62) 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 3, 2-10-2015)  
2.28.040 - Chairman and vice-chairman. 
The commissioners of the youth commission shall by election select their own chairman to preside over their meetings and a vice-chairman to preside in the absence of the chairman. 
(Ord. 700 § 3 (part), 1995; Ord. 644 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 2-7.63)  
2.28.050 - Removal from office. 
Any member of the youth commission may be moved from office by a majority vote of the council whenever it is in the best interests of the city as determined by the city council. 
(Ord. 700 § 3 (part), 1995; Ord. 644 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 2-7.64)  
2.28.060 - Meetings. 
The youth commission shall hold one regular meeting per month, which shall be held at the date, time, and place approved by the director of parks, recreation and arts. A majority of the regular members shall constitute a quorum. 
(Ord. 787 § 1, 2000: Ord. 741 § 1, 1998: Ord. 700 § 3 (part), 1995; Ord. 644 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 2-7.65)  
2.28.070 - Absence from meetings. 
If a commission member is absent without cause from three (3) regular meetings of the youth commission during any calendar year, the mayor, subject to approval of a majority of the city council, may deem said commission member's appointment immediately terminated, and may fill the vacancy in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 700 § 3 (part), 1995; Ord. 644 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 2-7.66) 
(Ord. No. 1002, § 4, 2-10-2015)  
2.28.080 - No financial liability. 
Neither the commission nor any member thereof shall incur any financial liability in the name of the city. 
(Ord. 700 § 3 (part), 1995; Ord. 644 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 2-7.67)  
2.28.090 - City liaison. 
City staff from the parks, recreation and arts department will act as a liaison between the city and the youth commission. City staff will assist the commission in developing and preparing reports. 
(Ord. 700 § 3 (part), 1995; Ord. 644 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 2-7.68)  
2.28.100 - Project work plan. 
The youth commission shall annually prepare and submit a yearly project work plan outlining proposed activities, project items and events for the next fiscal year. The work plan would specifically identify objectives and action dates of each project. The project work plan is to be submitted for council approval. 
(Ord. 700 § 3 (part), 1995; Ord. 644 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 2-7.69)  
2.28.110 - Duties of the youth commission. 
The duties of the youth commission shall be as follows: 
A.  Develop a work plan that specifically identifies projects and/or issues. Include objectives and action dates. The work plan should include specific long-term projects such as a Youth Forum, Teen Faire, Job/Career Faire, etc.; 
B.  Advise, recommend, assist and encourage activities, programs and projects to be undertaken for and with the teenagers of the city; 
C.  Keep informed about and be familiar with the progress and development of community teen activities and programs, including social service programs; 
D.  Prepare regular status reports on youth programs and activities and submit appropriate reports to the city council. Include recommendations as to future action regarding these programs; 
E.  Identify and recruit businesses, organizations and technical sources for assistance in developing and implementing teen programs; 
F.  Develop an action plan for the promotion of teen programs and for increasing the involvement of teens in the creation, promotion and implementation of teen programs; 
G.  Periodically attend city council meetings. A minimum of four city council meetings per year, one per quarter, should be attended by representatives of the youth commission; 
H.  Other duties as assigned. 
(Ord. 700 § 3 (part), 1995; Ord. 644 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 2-7.69.1)  
Chapter 2.30 - CRIMINAL JUSTICE COMMISSION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1024, § 2, adopted June 27, 2017 , amended ch. 2.30, §§ 2.30.010—2.30.100, in its entirety, to read as set out herein. Former ch. 2.30, pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Ord. No. 904 §§ 1 (Exh. A (part)) 2, 4 (Exh. A (part)), adopted 2008; Ord. No. 909, §§ 4, 5, adopted October 28, 2008; Ord. No. 986, § 2, adopted February 12, 2013 and Ord. No. 1002, §§ 5, 6, adopted February 10, 2015. 
 
2.30.010 - Creation and purpose. 
There is created a criminal justice commission for the city with the purpose of acting in an advisory capacity to the city council, city manager, and the county sheriff's department on any community issue or project having a direct or indirect effect on crime and to assist in implementing projects to address high crime areas within the city. 
( Ord. No. 1024, § 2, 6-27-2017 )  
2.30.020 - Membership. 
The Criminal Justice Commission shall be composed of seven (7) commissioners and up to three (3) alternates, all of whom shall be residents of the City of Lancaster or residents of the Antelope Valley who work within the city limits of the City of Lancaster. All commissioners and alternates of the Criminal Justice Commission shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to approval of a majority of the city council. An alternate may replace any commissioner who is absent from a meeting or abstains from a matter due to an actual or potential conflict of interest. In the event that a quorum cannot be reached at a meeting of the Criminal Justice Commission, by reason of one (1) or more commissioners' and/or alternates' absence or abstention from voting on or participating in a matter due to an actual or potential conflict of interest, the mayor and members of the city council shall be considered 'Commissioner at-large' and shall have the authority to approve agenda items as if they were an appointed member of the Criminal Justice Commission. 
( Ord. No. 1024, § 2, 6-27-2017 ; Ord. No. 1059 , § 2, 4-23-2019)  
2.30.030 - Term of office. 
The term of each commissioner and alternate shall be one (1) year commencing on January 1 of each year and ending on the following December 31. Notwithstanding said term, each commissioner and alternate shall serve until a successor has been appointed. Each commissioner and alternate may be reappointed for additional terms. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, all commissioners and alternates serve at the pleasure of the mayor and city council. 
( Ord. No. 1024, § 2, 6-27-2017 )  
2.30.040 - Chairman and vice-chairman. 
The mayor shall appoint one (1) of the commissioners of the criminal justice commission as chairman to preside over the meetings and another commissioner to serve as vice-chairman, to preside in the absence of the chairman. 
( Ord. No. 1024, § 2, 6-27-2017 )  
2.30.050 - Vacancy. 
Any vacancy occurring on the criminal justice commission shall be filled by an appointment made by the mayor, subject to approval of a majority of the city council. Any person appointed to fill such vacancy shall serve for the remainder of the term of the commissioner or alternate whose office has been vacated. 
( Ord. No. 1024, § 2, 6-27-2017 )  
2.30.060 - Removal. 
Whenever, in the opinion of the mayor or upon a vote of a majority of the city council, the best interests of the city shall be served thereby, any commissioner or alternate of the criminal justice commission may be removed from office by a majority vote of the city council. 
( Ord. No. 1024, § 2, 6-27-2017 )  
2.30.070 - Absence from meetings. 
If a commissioner fails to attend three (3) regular meetings of the criminal justice commission during any calendar year without cause, the mayor, subject to approval of a majority of the city council, may deem said commissioner's appointment immediately terminated, and may fill the vacancy in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 1024, § 2, 6-27-2017 )  
2.30.080 - Meetings. 
The criminal justice commission shall hold one (1) regular meeting per month, which meeting shall be held at the Lancaster City Hall Council Chamber located at 44933 Fern Avenue, Lancaster, California. The timing and date of such meeting shall be established by majority vote of the criminal justice commission. 
( Ord. No. 1024, § 2, 6-27-2017 )  
2.30.090 - Reserved.  
2.30.100 - Reserved.  
Chapter 2.32 - AD HOC COMMITTEES 
 
2.32.010 - Creation. 
The city council may at such time or times as it deems appropriate create an ad hoc committee by adopting a resolution setting forth the purpose for which such committee is being formed and the numbers of members which will comprise the committee. The committee shall be composed of members who shall be residents of the city. Selection of committee members will be made by each city council member and approved by a majority of the city council. 
(Prior code § 2-7.70)  
2.32.020 - Terms of office of members—Filling vacancies—Eligibility. 
A.  Unless otherwise stated in the enabling resolution, the members of the committee shall serve until the work of the committee has been completed. Upon election of a new city councilmember, all committees previously established shall be reestablished by resolution. The members of the reestablished committee may be new members or members who have previously served on such committees. 
B.  All vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose office is vacant and shall be selected by the respective city council member responsible for the original appointment. The new appointee shall be approved by a majority of the city council. 
(Prior code § 2-7.71)  
2.32.030 - Chairman and vice-chairman. 
The committee shall elect a chairman to preside over their meetings and a vice-chairman to preside in the absence of the chairman. 
(Prior code § 2-7.72)  
2.32.040 - Removal from office. 
Any members of the committee may be removed from office by a majority vote of the council whenever it is in the best interests of the city as determined by the city council. 
(Prior code § 2-7.73)  
2.32.050 - Meetings. 
The committee shall meet at such time and in such places as the committee shall determine and the committee shall determine the manner in which special meetings may be held. A majority of the regular members shall constitute a quorum. All meetings shall be subject to the provisions of Government Code Section 54950, et seq. 
(Ord. 724 § 3, 1996: prior code § 2-7.74)  
2.32.060 - Absence from meetings. 
If a member of the committee shall be absent from three regular meetings of said committee meeting during any one calendar year, without cause, the office of such commissioner shall be deemed vacant and the term of the ipso facto terminated and such vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term by an appointment by the city councilmember originally responsible for the appointment. 
(Prior code § 2-7.75)  
2.32.070 - No financial liability. 
Neither the committee nor any member thereof shall incur any financial liability in the name of the city. 
(Prior code § 2-7.76)  
2.32.080 - City liaison. 
City staff will act as a liaison between the city and the committee. City staff will assist the committee in developing and preparing reports. In addition, staff shall assist the committee in working closely with and coordinating necessary matters regarding activities, items and any other matters as necessary. 
(Prior code § 2-7.77)  
Chapter 2.34 - ARCHITECTURAL AND DESIGN PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1025, § 2, adopted June 27, 2017 , amended ch. 2.34, §§ 2.34.010—2.34.100, in its entirety, to read as set out herein. Former ch. 2., pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from ; Ord. 902 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), adopted 2008; Ord. No. 909, §§ 1, 2, adopted October 28, 2008; Ord. No. 915, § 1, adopted January 27, 2009; Ord. No. 942, § 1, adopted February 9, 2010; Ord. No. 986, § 1, adopted February 12, 2013 and Ord. No. 1002, §§ 7, 8, adopted February 10, 2015. 
 
2.34.010 - Creation and membership. 
The Architectural and Design Planning Commission shall be composed of seven (7) commissioners and up to three (3) alternates, all of whom shall be residents of the City of Lancaster or residents of the Antelope Valley who work within the city limits of the City of Lancaster. All commissioners and alternates of the Architectural and Design Planning Commission shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to approval of a majority of the city council. An alternate may replace any commissioner who is absent from a meeting or abstains from a matter due to an actual or potential conflict of interest. In the event that a quorum cannot be reached at a meeting of the Architectural and Design Planning Commission, by reason of one (1) or more commissioners' and/or alternates' absence or abstention from voting on or participating in a matter due to an actual or potential conflict of interest, the mayor and members of the city council shall be considered 'Commissioner at-large' and shall have the authority to approve agenda items as if they were an appointed member of the Architectural and Design Planning Commission. 
( Ord. No. 1025, § 2, 6-27-2017 ; Ord. No. 1060 , § 2, 4-23-2019)  
2.34.020 - Purpose and scope of authority. 
The purpose and authority of the architectural and design commission established by this chapter shall be limited to the following: (i) development and recommendation to the city council of new residential, commercial and/or industrial design standards, or the revision and/or modification of existing residential, commercial and/or industrial design standards, and (ii) hearing appeals from interpretations and/or decisions of city staff related to residential, commercial and/or industrial design standards; provided, however, that any final decision or determination made by the architectural and design commission may be appealed, as follows: 
A.  All appeals shall be heard by the planning commission. Procedure and notice shall be given as provided in Chapter 2.44 or, if the appeal is to be heard by the planning commission in conjunction with the consideration of a development application, notice shall be given in conjunction with the development application notice. 
B.  The final decision or determination made by the planning commission may be appealed to the city council pursuant to the procedure set forth in Chapter 2.44. 
( Ord. No. 1025, § 2, 6-27-2017 )  
2.34.030 - Term of office. 
The term of each commissioner and alternate shall be one (1) year commencing on January 1 of each year and ending on the following December 31. Notwithstanding said term, a commissioner or alternate shall serve until a successor has been appointed. A commissioner or alternate may be reappointed for additional terms. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, all commissioners and alternates serve at the pleasure of the mayor and city council. 
( Ord. No. 1025, § 2, 6-27-2017 )  
2.34.040 - Chairman and vice-chairman. 
The mayor shall appoint one (1) of the commissioners of the architectural and design commission as chairman to preside over the commission's meetings and another commissioner to serve as vice-chairman, to preside in the absence of the chairman. 
( Ord. No. 1025, § 2, 6-27-2017 )  
2.34.050 - Vacancy. 
Any vacancy occurring on the architectural and design commission shall be filled by an appointment made by the mayor, subject to approval of a majority of the city council. Any person appointed to fill such vacancy shall serve for the remainder of the term of the commissioner or alternate whose office has been vacated. 
( Ord. No. 1025, § 2, 6-27-2017 )  
2.34.060 - Removal. 
Whenever, in the opinion of the mayor or upon a vote of a majority of the city council, the best interests of the city shall be served thereby, any commissioner or alternate of the architectural and design commission may be removed from office by a majority vote of the city council. 
( Ord. No. 1025, § 2, 6-27-2017 )  
2.34.070 - Attendance. 
If a commissioner is absent without cause from three (3) regular meetings of the architectural and design commission during any calendar year, the mayor, subject to approval of a majority of the city council, may deem said commissioner's appointment immediately terminated, and may fill the vacancy in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 1025, § 2, 6-27-2017 )  
2.34.080 - Meetings. 
The architectural and design commission shall hold one (1) regular meeting per month, which meeting shall be held at the Lancaster City Hall Council Chamber located at 44933 Fern Avenue, Lancaster, California. The timing and date of such meeting shall be established by majority vote of the architectural and design commission. 
( Ord. No. 1025, § 2, 6-27-2017 )  
2.34.090 - Reserved.  
2.34.100 - Reserved.  
Chapter 2.36 - DISASTER COUNCIL 
 
2.36.010 - Purposes. 
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this city in the event of an emergency; direction of the emergency organization; the coordination of the emergency functions of this city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons; and the planned and orderly recovery from its adverse effects. 
(Prior code § 3-9.1)  
2.36.020 - Definition. 
As used in this chapter, "emergency" means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy. 
(Prior code § 3-9.2)  
2.36.030 - Disaster council membership. 
The Lancaster disaster council is created and shall consist of the following: 
A.  Representative chosen by the city council from its members who shall be chairman; 
B.  The director of emergency services, who shall be vice-chairman; 
C.  The emergency preparedness coordinator; 
D.  Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current emergency plan of this city, adopted pursuant to this chapter; 
E.  Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional, or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the director. 
(Prior code § 3-9.3)  
2.36.040 - Disaster council powers and duties. 
It shall be the duty of the Lancaster disaster council, and it is empowered, to see to the development of, and recommend for adoption by the city council, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The disaster council shall meet upon call of the chairman or, in his absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice-chairman. 
(Prior code § 3-9.4)  
2.36.050 - Continuance of local government—City council. 
A.  Designation and Duties of Standby Officers. 
1.  Each member of the Lancaster planning commission shall serve as the standby officer for the councilmember appointing said commission member in the event of a state of emergency. 
2.  The duties of the standby officers shall be those as provided for by state law and identified in the city's emergency plan. 
B.  Term of Service of Standby Officers. 
1.  General. Each standby officer shall serve in such position, as long as he is a member of the Lancaster planning commission. 
2.  State of Emergency. If, within seven days of declaration of local emergency by the director of emergency services as provided for in this chapter, a quorum of the city council is unable to meet, the standby officers representing the members of the council unable to meet shall serve on the city council until such time as the elected member of council is able to meet and serve, or until such time as a successor is selected by any means provided for in state law. 
C.  Order of Succession—Mayor. 
1.  In the event the mayor is unable to serve during a state of emergency, the order of succession for the mayor shall be the vice-mayor, the chairman of the Lancaster redevelopment agency, the vice-chairman of the Lancaster redevelopment agency, and the chairman of the Lancaster industrial development authority. 
2.  In the event no elected member of the city Council is able to meet during a state of emergency, the standby officer appointed by the mayor shall serve in that position. 
(Prior code § 3-9.5)  
2.36.060 - Director of emergency services and emergency preparedness coordinator. 
A.  There is created the position of director of emergency services. The city manager shall be the director of emergency services. 
B.  There is created the position of emergency preparedness coordinator, who shall be designated by the director. 
(Prior code § 3-9.6)  
2.36.070 - Powers and duties of the director of emergency services. 
A.  Powers and duties of the director when no emergency exists: 
1.  Designate the order of succession to the position of director, to take effect in the event that the director is unavailable to perform his duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the city council, and be reflected in the emergency plan. 
2.  Designate the emergency preparedness coordinator. 
B.  Powers and duties of the director under imminent threat of, during or after an emergency: 
1.  The director may request that the city council proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a "local emergency" if the city council is in session, or to issue such a proclamation if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect. The city council shall review, at least every fourteen (14) days until such local emergency is terminated, the need for continuing the local emergency, and shall proclaim the termination of such local emergency at the earliest possible date that conditions warrant. 
C.  Powers and duties of the director when a local emergency has been proclaimed, or a "state of emergency" has been proclaimed by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or if a "state of war emergency" exists: 
1.  The director shall have complete authority over the city and the right to exercise all police power vested in the city by the Constitution and General Laws, as per Section 38791 of the Government Code; and 
2.  The director is empowered to make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council; and 
3.  To control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter; and 
4.  To direct cooperation between the coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this city and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them; and 
5.  To represent this city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein; and 
6.  To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties, from public or private sources, found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use; and 
7.  To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a "state of emergency" in the county in which this city is located or the existence of a "state of war emergency" to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he deems necessary in the execution of his duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers; and 
8.  To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency; and 
9.  To request the Governor to proclaim a "state of emergency" when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency. 
(Prior code § 3-9.7)  
2.36.080 - Powers and duties of the emergency preparedness coordinator. 
A.  Powers and duties of the coordinator when no emergency exists: 
1.  Under the supervision of the director, develop emergency plans and mutual aid agreements; 
2.  Manage the emergency programs of this city; 
3.  Other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. 
B.  Powers and duties of the coordinator when a local emergency, or a "state of emergency" has been proclaimed by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or if a "state of war emergency" exists: 
1.  The coordinator shall have such powers and duties as are designated in the emergency plan, and those that may be assigned by the director. 
(Prior code § 3-9.8)  
2.36.090 - Emergency organization. 
All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of subsection (C)(7) of Section 2.36.070 during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the city. 
(Prior code § 3-9.9)  
2.36.100 - Emergency plan. 
The Lancaster disaster council shall be responsible for seeing to the development of the city of Lancaster emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. 
(Prior code § 3-9.10)  
2.36.110 - Expenditures. 
A.  Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city (Section 53021 Government Code). Records will be kept in such a manner that emergency-related expenditures and obligations of city departments can be broken out and identified, separate from regularly budgeted program activities. 
B.  The city council may pass a resolution by a four-fifths vote of its members, declaring that the public interest and necessity demand the immediate expenditure of public money to safeguard life, health or property. Upon adoption of the resolution, the city council may expend any sum required in the emergency without complying with the Local Agency Public Construction Act (Section 20168 of the Public Contract Code). 
(Prior code § 3-9.11)  
2.36.120 - Acceptance of assistance. 
The director of emergency services or his designee is authorized to accept services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds by gift, grant or loan for purposes of mitigating the effect of a declared local emergency from public and private sources. The director or his designee shall develop procedures for registration of such gift, grant or loan and for the recording of disposition of such. 
(Prior code § 3-9.12)  
2.36.130 - Punishment of violations. 
It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both, for any person, during an emergency to: 
A.  Wilfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter; 
B.  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof; 
C.  Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state or of this city. 
(Prior code § 3-9.13)  
Chapter 2.37 - LANCASTER HOMELESS IMPACT COMMISSION 
 
2.37.010 - Creation and purpose. 
There is created the Lancaster Homeless Impact Commission for the city with the purpose of providing collaborative leadership through research, strategic policy development, and coordinated accountability to positively impact homelessness in the city. 
( Ord. No. 1026, § 2, 6-27-2017 )  
2.37.020 - Membership. 
The Lancaster Homeless Impact Commission shall be composed of seven (7) commissioners and up to three (3) alternates, all of whom shall be residents of the City of Lancaster or residents of the Antelope Valley who work within the city limits of the City of Lancaster. All commissioners and alternates of the Lancaster Homeless Impact Commission shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to approval of a majority of the city council. An alternate may replace any commissioner who is absent from a meeting or abstains from a matter due to an actual or potential conflict of interest. In the event that a quorum cannot be reached at a meeting of the Lancaster Homeless Impact Commission, by reason of one (1) or more commissioners' and/or alternates' absence or abstention from voting on or participating in a matter due to an actual or potential conflict of interest, the mayor and members of the city council shall be considered 'Commissioner at-large' and shall have the authority to approve agenda items as if they were an appointed member of the Lancaster Homeless Impact Commission. 
( Ord. No. 1026, § 2, 6-27-2017 ; Ord. No. 1061 , § 2, 4-23-2019)  
2.37.030 - Term of office. 
The term of each commissioner and alternate shall be one (1) year commencing on January 1 of each year and ending on the following December 31. Notwithstanding said term, a commissioner or alternate shall serve until a successor has been appointed. A commissioner or alternate may be reappointed for additional terms. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, all commissioners and alternates serve at the pleasure of the mayor and city council. 
( Ord. No. 1026, § 2, 6-27-2017 )  
2.37.040 - Chairman and vice-chairman. 
The mayor shall appoint one (1) of the commissioners of the Lancaster Homeless Impact Commission as chairman to preside over the commission's meetings and another commissioner to serve as vice-chairman, to preside in the absence of the chairman. 
( Ord. No. 1026, § 2, 6-27-2017 )  
2.37.050 - Vacancy. 
Any vacancy occurring on the Lancaster Homeless Impact Commission shall be filled by an appointment made by the mayor, subject to approval of a majority of the city council. Any person appointed to fill such vacancy shall serve for the remainder of the term of the commissioner or alternate whose office has been vacated. 
( Ord. No. 1026, § 2, 6-27-2017 )  
2.37.060 - Removal. 
Whenever, in the opinion of the mayor or upon a vote of a majority of the city council, the best interests of the city shall be served thereby, any commissioner or alternate of the Lancaster Homeless Impact Commission may be removed from office by a majority vote of the city council. 
( Ord. No. 1026, § 2, 6-27-2017 )  
2.37.070 - Attendance. 
If a commissioner is absent without cause from three (3) regular meetings of the Lancaster Homeless Impact Commission during any calendar year, the mayor, subject to approval of a majority of the city council, may deem said commissioner's appointment immediately terminated, and may fill the vacancy in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 1026, § 2, 6-27-2017 )  
2.37.080 - Meetings. 
The Lancaster Homeless Impact Commission shall hold not less than one (1) regular meeting per month, which meeting(s) shall be held at the Lancaster City Hall Council Chamber located at 44933 Fern Avenue, Lancaster, California. The timing and date of such meeting(s) shall be established by majority vote of the Lancaster Homeless Impact Commission. 
( Ord. No. 1026, § 2, 6-27-2017 )  
Chapter 2.38 - LANCASTER HEALTHY COMMUNITY COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1027, § 2, adopted June 27, 2017 , amended ch. 2.38, §§ 2.38.010—2.38.080, in its entirety, to read as set out herein. Former ch. 2.38, pertained to "Neighborhood Vitalization Commission," and was derived from Ord. No. 1002, § 12, adopted February 10, 2015. 
 
2.38.010 - Creation and purpose. 
There is created the Lancaster Healthy Community Commission for the city with the purpose of advocating for and promoting better health and well-being for city residents. 
( Ord. No. 1027, § 2, 6-27-2017 )  
2.38.020 - Membership. 
The Lancaster Healthy Community Commission shall be composed of seven (7) commissioners and up to three (3) alternates, all of whom shall be residents of the City of Lancaster or residents of the Antelope Valley who work within the city limits of the City of Lancaster. All commissioners and alternates of the Lancaster Healthy Community Commission shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to approval of a majority of the city council. An alternate may replace any commissioner who is absent from a meeting or abstains from a matter due to an actual or potential conflict of interest. In the event that a quorum cannot be reached at a meeting of the Lancaster Healthy Community Commission, by reason of one (1) or more commissioners' and/or alternates' absence or abstention from voting on or participating in a matter due to an actual or potential conflict of interest, the mayor and members of the city council shall be considered 'Commissioner at-large' and shall have the authority to approve agenda items as if they were an appointed member of the Lancaster Healthy Community Commission. 
( Ord. No. 1027, § 2, 6-27-2017 ; Ord. No. 1062 , § 2, 4-23-2019)  
2.38.030 - Term of office. 
The term of each commissioner and alternate shall be one (1) year commencing on January 1 of each year and ending on the following December 31. Notwithstanding said term, a commissioner or alternate shall serve until a successor has been appointed. A commissioner or alternate may be reappointed for additional terms. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, all commissioners and alternates serve at the pleasure of the mayor and city council. 
( Ord. No. 1027, § 2, 6-27-2017 )  
2.38.040 - Chairman and vice-chairman. 
The mayor shall appoint one (1) of the commissioners of the Lancaster Healthy Community Commission as chairman to preside over the commission's meetings and another commissioner to serve as vice-chairman, to preside in the absence of the chairman. 
( Ord. No. 1027, § 2, 6-27-2017 )  
2.38.050 - Vacancy. 
Any vacancy occurring on the Lancaster Healthy Community Commission shall be filled by an appointment made by the mayor, subject to approval of a majority of the city council. Any person appointed to fill such vacancy shall serve for the remainder of the term of the commissioner or alternate whose office has been vacated. 
( Ord. No. 1027, § 2, 6-27-2017 )  
2.38.060 - Removal. 
Whenever, in the opinion of the mayor or upon a vote of a majority of the city council, the best interests of the city shall be served thereby, any commissioner or alternate of the Lancaster Healthy Community Commission may be removed from office by a majority vote of the city council. 
( Ord. No. 1027, § 2, 6-27-2017 )  
2.38.070 - Attendance. 
If a commissioner is absent without cause from three (3) regular meetings of the Lancaster Healthy Community Commission during any calendar year, the mayor, subject to approval of a majority of the city council, may deem said commissioner's appointment immediately terminated, and may fill the vacancy in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 1027, § 2, 6-27-2017 )  
2.38.080 - Meetings. 
The Lancaster Healthy Community Commission shall hold one (1) regular meeting per month, which meeting(s) shall be held at the Lancaster City Hall Council Chamber located at 44933 Fern Avenue, Lancaster, California. The timing and date of such meeting(s) shall be established by majority of the Lancaster Healthy Community Commission. 
( Ord. No. 1027, § 2, 6-27-2017 )  
Chapter 2.40 - CONFLICT OF INTEREST CODE 
 
2.40.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the conflict of interest code of the city. 
(Ord. 656 § 1 (part), 1994: prior code § 2-11.1)  
2.40.020 - Definitions. 
The definitions contained in the Political Reform Act of 1974, regulations of the Fair Political Practices Commission (2 California Code of Regulations Sections 18100, et seq.), and any amendments to the Act or regulations, are incorporated by reference into this conflict of interest code. 
(Ord. 656 § 1 (part), 1994: prior code § 2-11.2)  
2.40.030 - Designated employees. 
The persons holding those positions contained in the "List of Designated Employees" which shall be adopted by a resolution of the city council of the city and which may be amended from time to time, and which is incorporated herein by reference and made a part of this code as though it were set out in full, are designated employees. It has been determined that these persons make or participate in the making of decisions which may foreseeably have a material effect on financial interests. 
(Ord. 656 § I (part), 1994: prior code § 2-11.3)  
2.40.040 - Disclosure categories. 
This code does not establish any disclosure obligation for those designated employees who are also specified in Government Code Section 87200, if they are designated in this code in that same capacity or if the geographical jurisdiction of this city is the same as or is wholly included within the jurisdiction in which those persons must report their financial interests pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 7 of the Political Reform Act, Government Code Section 87200, et seq. 
In addition, this code does not establish any disclosure obligation for any designated employees who are designated in a conflict of interest code for another agency, if all of the following apply: 
A.  The geographical jurisdiction of the city is the same as or is wholly included within the jurisdiction of the other agency; 
B.  The disclosure assigned in the code of the other agency is the same as that required under Article 2 of Chapter 7 of the Political Reform Act, Government Code Section 87200; and 
C.  The filing officer is the same for both agencies.* 
Such persons are covered by this code for disqualification purposes only. With respect to all other designated employees, the disclosure categories which shall be adopted by a resolution of the city council of the city, which may be amended from time to time, and which is incorporated herein by reference and made a part of this code as though it were set out in full, specify which kinds of financial interests are reportable. Such a designated employee shall disclosure in his or her statement of economic interests those financial interests he or she has which are of the kind described in the disclosure categories to which he or she is assigned It has been determined that the financial interests set forth in a designated employee's disclosure categories are the kinds of financial interests which he or she foreseeably can affect materially through the conduct of his or her office. 
(Ord. 682 § 1, 1995; Ord. 656 § 1 (part), 1994: prior code § 2-11.4) 
* Designated employees who are required to file statements of economic interests under any other agency's conflict of interest code, or under Article 2 for a different jurisdiction, may expand their statement of economic interests to cover reportable interests in both jurisdictions, and file copies of this expanded statement with both entities in lieu of filing separate and distinct statements, provided that each copy of such expanded statement flied in place of an original is signed and verified by the designated employee is if it were an original. See Government Code Section 81004.  
2.40.045 - Campaign disclosure statements, electronic filing. 
A.  General. 
1.  Any elected officer, candidate, committee, or other person required to file statements, reports or other documents ("statements") as required by Chapter 4 of the Political Reform Act (California Government Code section 84100, et seq.) ("filers") may file such statements using the city clerk's online system according to procedures established by the city clerk (the "procedures"). 
2.  The city clerk shall have the authority to establish and amend the procedures, as necessary, to accomplish the following: 
a.  Ensure that the online system complies with the requirements set forth in Section 84615 of the Government Code, as may be amended from time to time; 
b.  Meet the purpose and intent of this section and comply with other applicable law; and 
c.  Ensure the integrity of the data transmitted and include safeguards against efforts to tamper with, manipulate, alter, or subvert the data. 
3.  Online filings made under this chapter will only be accepted if made in the standardized record format that is developed by the California Secretary of State pursuant to Section 84602(a)(2) of the California Government Code, as may be amended from time to time, and that is compatible with the secretary of state's system for receiving an online or electronic filing. 
B.  Procedures for Utilizing Online Filing. 
1.  During the period commencing with the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, an elected officer, candidate, or committee shall use the electronic filing system by electronically filing a Statement that is required to be filed with the city clerk pursuant to Chapter 4 of the Political Reform Act (California Government Code Section 84100 et seq.), unless the officer, candidate or committee is exempt pursuant to California Government Code Section 84615. 
2.  Any elected officer, candidate, or committee who has electronically filed a statement using the city clerk's online system is not required to file a copy of that document in paper format with the city clerk. 
3.  The city clerk shall issue an electronic confirmation that notifies the filer that the statement was received, which notification shall include the date and the time that the statement was received and the method by which the filer may view and print the data received by the city clerk. The date of filing for a statement filed online shall be the day that it is received by the city clerk. 
4.  If the city clerk's online system is not capable of accepting a statement, an elected officer, candidate, or committee shall file that statement in paper format with the city clerk. 
5.  The online or electronic filing system shall include a procedure for filers to comply with the requirement that they sign statements and reports under penalty of perjury and verify filings pursuant to Section 81004. 
6.  The online filing system shall enable electronic filers to complete and submit filings free of charge. 
C.  Availability of Statements for Public Review, Record Retention. 
1.  The city clerk's system shall make all the data filed available on the Internet in an easily understood format that provides the greatest public access. The data shall be made available free of charge and as soon as possible after receipt. The data made available on the Internet shall not contain the street name and building number of the persons or entity representatives listed on the electronically filed forms or any bank account number required to be disclosed by the filer. The city clerk's office shall make a complete, unredacted copy of the statement, including any street names, building numbers, and bank account numbers disclosed by the filer, available to any persons, and available to any person upon request. 
2.  The city clerk's office shall maintain, for a period of at least ten (10) years commencing from the date filed, a secured, official version of each online or electronic statement which shall serve as the official version of that record for purpose of audits and any other legal purpose. 
( Ord. No. 1050, § 1, 10-23-2018 )  
2.40.050 - Statements of economic interests—Place 
of filing. 
All designated employees shall file statements of economic interests with the city clerk, who shall be the filing officer.* 
(Ord. 656 § 1 (part), 1994: prior code § 2-11.5) 
* See Government Code Section 81010 and 2 California of Regulations Section 18115 for the duties of filing officers.  
2.40.060 - Statements of economic interests—Time 
of filing. 
A.  Initial Statements. All designated employees employed by the city on the effective date of this code, as originally adopted, promulgated and approved by the city council, shall file statements within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this code. Thereafter, each person already in a position when it is designated by an amendment to this code shall file an initial statement within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this amendment. 
B.  Assuming Office Statements. All persons assuming designated positions after the effective date of this code shall file statements within thirty (30) days after assuming the designated positions, or if subject to State Senate confirmation, thirty (30) days after being nominated or appointed. 
C.  Annual Statements. All designated employees shall file statements no later than April 1st. 
D.  Leaving Office Statements. All persons who leave designated positions shall file statements within thirty (30) days after leaving office. 
(Ord. 656 § 1 (part), 1994: prior code § 2-11.6)  
2.40.070 - Statements for persons who resign prior to assuming office. 
A.  Any person who resigns within twelve (12) months of initial appointment, or within thirty (30) days of the date of notice provided by the city clerk to file an assuming office statement, is not deemed to have assumed office or left office, provided he or she did not make or participate in the making of, or use his or her position to influence any decision and did not receive or become entitled to receive any form of payment as a result of his or her appointment. Such persons shall not file either an assuming or leaving office statement. 
B.  Any person who resigns a position within thirty (30) days of the date of a notice from the city clerk shall do both of the following: 
1.  File a written resignation with the appointing power; and 
2.  File a written statement with the city clerk declaring under penalty of perjury that during the period between appointment and resignation he or she did not make, participate in the making, or use the position to influence any decision of the city or receive, or become entitled to receive, any form of payment by virtue of being appointed to the position. 
(Ord. 682 § 2, 1995; Ord. 656 § 1 (part), 1994: prior code § 2-11.7)  
2.40.080 - Contents of and period covered by statements of economic interests. 
A.  Contents of Initial Statements. Initial statements shall disclose any reportable investments, interests in real property and business positions held on the effective date of the code and income received during the twelve (12) months prior to the effective date of the code. 
B.  Contents of Assuming Office Statements. Assuming office statements shall disclose any reportable investments, interests in real property and business positions held on the date of assuming office or, if subject to State Senate confirmation or appointment, on the date of nomination, and income received during the twelve (12) months prior to the date of assuming office or the date of being appointed or nominated, respectively. 
C.  Contents of Annual Statements. Annual statements shall disclose any reportable investments, interests in real property income and business positions held or received during the previous calendar year; provided, however, that the period covered by an employee's first annual statement begins on the effective date of the code or the date of assuming office whichever is later. 
D.  Contents of Leaving Office Statements. Leaving office statements shall disclose reportable investments, interests in real property, income and business positions held or received during the period between the closing date of the last statement filed and the date of leaving office. 
(Ord. 656 § I (part), 1994: prior code § 2-11.8)  
2.40.090 - Manner of reporting. 
Statements of economic interests shall be made on forms prescribed by the Fair Political Practices Commission and supplied by the city, and shall contain the following information: 
A.  Investments and Real Property Disclosure. When an investment or an interest in real property * is required to be reported, ** the statement shall contain the following: 
1.  A statement of the nature of the investment or interest; 
2.  The name of the business entity in which each investment is held, and a general description of the business activity in which the business entity is engaged; 
3.  The address or other precise location of the real property; 
4.  A statement whether the fair market value of the investment or interest in real property exceeds two thousand ($2,000), exceeds ten thousand dollars ($10,000), exceeds one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000), or exceeds one million dollars ($1,000,000). 
B.  Personal Income Disclosure. When personal income is required to be reported,*** the statement shall contain: 
1.  The name and address of each source of income aggregating five hundred dollars ($500) or more in value, or fifty dollars ($50) or more in value if the income was a gift, and a general description of the business activity, if any, of each source; 
2.  A statement whether the aggregate value of income from each source, or in the case of a loan, the highest amount owed to each source, was one thousand dollars ($1,000) or less, greater than one thousand dollars ($1,000), greater than ten thousand dollars ($10,000), or greater than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000); 
3.  A description of the consideration, if any, for which the income was received; 
4.  In the case of a gift, the name, address and business activity of the donor and any intermediary through which the gift was made; a description of the gift; the amount or value of the gift; and the date on which the gift was received; 
5.  In the case of a loan, the annual interest rate and the security, if any, given for the loan and the term of the loan. 
C.  Business Entity Income Disclosure. When income of a business entity or trust, including income of a sole proprietorship is required to be reported,****the statement shall contain: 
1.  The name, address, and general description of the business activity of the business entity; 
2.  The name of every person from whom the business entity received payments if the filer's pro rata share of gross receipts from such person was equal to or greater than ten thousand dollars ($10,000). 
D.  Business Position Disclosure. When business positions are required to be reported, a designated employee shall list the name and address of each business entity in which he or she is a director, officer, partner, trustee, employee, or in which he or she holds any position of management, a description of the business activity in which the business entity is engaged, and the designated employee's position with the business entity. 
E.  Acquisition or Disposal During Reporting Period. In the case of an annual or leaving office statement, if an investment or an interest in real property was partially or wholly acquired or disposed of during the period covered by the statement, the statement shall contain the date of acquisition or disposal. 
* 	For the purpose of disclosure only (not disqualification) an interest in real property does not include the principal residence of the filer. 
** 	Investments and interests in real property which have a fair market value of less than two thousand dollars ($2,000) are not investments and interests in real property within the meaning of the Political Reform Act. However, investments or interests in real property of an individual include those held by the individual's spouse and dependent children as well as a pro rata share of any investment or interest in real property of any business entity or trust in which the individual, spouse and dependent children own, in the aggregate, a direct, indirect or beneficial interest of ten (10) percent or greater. 
*** 	A designated employee's income includes his or her community property interest in the income of his or her spouse but does not include salary or reimbursement for expenses received from a state, local or federal government agency. 
**** 	Income of a business entity is reportable if the direct, indirect or beneficial interest of the filer and filer's spouse in the business entity aggregates a ten (10) percent or greater interest. In addition, the disclosure of persons who are clients or customers of a business entity is required only if the clients or customers are within one of the disclosure categories of the filer. 
  
2.40.095 - Prohibition on receipt of honoraria. 
A.  No member of a state board or commission, and no designated employee of a state or local government agency shall accept any honorarium from any source, if the member or employee would be required to report the receipt of income or gifts from that source on his or her statement of economic interests. This section shall not apply to any part-time member of the governing board of any public institution of higher education, unless the member is also an elected official. 
1.  Subdivisions (a), (b) and (c) of Government Code Section 89501 shall apply to the prohibitions in this section. 
2.  This section shall not limit or prohibit payments, advances or reimbursements for travel and related lodging and subsistence authorized by Government Code Section 89506. 
B.  Prohibition on Receipt of Gifts in Excess of Three Hundred Twenty Dollars. No member of a state board or commission, and no designated employee of a state or local government agency shall accept gifts with a total value of more than three hundred twenty dollars ($320.00) in a calendar year from any single source, if the member or employee would be required to report the receipt of income or gifts from that source on his or her statement of economic interests. This section shall not apply to any part-time member of the governing board of any public institution of higher education, unless the member is also an elected official. 
1.  Subdivision (e), (f) and (g) of Government Code Section 89503 shall apply to the prohibitions in this section. 
(Ord. 798 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 748 § 1, 1999)  
2.40.100 - Loans to public officials. 
A.  No elected officer of a state or local government agency shall, from the date of his or her election to office through the date that he or she vacates office, receive a personal loan from any officer, employee, member, or consultant of the state or local government agency in which the elected officer holds office or over which the elected officer's agency has direction and control. 
B.  No public official who is exempt from the state civil service system pursuant to subdivisions (c), (d), (e), (f), and (g) of Section 4 of Article VII of the Constitution shall, while he or she holds office, receive a personal loan from any officer, employee, member or consultant of the state or local govern-ment agency in which the public official holds office or over which the public official's agency has direction and control. This subdivision shall not apply to loans made to a public official whose duties are solely secretarial, clerical or manual. 
C.  No elected officer of a state or local government agency shall, from the date of his or her election to office through the date that he or she vacates office, receive a personal loan from any person who has a contract with the state or local government agency to which that elected officer has been elected or over which that elected officer's agency has direction and control. This subdivision shall not apply to loans made by banks or other financial institutions or to any indebtedness created as part of a retail installment or credit card transaction, if the loan is made or the indebtedness created in the lender's regular course of business on terms available to members of the public without regard to the elected officer's official status. 
D.  No public official who is exempt from the state civil service system pursuant to subdivisions (c), (d), (e), (f), and (g) of Section 4 of Article VII of the Constitution shall, while he or she holds office, receive a personal loan from any person who has a contract with the state or local government agency to which that elected officer has been elected or over which that elected officer's agency has direction and control. This subdivision shall not apply to loans made by banks or other financial institutions or to any indebtedness created as part of a retail installment or credit card transaction, if the loan is made or the indebtedness created in the lender's regular course of business on terms available to members of the public without regard to the elected officer's official status. This subdivision shall not apply to loans made to a public official whose duties are solely secretarial, clerical, or manual. 
E.  This section shall not apply to the following: 
1.  Loans made to the campaign committee of an elected officer or candidate for elective office; 
2.  Loans made by a public official's spouse, child, parent, grandparent, grandchild, brother, sister, parent-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, nephew, niece, aunt, uncle, or first cousin, or the spouse of any such persons, provided that the person making the loan is not acting as an agent or intermediary for any person not otherwise exempted under this section; 
3.  Loans from a person, which, in the aggregate, do not exceed five hundred dollars ($500) at any given time; 
4.  Loans made, or offered in writing, before January 1, 1998. 
(Ord. 798 § 1 (part), 2001)  
2.40.105 - Loan terms. 
A.  Except as set forth in subdivision (B), no elected officer of a state or local government agency shall, from the date of his or her election to office through the date he or she vacates office, receive a personal loan of five hundred dollars ($500) or more, except when the loan is in writing and clearly states the terms of the loan, including the parties to the loan agreement, date of the loan, amount of the loan, term of the loan, date or dates when payments shall be due on the loan and the amount of the payments, and the rate of interest paid on the loan. 
B.  This section shall not apply to the following types of loans: 
1.  Loans made to the campaign committee of the elected officer; 
2.  Loans made to the elected officer by his or her spouse, child, parent, grandparent, grandchild, brother, sister, parent-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, nephew, niece, aunt, uncle, or first cousin, or the spouse of any such person, provided that the person making the loan is not acting as an agent or intermediary for any person not otherwise exempted under this section; 
3.  Loans made, or offered in writing, before January 1, 1998. 
C.  Nothing in this section shall exempt any person from any other provision of Title 9 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 798 § 1 (part), 2001)  
2.40.115 - Disqualification. 
No designated employee shall make, participate in making, or in any way attempt to use his or her official position to influence the making of any governmental decision which he or she knows or has reason to know will have a reasonably foreseeable material financial effect, distinguishable from its effect on the public generally, on the official or a member of his or her immediate family or on: 
A.  Any business entity in which the designated employee has a direct or indirect investment worth two thousand dollars ($2,000) or more; 
B.  Any real property in which the designated employee has a direct or indirect interest worth two thousand dollars ($2,000) or more; 
C.  Any source of income, other than gifts and other than loans by a commercial lending institution in the regular course of business on terms available to the public without regard to official status, aggregating five hundred dollars ($500) or more in value provided to, received by or promised to the designated employee within twelve (12) months prior to the time when the decision is made; 
D.  Any business entity in which the designated employee is a director, officer, partner, trustee, employee, or holds any position of management; or 
E.  Any donor or any intermediary or agent for a donor of, a gift or gifts aggregating three hundred twenty dollars ($320) or more provided to, received by, or promised to the designated employee within twelve (12) months prior to the time when the decision is made. 
(Ord. 798 § 1 (part), 2001)  
2.40.120 - Personal loans. 
A.  Except as set forth in subdivision (B), a personal loan received by any designated employee shall become a gift to the designated employee for the purposes of this section in the following circumstances: 
1.  If the loan has a defined date or dates for repayment, when the statute of limitations for filing an action for default has expired. 
2.  If the loan has no defined date or dates for repayment, when one year has elapsed from the later of the following: 
a.  The date the loan was made. 
b.  The date the last payment of one hundred dollars ($100) or more was made on the loan. 
c.  The date upon which the debtor has made payments on the loan aggregating to less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250) during the previous 12 months. 
B.  This section shall not apply to the following loans: 
1.  A loan made to the campaign committee of an elected officer or a candidate for elective office; 
2.  A loan that would otherwise not be a gift as defined in this title; 
3.  A loan that would otherwise be a gift as set forth under subdivision (A), but on which the creditor has taken reasonable action to collect the balance due; 
4.  A loan that would otherwise be a gift as set forth under subdivision (A), but on which the creditor, based on reasonable business considerations, has not undertaken collection action. Except in a criminal action, a creditor who claims that a loan is not a gift on the basis of this paragraph has the burden of proving that the decision for not taking collection action was based on reasonable business considerations; 
5.  A loan made to a debtor who has filed for bankruptcy and the loan is ultimately discharged in bankruptcy. 
C.  Nothing in this section shall exempt any person from any other provisions of Title 9 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 798 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 656 § 1 (part), 1994: prior code § 2-11.11)  
2.40.125 - Manner of disqualification. 
When a designated employee determines that he or she should not make a governmental decision because he or she has a disqualifying financial interest in it, the determination not to act must be accompanied by disclosure of the disqualifying interest. In the case of a voting body, this determination and disclosure shall be made part of the body's official record; in the case of a designated employee who is the head of a department, this determination and disclosure shall be made in writing to his or her appointing authority; and in the case of other designated employees, this determination and disclosure shall be made in writing to the designated employee's supervisor. 
(Ord. 798 § 1 (part), 2001; Ord. 656 § 1 (part), 1994: prior code § 2-11.12)  
2.40.130 - Assistance of the commission and counsel. 
Any designated employee who is unsure of his or her duties under this code may request assistance from the fair political practices commission pursuant to Government Code Section 83114 or from the city attorney; provided, that nothing in this section requires the city attorney to issue any formal or informal opinion. 
(Ord. 656 § 1 (part), 1994: prior code § 2-11.13)  
2.40.140 - Violation—Penalty. 
This code has the force and effect of law. Designated employees violating any provision of this code are subject to the administrative, criminal and civil sanctions provided in the Political Reform Act, Government Code Sections 81000 through 91014. In addition, a decision in relation to which a violation of the disqualification provisions of this code or the Government Code Section 87100 or 87450 has occurred may be set aside as void pursuant to Government Code Section 91003. 
(Ord. 682 § 4, 1995; Ord. 656 § 1 (part), 1994; prior code § 2-11.14)  
Chapter 2.44 - UNIFORM APPEAL PROCEDURE 
 
2.44.010 - Appeal to the city. 
A.  Whenever an applicant or an interested citizen of the city is entitled under this code or any other provision of law to appeal to the city council from an adverse determination in a matter made by a city official, board or commission and desires to so appeal, he shall, within ten (10) working days after the date of that adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the clerk of the city council. Members of the city council are specifically exempted from the requirement of submitting a notice of appeal and the other requirements of this chapter and they shall have the right to request the review of an act of any city official, board or commission within ten (10) working days of said act. 
B.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, the city council may, by resolution, designate an independent hearing officer to hear appeals of any decision, determination or order from which the right of appeal has been granted by this code or other provision of law. 
(Prior code § 2-8.1) 
(Ord. No. 998, § 4, 6-24-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 998, § 4, adopted June 24, 2014, amended the title of § 2.44.010 to read as set out herein. Previously § 2.44.010 was titled appeal to the city council from action of a city official, board or commission.  
2.44.020 - Form. 
The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the city council and shall specify the following: 
A.  Name, address and phone number of appellant; 
B.  Name, address and phone number of applicant, if different from appellant; 
C.  Name(s) and address(es) for recipients of additional notice, if applicable; 
D.  Address and description of real property; 
E.  Commission, board, officer or department whose action is being appealed; 
F.  Date of action or decision being appealed; 
G.  Specific action or decision being appealed; 
H.  Case number of item; 
I.  Grounds for appeal. 
(Prior code § 2-8.2)  
2.44.030 - Filing fee. 
No notice of appeal shall be accepted for filing by the city clerk until the required filing fee, as established by the city council, has been submitted to the city clerk. The filing fee shall be as determined by resolution of the city council. In the event an appeal is abandoned or terminated prior to publication of notice, the filing fee shall be refunded. 
(Ord. 744 § 1, 1998: prior code § 2-8.3)  
2.44.040 - Mailing labels. 
If applicable, a copy of the set of mailing labels submitted for the original planning commission consideration shall be provided by the appellant at the time of the appeal filing. 
(Prior code § 2-8.4)  
2.44.050 - Setting the hearing. 
Upon receiving notice of appeal, the city clerk shall determine if it is in the proper form and, if so, may schedule the matter for public hearing on the next available agenda of the council, in compliance with notice requirement of state law, unless a later setting is requested by the appellant. 
(Prior code § 2-8.5)  
2.44.060 - Action by the city council. 
Such public hearing shall be held de novo (as if no hearing has been previously held) and therefore the council's decision need not be limited to the points appealed and may cover all phases of the matter including the addition or deletion of any condition. 
Following the public hearing, the city council may take one of the following actions: 
A.  Deny the appeal thereby affirming the action of the commission, board or city official; 
B.  Grant the appeal in its entirety or any portion thereof; or 
C.  Refer the matter back to the commission, board or city official for further proceedings with or without instruction. 
(Prior code § 2-8.6)  
2.44.070 - Manner of notice. 
The appellant, the commission, board, officer or department head involved and any person specifically requesting notice in writing shall be mailed notice of hearing in accordance with the city's notification procedure. In addition, where the zoning, use, abandonment, occupancy or ownership of real property is involved, such notice shall be mailed to "occupant," if any, at the property's address; and the owner shall be mailed similar notice to the address shown on the last assessment roll. 
(Prior code § 2-8.7)  
2.44.080 - Form of notice. 
The form of notice of public hearing shall be similar to the following: 
NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING 
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that at ________ o'clock on the ________ day of ___________, 19___, in the Council Chamber at Lancaster City Hall, there will be a public hearing on the appeal of ___________, appellant from the (action) of the (Commission, Board, Officer, or Department Head) of the City of Lancaster. 
Interested persons are invited to attend and be heard. 
Dated: 	___________ 
	___________ 
	City Clerk, City of Lancaster 
 
(Prior code § 2-8.8)  
2.44.090 - Procedure. 
Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with city council procedure for the conduct of hearings. The city council may examine witnesses under oath and issue subpoenas as provided by state or local law. Each councilmember shall have the power to administer oaths to witnesses. After the close of the public hearing, the city council shall review the evidence and shall render its decision at any time within sixty (60) days after the close of the public hearing provided that said time may be extended with the consent of the appellant. If the appeal is not decided in said time period, it is presumed denied. Except for disciplinary proceedings, the burden of proof is upon the appellant. The decision of the city council after appeal is final. 
(Prior code § 2-8.9)  
2.44.100 - Burden of proof. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided by law, the burden is on the applicant/appellant in any hearing under this chapter to prove that he is entitled to that for which he is applying under the uniform appeal procedure or that the determination of the official or body which he is appealing under these provisions is unreasonable, erroneous, or clearly abusive of discretion. 
(Prior code § 2-8.10)  
2.44.110 - Rules of evidence inapplicable. 
The city council and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this chapter and hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the city council procedures ordinance. 
(Prior code § 2-8.11)  
2.44.120 - Prejudicial error. 
No action, inaction or recommendation regarding any matter for which an appeal is taken in accordance with this chapter by the legislative body or any administrative body or any official of the city shall be held valid or invalid by reason of any error, irregularity, informality, neglect or omission (hereinafter called "error") as to any matter pertaining to petitions, applications, notices, findings, records, hearings, reports, recommendations, appeals, or any matters of procedure whatsoever unless the error complained of was prejudicial, and that by reason of such error the party complaining or appealing sustained and suffered substantial injury, and that a different result would have been probable if such error had not occurred or existed. 
(Prior code § 2-8.12)  
2.44.130 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  Hearings to determine whether public convenience and necessity require acquisition of property for public use; 
B.  Hearings to consider parcel maps. 
(Prior code § 2-8.13)  
Chapter 2.48 - EMERGENCY PLAN 
 
2.48.010 - Purpose. 
The declared purpose of this chapter is to provide for the general direction and guidelines by which the city shall plan and operate under emergency conditions. 
(Prior code § 3-9A.1)  
2.48.020 - Authority. 
This chapter is adopted pursuant to Chapter 7 of Division 1 of Title 2 of the Government Code of the state of California, the "California Emergency Services Act." 
(Prior code § 3-9A.2)  
2.48.030 - Emergency plan. 
The "City of Lancaster Emergency Plan" is made a part of this chapter by reference and shall be the city emergency plan. 
(Prior code § 3-9A.3)  
Chapter 2.52 - MISCELLANEOUS ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 
 
2.52.010 - Contracts with Los Angeles County. 
The city council shall have the right to contract with the county of Los Angeles or other public agency pursuant to the laws of the state of California and the charter of the county of Los Angeles, for the performance and execution by designated county or other public officials of the rights, powers and duties of officers, officials and employees of the city. Whenever by law or in this code, whether set forth in full or by adoption by reference, any power or authority is granted to an officer, official or employee, the power or authority is conferred upon the appropriate officer, official or employee of the city or the appropriate officer, official or employee of the county of Los Angeles or other public agency with whom a contract has been entered into. 
(Prior code § 2-10.1)  
2.52.020 - Posting of agenda for meetings. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Senate Bill 1333 (1990 Stats. Ch. 459), at least seventy-two (72) hours before a regular meeting of the city council, redevelopment agency, planning commission, parks, recreation and arts commission, and other official commissions, boards and committees of the city, an agenda containing a brief description of each item of business to be transacted or discussed at the meeting shall be posted in a location that is freely accessible to members of the public. No action shall be taken on any item not appearing on the posted agenda except under the conditions set forth in Government Code Section 54954.2(b). 
(Prior code § 2-7.50)  
2.52.030 - Political mass mailings. 
A.  Political Mass Mailing Requirements. No candidate or committee shall send a mass mailing unless the name, street address and city of the candidate or committee are shown on the outside of each piece of mail in the mass mailing and on at least one of the inserts included within each piece of mail of such mass mailing in no less than six-point type. A copy of every mass mailing shall be sent to the city clerk on the same day on which it is mailed to the public generally. Such copies sent to the city clerk shall be public records. 
B.  Mass Mailing Defined. As used in this chapter, "mass mailing" means two hundred (200) or more substantially similar pieces of mail supporting or opposing candidate(s) or ballot measure(s). 
C.  Candidate Defined. As used in this chapter, "candidate" means an individual who is listed on the ballot or who has qualified to have write-in votes on his or her behalf counted by election officials, for nomination for election to the office of city councilmembers of the city. "Candidate" also includes any city councilmember who is the subject of a recall election. 
D.  Committee Defined. As used in this chapter, "committee" means any person or combination of persons who directly or indirectly receives contributions totalling one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more in a calendar year, or makes contributions totalling ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more in a calendar year in an effort to support or oppose any candidate or ballot measure. 
E.  Ballot Measure Defined. As used in this chapter, "ballot measure" means any proposition which is submitted or is intended to be submitted to a popular vote of the citizens of the city at any citywide election by action of the city council, initiative, referendum or recall procedure whether or not the proposition qualifies for the ballot. 
F.  Violation. Violation of subsection A of this section shall be a misdemeanor, punishable in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.12.020 of this code. 
(Prior code § 2-4.6)  
Chapter 2.56 - PERSONNEL SYSTEM 
 
2.56.010 - Adoption of personnel system. 
In order to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters; to attract to municipal service the best and most competent persons available; to assure that appointments and promotions of employees will be based on merit and fitness; the following personnel system is adopted. 
(Prior code § 2-9.1)  
2.56.020 - Applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all offices, positions and employments in the service of the city, except: 
A.  The city manager; 
B.  Assistants to the city manager, whether executive or clerical, as designated by the city manager; 
C.  Elective officers; 
D.  Members of appointive boards, commissions and committees; 
E.  Heads of departments and administrative assistant(s) to heads of departments; 
F.  Persons engaged under contract to provide the city with expert, professional or technical service; 
G.  Volunteer personnel; 
H.  City attorney; 
I.  City treasurer; 
J.  Emergency employees hired to meet immediate requirements of an emergency situation. 
(Prior code § 2-9.2)  
2.56.030 - Personnel officer. 
The city manager shall serve as the personnel officer for the city. The city manager may delegate any of the powers and duties conferred upon him as personnel officer to any other officer or employee of the city or may recommend that such powers and duties be performed under contract. The personnel officer shall have the following powers and duties: 
A.  Administer the provisions of this chapter and any personnel rules and regulations adopted by the city council by resolution, not specifically reserved to the city council; 
B.  Prepare and recommend to the city council any and all revisions to this chapter or personnel rules and regulations; 
C.  Prepare or cause to be prepared a position classification plan, including class specifications, and revisions of the plan for approval by the city council; 
D.  Prepare a compensation plan, and revisions thereof, covering all classifications in the competitive service for approval by the city council; 
E.  Provide for the publishing and/or posting of current employment vacancies; receiving of applications; the conducting and grading of any necessary examinations; and certifying an appointment. 
(Prior code § 2-9.3)  
2.56.040 - Adoption and amendment of rules. 
Personnel rules shall be adopted by resolution of the city council. The rules shall establish regulations governing the personnel system including: 
A.  Preparation, installation, revision and maintenance of a position classification and compensation plan covering all positions, including employment standards and qualifications for each class; 
B.  Public announcement of all tests and acceptance of applications for employment; 
C.  Preparation and conduct of tests and the establishment and use of resulting employment lists containing names of persons eligible for appointment; 
D.  Certification and appointment of persons for employment lists, and the making of provisional, temporary and emergency appointments; 
E.  Establishment of probationary periods; 
F.  Evaluation of employees during and after probationary period; 
G.  Transfer, promotion, demotion, reinstatement, disciplinary action and layoff of employees in the competitive service; 
H.  Separation of employees from the city service through layoff, suspension and discharge; 
I.  The establishment, maintenance and use of personnel records and forms; 
J.  Standardization of hours of work, attendance and leave regulations, working conditions and the development of employee morale, welfare and training; 
K.  The establishment of appeal procedures concerning the interpretation or application of this chapter and any rules adopted hereunder. 
(Prior code § 2-9.4)  
2.56.050 - Status of present employees. 
A.  Any person holding a position who, on the effective date of this chapter, shall have served continuously in such position, or in some other position in the competitive service, for a period equal to the probationary period prescribed in the rules for his class shall assume permanent status in the position held on such effective date without a qualifying test, and shall thereafter be subject in all respects to the provisions of this chapter and personnel rules. 
B.  Any other person holding positions in the competitive service shall be regarded as probationers who are serving out the balance of their probationary periods as prescribed in the rules before obtaining permanent status. The probationary period shall be computed from the date of appointment or employment as specified in the personnel rules. 
(Prior code § 2-9.5)  
2.56.060 - Applicability of rules to certain exempt positions. 
The provisions of the personnel rules relating to attendance and leaves shall apply to the incumbents of full-time exempt positions, unless otherwise specified. The city manager may, by written administrative policy, apply any provision(s) of the personnel rules to any person or position otherwise exempt therefrom. 
(Prior code § 2-9.6)  
2.56.070 - Authority to make appointments and changes in employment status. 
The city manager or any municipal officer in whom is vested the power to appoint, reinstate, transfer, promote, layoff, demote, reduce in pay, suspend with or without pay or discharge employees shall retain such power, subject to the provisions of this chapter and other personnel rules. 
(Prior code § 2-9.7)  
2.56.080 - Right of appeal. 
A.  Any employee in the competitive service shall have the right to appeal any disciplinary action, or alleged violation of this chapter to the city manager except in those instances where the right of appeal is specifically prohibited by this chapter or the rules adopted thereunder. 
B.  All appeals shall be concluded as expeditiously as possible and in accordance with the requirements and procedures as set forth in the personnel rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 2-9.8)  
2.56.090 - Layoff. 
Whenever in the judgment of the city council it becomes necessary in the interest of economy, or because the necessity for a position no longer exists, the city council may abolish any position or employment and the employee holding such position or employment may be laid off without the right of appeal, subject to the provisions of this chapter and the personnel rules. 
(Prior code § 2-9.9)  
2.56.100 - Discrimination prohibited— Affirmative action. 
No person in the competitive service, or seeking admission thereto, shall be employed, promoted, demoted, discharged or in any way favored or discriminated against because of political opinions or affiliations, or because of race, color, ancestry, national origin, religious belief, sex, age, or because of the exercise of rights under Section 3502-3502.5 of the Government Code. The personnel officer shall provide for the establishment of programs, including trainee programs designed to attract and utilize persons possessing minimum qualifications, with a potential for development, to provide career development opportunities among members of such disadvantaged groups as handicapped persons, returning veterans, women, or other minority group representatives as may be designated by the personnel officer. Such programs may provide for regular appointment upon satisfactory completion of the training period and satisfactory completion of an open competitive examination. 
(Prior code § 2-9.10)  
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE  
Chapter 3.04 - CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY 
 
3.04.010 - Intent of procedures. 
The city desires to adopt procedures relative to the fiscal affairs of the new city and to provide for the payment of its debts as they come due. 
(Prior code § 2-5.20)  
3.04.020 - Person to present claim. 
No city officer shall, except for his own service, present any claim, account or demand for allowance against the city, or in any way except in the discharge of his official duty advocate the relief asked in the claim or demand made by any other person. Any person may appear before the city council and oppose the allowance of any claim or demand made against the city. 
(Prior code § 2-5.21)  
3.04.030 - Itemization necessary. 
The city council shall not hear or consider or allow or approve any claim, bill or demand against the city unless the same be itemized giving names, dates, and particular services rendered, character of process served and upon whom, distance traveled, character of work done, and number of days engaged, materials and supplies furnished, when and to whom, and in what quantity furnished, the price therefor, any other pertinent details as the case may be. Claims and demands for salaries and wages of officers and employees of the city may, but need not be, presented to the city in accordance with the provisions of this code. 
(Prior code § 2-5.22)  
3.04.040 - Presenting and filing. 
All claims against the city shall comply with the requirements set forth in Section 900-935.6 of the Government Code of the state of California. 
(Prior code § 2-5.23)  
3.04.050 - Suit. 
Any action brought against the city upon any claim or demand shall conform to the requirements of Sections 945—949 of the Government Code of the state of California and any action brought against any employees shall comply with the requirements of Sections 950—951 of the Government Code of the state of California. 
(Prior code § 2-5.24)  
3.04.060 - Method of approval. 
Each claim or demand shall be presented by the city clerk to the department head, if any, who authorized the same, for his written approval thereof, and each claim or demand shall thereafter be presented to the city manager for his written approval thereof. The city manager shall inform the city council in writing of any claims or demands presented against the city which shall fail to obtain the approval of the proper department head or which shall fail to obtain the approval of the city manager. All such claims and demands, whether approved as aforesaid or not, shall be forwarded by the city manager to the city council for audit. The city council shall audit said claims and demands as required by law. 
(Prior code § 2-5.25)  
3.04.070 - Disposition of claim. 
If the city council finds that any claim or demand is not a proper charge against the city, it shall be rejected by resolution or minute action, and the fact of rejection shall be plainly endorsed upon the claim by the city clerk or his authorized representative. If any claim or demand is determined to be a proper charge against the city, the same shall be allowed only by resolution setting forth as to each claim the name of the claimant, a brief statement of the claim, and the amount allowed. Any claim may be allowed in part and rejected in part by the city council. 
(Prior code § 2-5.26)  
3.04.080 - Approved and allowed. 
If any claim or demand be approved and allowed by the city council, the city clerk shall endorse upon each of the duplicate copies thereof the words "allowed by the City Council of the City of Lancaster," together with the resolution number allowing the same and for what amount and from what fund and the city clerk shall attest the same with his signature. 
(Prior code § 2-5.27)  
3.04.090 - Warrant. 
If any claim or demand be approved and allowed by the city council, a warrant and/or check shall be drawn upon the city treasury for the same, which warrant and/or check shall be forwarded to the city treasurer and, if found correct, shall be manually signed by the city treasurer or city manager, and a facsimile of the mayor's or vice-mayor's signature shall be affixed thereto, whether done by manual operation or by a check-signing machine, and such warrants or checks shall be distributed by the city manager or his designee to the claimants legally entitled thereto. All demands and warrants and/or checks shall be filed in numerical order by the city manager or his designee. 
(Prior code § 2-5.28)  
3.04.100 - Sufficient money in treasury. 
Except as otherwise provided, no warrant shall be drawn or evidence of indebtedness issued unless there be at the time sufficient money in the treasury legally applicable to the payment of the same. 
(Prior code § 2-5.29)  
3.04.110 - Acceptance by treasurer. 
Upon presentation of said warrant, properly executed and endorsed, the city treasurer shall pay the same out of funds in the city treasury properly applicable to that purpose. 
(Prior code § 2-5.30)  
3.04.120 - Disapproval for want of funds. 
When an order or demand is not approved for want of funds and its amount does not exceed the income and revenue for the year in which the indebtedness was incurred, the city clerk shall endorse on it: "Not approved for want of funds," with the date of presentation and his signature. 
(Prior code § 2-5.31)  
3.04.130 - Registration of demands. 
The city clerk shall number the endorsement, register the order or demand in his records, and deliver it to the claimant, or his order. Orders or demands shall be paid in the order they are registered. 
(Prior code § 2-5.32)  
Chapter 3.08 - UNIFORM REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX 
 
3.08.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Uniform Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance of the City of Lancaster." It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California. 
(Prior code § 6-2.1)  
3.08.020 - Imposition of tax. 
There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00), a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents ($0.275) for each five hundred dollars ($500.00) or fractional part thereof. 
(Prior code § 6-2.2)  
3.08.030 - Payment. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.08.020 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. 
(Prior code § 6-2.3)  
3.08.040 - Exemption for security. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. 
(Prior code § 6-2.4)  
3.08.050 - Exemption for governmental agencies. 
Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, is a party shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title. The tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument, or other writing by which realty is conveyed by the state of California, any political subdivision thereof, or agency or instrumentality of either thereof, pursuant to an agreement whereby the purchaser agrees to immediately reconvey the realty to the exempt agency. 
(Ord. 697 § 1, 1995: prior code § 6-2.5)  
3.08.060 - Exemption for miscellaneous proceedings. 
A.  Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment: 
1.  Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended; 
2.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; 
3.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or 
4.  Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected. 
B.  Subsections (A)(1)—(A)(4), inclusive, of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. 
(Prior code § 6-2.6)  
3.08.070 - Exemption for Securities and Exchange Commission. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if: 
A.  The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935; 
B.  Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; 
C.  Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. 
(Prior code § 6-2.7)  
3.08.080 - Partnerships. 
A.  In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if: 
1.  Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and 
2.  Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned. 
B.  If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
C.  Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection B of this section and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
(Prior code § 6-2.8)  
3.08.090 - Administration by county recorder. 
The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Prior code § 6-2.9)  
3.08.100 - Claims for refund. 
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California. 
(Prior code § 6-2.10)  
3.08.110 - Exemption for instruments taken in lieu of foreclosure. 
The tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument, or writing to a beneficiary or mortgagee, which is taken from the mortgagor or trustor as a result of or in lieu of foreclosure; provided, that such tax shall apply to the extent that the consideration exceeds the unpaid debt, including accrued interest and cost of foreclosure. Consideration, unpaid debt amount and identification of grantee as beneficiary or mortgagee shall be noted on said deed, instrument or writing or stated in an affidavit or declaration under penalty of perjury for tax purposes. 
(Ord. 697 § 2 (part), 1995: prior code § 6-2.11)  
3.08.120 - Exemption for instruments which divide marital property. 
The tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument, or other writing which purports to transfer, divide or allocate community, quasi-community or quasi-marital property assets between spouses for the purpose of effecting a division of community, quasi-community or quasi-marital property which is required by a judgment decreeing a dissolution of the marriage or legal separation, by a judgment of nullity, or by any other judgment or order rendered pursuant to the Family Code, or by a written agreement between the spouses, executed in contemplation of any such judgments or orders. In order to qualify for the exemption provided in this section, the deed, instrument, or other writing shall include a written recital, signed by either spouse, stating that the deed, instrument, or other writing is entitled to the exemption. 
(Ord. 697 § 2 (part), 1995: prior code § 6-2.12)  
3.08.130 - Exemption for certain conveyances by a governmental entity to a nonprofit corporation. 
The tax imposed pursuant to this part shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument, or other writing by which the state of California, any political subdivision thereof, or agency or instrumentality of either thereof, conveys to a nonprofit corporation realty the acquisition, construction or improvement of which was financed or refinanced by obligations issued by the nonprofit corporation on behalf of a governmental unit, within the meaning of Section 1.103-1(b) of Title 26 of the Code of Federal Regulations. 
(Ord. 697 § 2 (part), 1995: prior code § 6-2.13)  
Chapter 3.12 - UNIFORM LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX 
 
3.12.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the uniform local sales and use tax ordinance. 
(Prior code § 6-1.1)  
3.12.020 - Rate. 
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent. 
(Prior code § 6-1.2)  
3.12.030 - Operative date. 
This chapter shall be operative on January 1, 1978. 
(Prior code § 6-1.3)  
3.12.040 - Purpose. 
This city council declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
B.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
C.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes; 
D.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6-1.4)  
3.12.050 - Contract with state. 
Prior to the operative date, this city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax ordinance; provided, that if this city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6-1.5)  
3.12.060 - Sales tax. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.12.020 ofthe gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date. 
(Prior code § 6-1.6)  
3.12.070 - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Prior code § 6-1.7)  
3.12.080 - Use tax. 
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate stated in Section 3.12.020 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Prior code § 6-1.8)  
3.12.090 - Adoption of provisions of state law. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
(Prior code § 6-1.9)  
3.12.100 - Limitations on adoption of state law. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "State" is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of the ordinance codified in this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provisions of that Code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Prior code § 6-1.10)  
3.12.110 - Permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6-1.11)  
3.12.120 - Exclusions and exemptions. 
A.  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer. 
B.  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax dueunder this chapter. 
C.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
D.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(Prior code § 6-1.12)  
3.12.130 - Amendments. 
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6-1.13)  
3.12.140 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Prior code § 6-1.14)  
3.12.150 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Prior code § 6-1.15)  
Chapter 3.16 - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX 
 
3.16.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the uniform transient occupancy tax ordinance of the city. 
(Prior code § 6-5.1)  
3.16.020 - Definitions. 
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter. 
"Hotel" means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes and including any hotel, in tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobilehome or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof. 
"Occupancy" means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
"Operator" means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
"Rent" means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
"Tax administrator" means the city manager. 
"Transient" means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty (30) days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this chapter may be considered. 
(Prior code § 6-5.2)  
3.16.030 - Tax imposed. 
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of seven percent of the rent charged by the operator. This tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax administrator may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the tax administrator. 
(Prior code § 6-5.3)  
3.16.040 - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be imposed upon any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty. 
(Ord. 667 § 1, 1994: prior code § 6-5.4)  
3.16.050 - Operator's duties. 
Each operator shall maintain records as provided in subsection A of Section 3.16.110 and shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of rent charged and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. 
(Prior code § 6-5.5)  
3.16.060 - Registration. 
Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or within thirty (30) days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register such hotel with the tax administrator and obtain from him a transient occupancy registration certificate to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Such certificate shall, among other things, state the following: 
A.  The name of the operator; 
B.  The address of the hotel; 
C.  The date upon which the certificate was issued; 
D.  "This transient occupancy registration certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the Tax Administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the Tax Administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct in any unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including, but not limited to, those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this City. This certificate does not constitute a permit." 
(Prior code § 6-5.6)  
3.16.070 - Reporting and remitting. 
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax administrator, make a report to the tax administrator, on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the tax administrator. The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax and shall require information in the report addressing the name and address of the business, license number, the reporting period, the total gross rental receipts, exemptions, total taxable rents, the tax based upon the percent levied by the city, and the applicable penalties due and payable. Reports and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator. 
(Prior code § 6-5.7)  
3.16.080 - Penalties and interest. 
A.  Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax. 
B.  Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty (30) days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten (10) percent penalty first imposed. 
C.  Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section. 
D.  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
E.  Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section, shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. 
(Prior code § 6-5.8)  
3.16.090 - Failure to collect and report tax. 
If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect the tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of the tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known place of address. Such operator may, within ten (10) days after the serving or mailing of such notice, make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the tax administrator shall give not less than five days' written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in the notice why amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing, the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen (15) days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.16.100. 
(Prior code § 6-5.9)  
3.16.100 - Appeal. 
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk in accordance with the uniform appeal procedure. The finding of the council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant at the appellant's last known address. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. 
(Prior code § 6-5.10)  
3.16.110 - Records. 
Every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter shall, for a period of three years, retain for inspection by the tax administrator all records necessary to determine the amount of tax payable to the city. The tax administrator shall have the right to inspect such records, as provided in Section 3.16.120, as appropriate, to insure the collection of taxes due. Inspection shall be made available to the tax administrator upon reasonable request. Required information shall include, but not be limited to, the following: paid laundry and linen bills, cash receipts and sales journals, daily sheets, individual registration cards and folios, daily occupancy reports, housekeeping reports, records of transient tax collections, proof of government employee exemptions, proof of over thirty (30) day occupancies, and record of cash payouts. 
(Prior code § 6-5.11)  
3.16.120 - Examination of records. 
The tax administrator, or any person authorized in writing by the tax administrator, shall have the right to examine the books, papers, records and equipment of any hotel operator as defined in Section 3.16.110. Such operator liable for transient occupancy tax may be subject to investigation for the purpose of determining character of the business of the person(s) in order to verify the accuracy of any report made, or if no report is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine tax due and payable to the city. 
(Prior code § 6-5.12)  
3.16.130 - Refunds. 
A.  Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsections B and C of this section provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator. 
B.  An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator. 
C.  A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient, having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax. 
D.  No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. 
(Prior code § 6-5.13)  
3.16.140 - Actions to collect. 
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. 
(Prior code § 6-5.14)  
3.16.150 - Penalty for violations. 
A.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable according to the provisions of Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
B.  Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required herein, or furnish records as specified in Section 3.16.110, or to furnish any report required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental report or other data required by the tax administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is punishable as aforesaid. 
(Prior code § 6-5.15)  
Chapter 3.20 - DOWNTOWN PARKING AND BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT 
 
3.20.010 - Resolution of intention, public hearing and findings. 
The recitals hereof, which set forth facts regarding the adoption of the resolution, the conduct of a public hearing and certain findings of this city council, are true and correct and incorporated herein by reference. 
(Prior code § 6-9.1)  
3.20.020 - Establishment of area. 
A parking and business improvement area to be known as the "downtown Lancaster business improvement district" (the "district") is established pursuant to the Parking and Business Improvement Area Law of 1979, Streets and Highway Code Section 36500 et seq. The boundaries of the district and the benefit zones within the district shall be as set forth on Exhibit A, set out at the end of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6-9.2)  
3.20.030 - Benefit assessment. 
All businesses, trades and professions located within the boundaries shown on Exhibit A, set out at the end of this chapter, shall, commencing January 1, 1990, pay a benefit assessment in addition to the city or other governmental entity, in the following amounts: 
	Benefit 	Benefit 
	Zone A 	Zone B 
Retail 		
Type 1 		
(1—2 employees) 	$150.00 	$75.00 
		
Type 2 		
(3+ employees) 	300.00 	150.00 
		
Nonretail 		
Type 1 		
(1—2 employees) 	120.00 	60.00 
		
Type 2 		
(3+ employees) 	240.00 	120.00 
 
The benefit assessment shall be payable semiannually during each fiscal year, as provided in Section 3.20.080. The benefit assessment shall be prorated for the 1989/90 fiscal year. 
(Prior code § 6-9.3)  
3.20.040 - Residential exclusion. 
No one shall be required to pay an assessment based on a residential use within the district. 
(Prior code § 6-9.4)  
3.20.050 - New business exemption. 
Any new business established within the district shall not be required to pay an assessment hereunder for the year during which it commenced business, but the initial assessment payable by said business shall commence with the next succeeding fiscal year. This shall not be deemed to apply to an existing business that has changed ownership or location within the district. 
(Prior code § 6-9.5)  
3.20.060 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of calculating the amount of assessment owed, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Fiscal year" means July 1st to June 30th of each year. 
"Nonretail businesses" means professions and service businesses, as defined in this section, not meeting the definition of retail businesses and would include financial and lending institutions, hotels and motels. 
"Professions" and "service businesses" mean and include general office, attorney, architects, physicians and others in a medical/health service field, news and advertising media, printers, photographers, real estate brokers, builders, service stations, repairing and servicing businesses, renting and leasing businesses, laboratories (including dental and optical), hearing aid services, utilities, artists and designers, vending machine businesses, and other businesses not included in the "retail" category, as defined in this section. 
"Retail businesses" means and includes all businesses not covered by other definitions set out in this section at least fifty (50) percent of whose gross income is derived from "retail sales" as that term is defined in the California Sales and Use Tax Law. The fact that a substantial part of its business consists of other than retail sales does not exclude the business from this classification so long as such other business component does not account for more than fifty (50) percent of such business' gross income. 
(Prior code § 6-9.6)  
3.20.070 - Purposes. 
The purposes for which the funds raised by said benefit assessment shall be devoted to the statutory purposes set forth in Section 36500 of the act, or one or more of said purposes, which are as follows: 
A.  Acquisition, construction or maintenance of parking facilities for the benefit of the district; 
B.  Promotion of public events which are to take place on or in public places in the district; 
C.  Decoration of any public place in the district; 
D.  Furnishing of music in any public place in the district; 
E.  The general promotion of business activities in the district. 
(Prior code § 6-9.7)  
3.20.080 - Collection of benefit assessment. 
The benefit assessment authorized by this chapter shall be billed by the city as of January 1st and July 1st of each fiscal year and shall be paid within thirty (30) days thereafter. Each billing shall represent fifty (50) percent of the annual assessment. 
(Prior code § 6-9.8)  
3.20.090 - Effective date. 
This chapter shall take effect on January 1, 1990. 
(Prior code § 6-9.9) 
   
Chapter 3.24 - SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND 
 
3.24.010 - Fund established. 
To comply with the provisions of Section 2113 of the Streets and Highways Code and to avail itself of its benefits of Sections 2106 and 2107 thereof, there is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the "special gas tax street improvement fund." 
(Prior code § 6-8.1)  
3.24.020 - Purpose of fund. 
All moneys received by the city from the state of California under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein or for engineering or for the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways by the city shall be paid into this fund. 
(Prior code § 6-8.2)  
3.24.030 - Funds to be spent for authorized purposes. 
All moneys in this fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by and subject to the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code. 
(Prior code § 6-8.3)  
Chapter 3.28 - HOUSING REVENUE BONDS 
 
3.28.010 - Indemnification for multifamily housing revenue bond default refundings. 
Developers of multifamily housing projects financed through city or Lancaster redevelopment agency multifamily housing revenue bonds whose projects are refunded to cure defaults shall indemnify the city and agency for all loss arising out of any refunding of such bonds. 
Such indemnification shall include all costs and attorney fees which would be incurred by the city and agency. 
(Prior code § 2-5.80)  
Chapter 3.32 - PURCHASING SYSTEM[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 976, § 1, adopted February 28, 2012, amended the Code by repealing former Ch. 3.32, §§ 3.32.010—3.32.250, and adding a new Ch. 3.32. Former Ch. 3.32 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. 846 of 2005 and Ord. 871 of 2007. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
3.32.010 - Purpose. 
The purposes of this chapter are to define a uniform system for the procurement of materials and services, to provide for the fair and equitable treatment of all persons involved in the procurement process, to obtain the highest possible value in exchange for public funds and to safeguard the quality and integrity of the purchasing system. 
(Ord. No. 976, § 1, 2-28-2012)  
3.32.020 - General procedural requirements. 
All contracts shall conform to the procedural requirements set forth in this section unless otherwise specified in this chapter or Code, or in another provision of state or federal law. 
A.  All contracts must be in writing and be signed in the name of the city. 
B.  All contracts must include appropriate insurance and indemnification provisions. 
C.  All contracts must be approved as to form by the city attorney or other legal counsel representing the city. 
D.  City council approval is required for all contracts unless otherwise specified in this chapter or Code, or in another provision of state or federal law. 
E.  A signed original of each contract entered into must be filed with the city clerk's office, except for a contract for the procurement of materials or services, which must be filed in the office of the purchasing officer. 
(Ord. No. 976, § 1, 2-28-2012)  
3.32.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Business" means any corporation, partnership, individual, sole proprietorship, joint stock company, joint venture or any other private legal entity. 
"Bid," "bid document" and "proposal" mean the documents, including the attachments and addenda, which set forth instruction to bidders or proposers and which are disseminated for the purpose of soliciting bids or proposals. 
"City" means the municipal corporation and charter city now existing and known as the City of Lancaster. 
"Construction projects" and "public projects" mean those public projects as defined in California Public Contract Code Section 22002. 
"Contract" is synonymous to "agreement" and, regardless of which terms is used, it means an agreement between the city and one or more parties for the procurement or disposition of materials, services, professional services, and/or construction projects. 
"Contractor" includes vendor and means any person who has entered into a contract with the city. 
"Designee" means any person to whom the purchasing officer delegates authority under this chapter. 
"Emergency" means a sudden, unexpected occurrence that poses a clear and imminent danger, requiring immediate action to prevent or mitigate the loss or impairment of life, health, property, or essential public services. 
"Formal bidding procedure" means the procedure described in Section 3.32.210. 
"Informal bidding procedure" means the procedure described in Section 3.32.310. 
"Invitation for bids" means a public notice inviting bids for one or more specific public projects. 
"Materials" means all property, including but not limited to, equipment and supplies, but does not include land, a permanent interest in land or leases of real property. 
"Procurement" and "procure" mean the acquisition of materials or services, professional services, or construction projects by the city, including but not limited to purchasing, renting or leasing, and all functions and procedures pertaining to such acquisitions, such as description of requirements, selection and solicitation of sources, preparation and award of contract, and all phases of contract administration. 
"Procurement procedures manual" means a policies and procedures manual explaining in more details how the principles detailed in the chapter are to be implemented. 
"Professional services" means the procurement of services that involve the exercise of professional discretion and independent judgment based on advanced or specialized knowledge, expertise or training gained by formal study or experience. Such professional services include, but are not limited to, services provided by appraisers, architects, engineers, instructors, insurance advisors, physicians, or other specialized consultants. Professional services include, but are not limited to, those professionals as defined in California Government Code Section 4526. Professional services, for the purposes of this chapter, does not include attorney/legal services. 
"Public notice" means the distribution or dissemination of information to interested parties using methods that are reasonably available. Such methods may include publication in a newspaper or trade journal in general circulation in the city, electronic mailing lists and/or posting on a website maintained for the purpose of providing public notices. 
"Purchasing officer" means the city manager or designee. 
"Services" mean the furnishing of labor, time or effort by a contractor. 
"Solicitation" means an invitation for bids, a request for technical offers, a request for proposals, a request for qualifications, a request for quotations, or any other invitation or request by which the city invites a person to participate in a procurement. 
(Ord. No. 976, § 1, 2-28-2012)  
3.32.040 - Supplementary general principles of law applicable. 
The provisions of this chapter and general principles of law and equity, including the Uniform Commercial Code of this state and the Common Law of Contracts (as applied in this state) shall govern procurement and contracting for public projects in the City of Lancaster; provided, in the event of a conflict between such general legal and equitable principles and this chapter, this chapter shall control for purposes of transactions governed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 976, § 1, 2-28-2012)  
3.32.050 - Requirement of good faith. 
This chapter requires all parties involved in the negotiation, performance, or administration of city contracts to act in good faith. 
(Ord. No. 976, § 1, 2-28-2012)  
3.32.060 - Reporting of anticompetitive practices. 
If for any reason collusion or other anticompetitive practices are suspected among any bidders or offerors, a notice of the relevant facts shall be transmitted to the purchasing officer and the city attorney. This section does not require a law enforcement agency conducting an investigation into such practices to convey such notice to the purchasing officer. 
(Ord. No. 976, § 1, 2-28-2012)  
3.32.070 - Purchasing officer—Appointment. 
The city manager is hereby designated as the purchasing officer of the city. The purchasing officer may delegate procurement authority to any designee. 
(Ord. No. 976, § 1, 2-28-2012)  
3.32.080 - Purchasing officer—Duties. 
The purchasing officer or designee shall supervise the purchasing division and shall have authority to do the following: 
A.  Designate a designee for the administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
B.  Procure or contract for materials and services required by a department of the city in accordance with the procurement procedures prescribed by this chapter. 
C.  Enter into any contract permitted by law, including, but not limited to, equipment service contracts, lease purchase agreements, agreements for services and professional services, and rental agreements subject to any restrictions set forth in this chapter or specifically provided by law. 
D.  Maintain, when feasible, full and open competition among bidders on all procurements. 
E.  Prepare, recommend and implement rules to be adopted by resolution of the city council governing the purchasing of materials and services for the city, which rules shall be consistent with this chapter. Recommend revisions and amendments to such rules where applicable. 
F.  Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary to the operation of this chapter and any rules adopted by the city council to implement this chapter. 
G.  Act as the city's agent in the transfer and disposal of surplus materials. 
H.  Make procurement award recommendations to the appropriate authority. 
(Ord. No. 976, § 1, 2-28-2012)  
3.32.090 - Purchasing authority. 
A.  Subject to compliance with Section 3.32.200, procurements up to one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($125,000.00) shall be made as follows: The purchasing officer may approve, without city council approval, procurement contracts of one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($125,000.00) or less. 
B.  Subject to compliance with Section 3.32.210, procurements in excess of one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($125,000.00) shall be made as follows: The city council must approve procurement contracts in excess of one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($125,000.00), unless otherwise excepted in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 976, § 1, 2-28-2012)  
3.32.100 - Purchase orders. 
Except as stated in this chapter, or if procurements are made pursuant to previously adopted alternative procedures (such as procurement card purchases), no procurement of materials or services of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) or more shall be made without a purchase order. 
(Ord. No. 976, § 1, 2-28-2012)  
3.32.110 - Encumbrance of funds. 
Except for cases of emergency, the purchasing officer shall not issue any purchase order nor shall any contract be approved for materials or services unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which said procurement or contract is to be charged. 
(Ord. No. 976, § 1, 2-28-2012)  
3.32.120 - Multi-year contracts. 
Unless otherwise provided by law, a contract for materials or services may be entered into for any period of time deemed to be in the best interest of this city, if the term of the contract and conditions of renewal or extension, if any, are included in the solicitation and monies are available for the first fiscal period at the time of contracting. Payment and performance obligations for succeeding fiscal periods are subject to the availability and appropriation of monies. 
A.  Prior to use of a multi-year contract, it shall be determined that: 
(1)  Estimated requirements cover the period of the contract and are reasonably firm and continuing; 
(2)  The contract will serve the best interests of the city by encouraging effective competition or otherwise promoting economies in city procurement. 
B.  When funds are not appropriated or otherwise made available to support continuation of performance in a subsequent fiscal year, the contract shall be cancelled and the contractor shall be reimbursed for the reasonable value of any nonrecurring costs incurred but not amortized in the price of the materials or services delivered under the contract. 
(Ord. No. 976, § 1, 2-28-2012)  
3.32.130 - Appeals. 
The purchasing officer shall have the authority to resolve protests. Appeals from the decisions of the purchasing officer may be made pursuant to the uniform appeals procedure set forth in Chapter 2.44 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 976, § 1, 2-28-2012)  
3.32.140 - Violations of purchasing policy and unauthorized acts. 
A.  The purchasing officer is responsible for the city's compliance with applicable laws. 
B.  Employees are required to make all procurements of goods and services in accordance with this chapter and with the rules prescribed by the city council from time to time pursuant to Section 3.32.080. 
C.  Procurements of goods or services, including construction services, by any means other than approved procurement procedures are a violation of city policy and are unlawful. 
D.  The purchasing officer shall review procurement practices and activities for adherence to this chapter. Any violations shall be addressed pursuant to the city's procurement procedures manual or state law, if applicable. 
E.  The purchasing officer is under no obligation to authorize payment for expenditures not made in compliance with the applicable policies, and financial responsibility may become the personal liability of the employee who effected the improper procurement or transaction. 
F.  Deliberate violations in order to circumvent the requirements of this chapter shall be subject to Section 1.12.010 of the city's Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 976, § 1, 2-28-2012)  
ARTICLE II. - PROCUREMENT PROCEDURES FOR MATERIALS AND SERVICES 
 
3.32.200 - Procurement of materials and services of thirty thousand dollars to one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars. 
A.  Quotation Requirement. The procurement of materials and services of thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) up to one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($125,000.00) may be made by the purchasing officer in the open market, following the procedure described in this section. 
(1)  Minimum Number of Quotations. Open market procurements shall, whenever possible, be based on at least three quotations. 
(2)  Inviting Quotations. The purchasing officer shall solicit quotations by written request (including facsimile and electronic mail) or telephone to prospective vendors. 
(3)  Quotations. Quotations shall be submitted to the purchasing officer, who shall keep a record of all open market orders and quotes for a period of one year after the order is placed. These records shall be made available for public inspection for up to one year following award of the contract. 
(4)  No Responsive Quotation. If no quotation, or no responsive quotation, is received after inviting quotations under this section, the purchasing officer may proceed to hire or have services performed or procure the materials or services in the open market. 
B.  Exceptions. The quotation procedure under this section may be dispensed with in the following instances: 
(1)  Emergency. In an emergency, when time is of the essence and in accordance with the procurement procedures manual for one of the following reasons: 
(a)  To preserve or protect life, health or property; 
(b)  Upon natural disaster; 
(c)  To forestall a shutdown of essential public services. 
(2)  Sole Source. Where the purchasing officer determines that the materials or services are unique and available only from one source, so that the quotation procedure required by this section would be meaningless. Sole source procurements may include proprietary items sold directly from the manufacturer, items that have only one distributor authorized to sell in this area, or a specified product that the purchasing officer determines to be the only product that is acceptable. The basis upon which this determination is made shall be supported by written documentation signed by the requesting department head and provided to the purchasing officer. 
(3)  Cooperative Purchasing Program. Where materials or services are procured through a cooperative purchasing program maintained by any public agency, if the underlying procurement was made using quotation or bid procedures at least as restrictive as the city's. In all such cases, the materials and services must be the same and be offered at the same price as the materials and services subject to the agreement or program, allowing for variation in customizing the order or for desirable options. 
C.  Local Preference. Local businesses shall be given a preference in the procurement process by allowing for a local vendor to submit within forty-eight (48) hours a new quotation if they are within five percent of the lowest offer. This provision only applies to quotations and proposals below the bidding threshold and only for materials and services, excluding construction services. A "local vendor" is a business that meets the following criteria: 
(1)  Has its headquarters, distribution point or locally-owned franchise located in or having a street address within the city for at least six months immediately prior to the request for quotations; 
(2)  Holds all required business licenses by the city; and 
(3)  Employs at least one full-time employee or two part-time employees whose primary residence(s) is located within the city, or if the business has no employees, shall be at least fifty (50) percent owned by one or more persons whose primary residence(s) is located within the city. 
(Ord. No. 976, § 1, 2-28-2012)  
3.32.210 - Procurements of materials and services in excess of one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars; formal bidding procedure. 
The purchasing officer shall procure materials and services in excess of one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($125,000.00) pursuant to the formal bidding procedure described in this section, subject to the exceptions set forth in subsection B of Section 3.32.200 above. 
A.  Invitation for Bids. An invitation for bids shall be issued and shall include the specifications, the contract to be used, and shall state where bid forms and specifications may be secured, and the final time and place for submitting bids. 
(1)  Public Notice. Invitation for bids shall be given by public notice in the manner directed by the purchasing officer. 
(2)  Bidder's List. The purchasing officer may also solicit sealed bids from prospective suppliers whose names are on a bidder's list. 
B.  Bidder's Security. When deemed necessary by the purchasing officer, required bidder's security may be prescribed in the invitation for bids. Bidders shall be entitled to the return of their bidder's security; provided, however, that a successful bidder shall forfeit his bid security upon his refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten days after the notice of award of contract has been mailed, unless in the latter event the city is solely responsible for the delay in executing the contract. The city council may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the next lowest responsible bidder. If the city council awards the contract to the next lowest bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder's security shall be applied by the city to the contract price differential between the lowest bid and the second lowest bid, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder. If the city council rejects all remaining bids presented and re-solicits, the amount of the lowest bidder's security may be used to offset the cost of soliciting and receiving new bids. The surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder. 
C.  Performance Bonds. The purchasing officer shall have the authority to require a performance bond before entering into a contract in such amount as it shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interest of the city. If the purchasing officer requires a performance bond, the form and amount of the bond shall be described in the invitation for bids. 
D.  Insurance and Indemnity. Bid solicitations for contractual services or specialized equipment shall include required insurance and indemnity clauses. 
E.  Bid Opening. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the purchasing officer and shall be identified on the envelope as a bid. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the invitation for bids. A tabulation of all bids received shall be open for public inspection in the purchasing officer's office during regular business hours for a period of not less than thirty (30) calendar days after the bid opening. 
F.  Bid Evaluation. Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids, which may include criteria to determine acceptability such as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery, and suitability for a particular purpose. Those criteria that will affect the bid price and be considered in evaluation for award shall be objectively measurable. The invitation for bids shall set forth the evaluation criteria to be used. The contract will be awarded to the lowest responsible and qualified bidder whose bid meets the requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids. 
G.  Rejection of Bids. The purchasing officer or the requesting department may recommend rejection of any or all bids if it is determined to be in the best interests of the city. Reasons for rejection may include, but are not limited to, the following: a bid is determined to be non-responsive, the number of bids received is inadequate, bids received are not reasonably uniform in price, or the lowest bid received is deemed to be too high. The purchasing officer may, in any given case, reject all bids with or without cause and submit the material or services involved to a new bidding process. If all bids are rejected, the purchasing officer may be authorized to re-solicit bids, negotiate a contract for the procurement, or abandon the procurement. 
H.  Tie Bids. If two or more bids are received which are in all respects equal, the award will go to the bidder with local preference. If both bidders or neither have local preference, the purchasing officer will select by means of random selection, such as a coin toss. 
I.  Award of Contracts. Procurements or contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsive and qualified bidder. In determining the lowest responsive and qualified bidder, the following will be taken into consideration: 
(1)  Bids shall be awarded to the "responsive" and "qualified" bidder who submits the lowest bid. 
(2)  In determining the lowest "responsive" bid, the following elements shall be considered in addition to price: 
(a)  A responsive bid is one which is in substantial conformance with the requirements of the invitation for bids, including specifications and the city's contractual terms and conditions. Bidders who substitute terms and conditions or who qualify bids in such a manner as to nullify or limit their liability shall be considered non-responsive. 
(b)  Conformance with the requirements of the invitation for bids may also include providing proof of insurance, completing all forms, including references, and all other information required in the bid document. 
(c)  The successful bidder must demonstrate the ability to successfully fulfill a contract, including rendering of subsequent and continued service. Staff may request proof of a prospective bidder's reliability. Prospective bidders may be requested to furnish proof of financial resources, a list of current or previous customers, and other pertinent data. Such action may also be taken after receipt of bids. 
(d)  A bidder may be determined to be non-responsive if a prospective bidder fails to furnish proof of qualifications when required. 
(3)  In determining the lowest "qualified" bidder, the following elements shall be considered in addition to price: 
(a)  Products offered provide the quality, fitness, and capacity for the required usage. 
(b)  Bidder has the ability, capacity and skill to perform the contract satisfactorily and within the time required. 
(c)  Bidder's experience(s) regarding past procurements or contracts by the city or other public agencies demonstrates the reliability of the bidder to perform the contract. 
(d)  When a bid is recommended to be awarded to other than the low bidder, written justification is required. The written statement, signed by the appropriate department head, shall be attached to the procurement requisition, delivered to the purchasing officer, and maintained in the files of the appropriate department. 
(Ord. No. 976, § 1, 2-28-2012)  
3.32.220 - Procurements of professional services in an amount in excess of one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars. 
A.  Competitive Sealed Proposals. Procurements of professional services in an amount in excess of one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($125,000.00) shall be solicited by competitive sealed proposal. 
B.  Request for Proposal. Proposals shall be solicited through a request for proposal. 
C.  Public Notice. Public notice of the request for proposal shall be given in the manner directed by the purchasing officer. 
D.  Receipt of Proposals. Sealed proposals shall be submitted to the purchasing officer by the date and time specified in the request for proposal. 
E.  Proposal Evaluation. The request for proposal shall state the criteria for evaluation and the relative importance of price and other factors. 
F.  Negotiation. The most qualified and responsive offer will be selected for contract negotiation. If agreement cannot be negotiated with the first choice offer, the second choice offer will be contacted with first choice offer being dismissed from further consideration on that particular project. The negotiation process shall be documented by the purchasing officer. 
G.  Award. Award shall be made to the responsible offeror whose proposal is determined to be the most advantageous to the city, taking into consideration price and the criteria established for evaluation set forth in the request for proposal. The contract file shall contain documentation of the basis on which the award is made. 
H.  Rejection of Proposals. The city reserves the right to reject any or all proposals in whole and may waive any irregularities or informalities in the proposals when such action is considered to be in the best interest of the city. The purchasing officer shall have the authority to reject proposals and waive irregularities and informalities on behalf of the city. All proposals received after the designated closing date and time shall be considered non-responsive and shall be rejected. 
I.  Exceptions. The purchasing officer may waive the requirement of this chapter when it may be shown that that the competitive selection process will fail to produce an advantage to the city. 
(Ord. No. 976, § 1, 2-28-2012)  
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC PROJECTS 
 
3.32.300 - Construction projects. 
A.  Except where specifically exempted from such laws by ordinance of the city council, contracts for construction projects in the city shall be governed by applicable state laws including the California Public Contract Code, Division 2, Part 1 and Division 2, Part 3, the Local Agency Public Construction Act, including the Alternate Provisions of the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act, which are hereby adopted for use in the city. Contracts for construction shall also be governed by the current edition of the standard specifications for public works construction and the latest supplement thereto, adopted by the Greenbook Committee of the Public Works Standards, Inc., except as otherwise provided by the city council or the purchasing officer if the contract is within his/her authority. 
(1)  Construction projects less than the amount specified in Section 22032(a) of the California Public Contract Code may be performed by city employees by force account, by negotiated contract or by purchase order. 
(2)  Construction projects less than the amount specified in Section 22032(b) of the Public Contract Code may be let to contract by informal bidding procedures. 
(3)  Construction projects of more than the amount specified in Section 22032(c) of the California Public Contract Code shall be let by formal bidding procedure. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful to split projects into smaller work orders or projects for the purpose of evading the provisions of this chapter or applicable state laws. 
(Ord. No. 976, § 1, 2-28-2012)  
3.32.310 - Informal bidding procedure. 
A.  Informal Bidding Procedures. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, public projects, as defined by Section 22002 of the California Public Contract Code and in accordance with the limits listed in Section 22032 of the Public Contract Code, may be let to contract by informal bidding procedures as set forth in Section 22032, et seq., of the California Public Contract Code. 
B.  Contractors Lists. A list of contractors shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of Section 22034 of the California Public Contract Code and criteria promulgated from time to time by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission. 
C.  Public Notice Inviting Informal Bids. Where a public project is to be performed which is subject to the provisions of this section, a notice inviting informal bids shall be mailed to all contractors for the category of work to be bid, as shown on the list developed in accordance with subsection B of this section, and to all construction trade journals as specified by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission in accordance with Section 22036 of the California Public Contract Code. Additional contractors and/or construction trade journals may be notified at the discretion of the purchasing officer, provided however: 
(1)  If there is no list of qualified contractors maintained by the city for the particular category of work to be performed, the public notice inviting informal bids shall be sent only to the construction trade journals specified by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission. 
(2)  If the product or service is proprietary in nature such that it can be obtained only from a certain contractor or contractors, the public notice inviting informal bids may be sent exclusively to such contractors. 
D.  Award of Contracts. The purchasing officer is authorized to award informal contracts pursuant to this section. The city council may delegate the authority to award informal contracts to a different appropriate person when necessary. 
(Ord. No. 976, § 1, 2-28-2012)  
ARTICLE IV. - DISPOSAL OF SURPLUS PROPERTY 
 
3.32.400 - Disposition of surplus property. 
A.  The purchasing officer will operate a surplus property program for the purpose of receiving, storing, transferring, or selling surplus property no longer needed by using agencies. 
B.  Unless otherwise provided for, surplus property no longer needed by any department of the city or the Lancaster Redevelopment Agency shall be offered for sale through competitive bids or public auction. Sales by competitive bid will be conducted in accordance with Section 3.32.210, except that sale shall be made to the highest responsible bidder. Public auctions may be conducted on-site or electronically or through an auction company hired by the city. 
C.  Unless otherwise provided, all proceeds from sale or auction of surplus property will be deposited into the city's general fund. Proceeds from sale of enterprise, federal, grant or other special designation property will be reimbursed, less prorated selling expenses, to the appropriate fund, after completion of each sale. 
(Ord. No. 976, § 1, 2-28-2012)  
Chapter 3.36 - LOCAL HIRING PREFERENCES IN PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS 
 
3.36.010 - Findings and purpose. 
A.  The city council finds and declares as follows: 
1.  The unemployment rate in the city has consistently been higher than in the State of California and County of Los Angeles as a whole. According to the Labor Market Information Division of the Employment Development Department, the average annual unemployment rate in the city as of February 2011 was sixteen and six-tenths (16.6) percent. 
2.  Statistics indicate that the city's higher unemployment rate correlates to a higher number of families living in poverty and to a higher crime rate. 
3.  Due to the lack of local jobs, a higher percentage of the workforce residing in the city must commute long distances to find work, causing increased traffic on state highways, increased pollution, increased use of gas and other fuels and other serious environmental impacts. 
4.  Because of the shortage of local jobs, many residents of the city must leave for work very early in the morning and return late in the evening, often leaving children and teenagers alone and unsupervised during the hours between school and the parents' return from work outside the area. 
5.  Absentee parents and unsupervised youth can result in increased problems for families, communities and the city as a whole, including, but not limited to, increased crime, more frequent and serious injuries, poor homework accomplishments, failing grades, and increased high school dropout rates. 
6.  The Antelope Valley needs an expanding employment base and a local hiring preference in public works contracts will benefit the city as a whole. 
7.  The city spends significant amounts on purchasing personal property and materials, in contracting for services, and in constructing improvements to real property or to existing facilities. The funds used in making those purchases are derived, in part, from taxes, fees, and other revenues of local businesses in the city. To the extent possible, such funds should be placed back into the local economy. 
8.  The construction industry is a potential path to middle income employment, and is therefore a crucial opportunity to connect residents with economic opportunities. 
9.  A local hiring preference in public works contracts will provide job opportunities to city and Antelope Valley residents, expand the area's employment base, lessen the drain on public assistance resources and reduce the impacts on the environment caused by the high unemployment and long commuting times to jobs outside the area. 
B.  The purpose of this chapter is to ameliorate the foregoing by: 
1.  Increasing the local workforce base by decreasing unemployment and thereby enhancing and retaining job skills; and 
2.  Increasing local spending power, which will result in a stronger, more self-reliant economy. 
(Ord. No. 977, § 1, 4-24-2012)  
3.36.020 - Definitions. 
Except as otherwise expressly set forth herein, the following words and terms as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
"Construction work hours" means the total hours worked on a public works contract by qualified individuals, whether those individuals are employed by a contractor or subcontractor. 
"Contractor" means the following: 
A.  Any person or entity who submits a bid to the city for a public works contract; and/or 
B.  Any person or entity who provides labor and/or materials for the city pursuant to a public works contract. 
"City" means the City of Lancaster. 
"Days" means calendar days unless otherwise specified. 
"Local resident" means an individual who is legally domiciled in the Antelope Valley immediately preceding the date of the notice of solicitation or bid advertisement by the city. An individual's domicile is his or her one and only true, fixed and permanent home and principal establishment. An individual shall verify his or her domicile upon request of the contractor or city by producing satisfactory documentation such as a rent/lease agreement, utility bills, a valid state-issued driver's license or identification card, or any other similar and reliable evidence. For the purpose of this chapter, the following ZIP codes are considered to be within the Antelope Valley: 93501, 93502, 93504, 93505, 93510, 93516, 93523, 93524, 93532, 93534, 93535, 93536, 93539, 93543, 93550, 93551, 93552, 93553, 93560, 93584, 93586, 93590, 93591, 93596, 93599, which includes the cities and communities of Acton, Boron, California City, Edwards Air Force Base, Elizabeth Lake, Lake Los Angeles, Lancaster, Littlerock, Mojave, Palmdale, Pearblossom, Quartz Hill and Rosamond. 
"Public works contract" has the same meaning as set forth in Section 1101 of the California Public Contracts Code, as amended or supplanted. 
"Qualified individuals" means any and all skilled and unskilled workers, including but not limited to work site foremen, journeymen, technical engineers, apprentices, construction trainees, and construction helpers. Qualified individuals also include any and all other workers appropriate for construction activities regardless of level of skill. 
"Subcontractor(s)" means any person or entity that assumes by secondary contract some or all of the obligations of a contractor. 
(Ord. No. 977, § 1, 4-24-2012)  
3.36.030 - Requirements for contractors. 
A.  Every contractor submitting a bid to the city for a public works contract shall agree to make a good faith effort to hire qualified individuals who are local residents in sufficient numbers so that (with respect to such public works contract) no less than fifty (50) percent of the total construction workforce, including any subcontractor workforce, measured in construction work hours, is comprised of local residents. 
B.  A "good faith effort" means a contractor will take the following or similar actions to recruit and maintain local residents as part of the construction workforce: 
1.  Contact local recruitment sources to identify qualified individuals who are local residents; 
2.  Advertise for qualified individuals who are local residents in trade papers and newspapers of general circulation within the city and the County of Los Angeles, unless time limits imposed under the applicable public works contract relative to the commencement and/or completion of work do not permit such advertising; 
3.  With respect to any portion of a public works contract to be performed by a subcontractor, identify subcontractors whose workforce includes qualified individuals who are local residents; and 
4.  Develop a written plan to recruit local residents as part of the construction workforce. 
C.  Every contractor shall complete and sign under penalty of perjury a certification of good faith effort to hire local residents, on the form provided in the city's bid package, and shall submit the same with its sealed bid no later than the date and time of the bid opening. 
D.  A contractor shall include in each and every subcontract relating to a public works contract, a provision whereby the subcontractor agrees to make a good faith effort to hire qualified individuals who are local residents. A contractor shall be responsible for a subcontractor's compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
E.  The purchasing agent shall prescribe rules, regulations, and procedures relating to the application, administration, and interpretation of the provisions of this section. Such rules, regulations, and procedures shall be consistent with the provisions of this section and may specify details and forms to be used. 
(Ord. No. 977, § 1, 4-24-2012)  
3.36.040 - Requirements for subcontractors. 
Each subcontractor for work, laborers or materialmen relating to a public works project subject to this chapter shall, in its contract with the prime contractor, promise to make a good faith effort (as defined in Section 3.36.030) to hire qualified individuals who are local residents and to maintain documentary evidence of such actions. 
(Ord. No. 977, § 1, 4-24-2012)  
3.36.050 - Hiring discretion. 
This chapter does not limit the contractor's or the subcontractor's ability to assess the qualifications of prospective workers, and to make final hiring and retention decisions. No provision of this chapter shall be interpreted so as to require a contractor or subcontractor to employ a worker not qualified for the position in question, or to employ any particular worker. 
(Ord. No. 977, § 1, 4-24-2012)  
3.36.060 - Nonresponsive bids. 
The city may declare a bid to be nonresponsive under the provisions of this chapter for good cause including, but not limited to, the following circumstances: 
A.  If a contractor fails to complete and sign under penalty of perjury the certificate of good faith effort to hire local residents and/or fails to submit the same with its sealed bid no later than the date and time of the bid opening; or 
B.  If a contractor, or a subcontractor listed by a contractor, fails to comply with the good faith effort requirements set forth in Sections 3.36.030 and 3.36.040. 
(Ord. No. 977, § 1, 4-24-2012)  
3.36.070 - Required documentation. 
During its performance of a public works contract, a contractor shall keep an accurate record on a standardized form showing the name, place of residence, trade classification, hours employed, proof of qualified individual status, per diem wages and benefits of each person employed by the contractor on the specific public works project, including full-time, part-time, permanent and temporary employees. A contractor shall require each subcontractor performing work pursuant to a public works contract awarded by the city to the contractor to maintain records of the same information for the subcontractor's workforce and shall require each subcontractor to provide a copy of such records to the contractor upon the contractor's request. A contractor shall make the records and documents set forth in this section available to the city, upon request, within five business days. 
(Ord. No. 977, § 1, 4-24-2012)  
3.36.080 - Forms submitted under penalty of perjury. 
All forms required under this chapter shall be attested to as true as to the information set forth therein and shall be submitted under penalty of perjury. 
(Ord. No. 977, § 1, 4-24-2012)  
3.36.090 - Monitoring. 
From time to time, and at its sole discretion, the city may monitor and investigate compliance of any contractor and/or subcontractor with respect to the requirements of this chapter. The city shall have the right to engage in random inspections of job sites, subject to construction schedule and safety concerns. Each contractor and subcontractor shall allow representatives of the city, in the performance of their duties, to engage in random inspections of job sites and to have access to the employees of the contractor and subcontractor and the records required to document compliance with this chapter. The city shall establish a procedure for city monitoring of compliance with this chapter and to address allegations of noncompliance. The city shall have sole authority over the administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 977, § 1, 4-24-2012)  
3.36.100 - Exclusions and exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply under any of the following circumstances: 
A.  When a state or federal law or regulation applicable to a particular public works contract prohibits a local hiring requirement; 
B.  When the city determines, in accordance with the requirements of this code or applicable state law, that a contract is necessary to respond to an emergency which endangers the public health, safety or welfare; and/or 
C.  When the City determines that a suitable pool of qualified individuals who are local residents does not exist for a specific public works contract. 
(Ord. No. 977, § 1, 4-24-2012)  
Chapter 3.37 - HOTEL STIMULUS PROGRAM 
 
3.37.000 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the hotel stimulus program. 
( Ord. No. 1042, § 1, 5-8-2018 )  
3.37.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide an incentive program for the operation of hotels which meet criteria set forth in this chapter and which, as and when opened for business, will be qualifying hotels and thereafter continuously operate as AAA Three Diamond Hotels. In the implementation of this hotel stimulus program, the city council finds: 
The general welfare and material well-being of the residents of the city depend, in part, upon serving the existing needs of businesses and visitors and families within the city as well as promoting tourism in the city. 
The establishment of qualifying hotels and the operation, maintenance, and expansion of the inventory of AAA Three Diamond Hotels in the city will serve the existing needs of businesses and visitors and families within the city as well as promote and enhance the economy of the city and assist the city in serving growing needs of commercial and industrial businesses and promoting tourism by providing attractive and desirable visitor serving facilities and experiences that will serve the needs of visitors to the city, provide employment opportunities for the residents of the city, and provide additional benefits to the city by virtue of the city benefit package, as defined below. 
It is in the best interest of the city to induce and encourage the establishment of qualifying hotels and the operation of AAA Three Diamond Hotels that, but for the hotel stimulus program, would not operate within the city. 
The authority granted and the purposes to be accomplished by this chapter is a municipal affair for which public funds can be expended and that the establishment of qualifying hotels and the operation, maintenance, and expansion of the inventory of AAA Three Diamond Hotels is of paramount importance to the city, its residents, and businesses. 
( Ord. No. 1042, § 1, 5-8-2018 )  
3.37.020 - Definitions. 
For the provisions of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
"AAA Three Diamond Hotel(s)" means a hotel(s) which provides physical features and operational services which meet or exceed the rating criteria established for AAA Three Diamond Hotels by the American Automobile Association, as such compliance is determined by the American Automobile Association, and the Minimum Development Standards. AAA Three Diamond Hotel(s) does not include hotels operating on or before January 1, 2018, other than renovated qualifying hotel(s), nor does it include property, including both existing hotels and/or undeveloped land, that is/are currently the subject of an agreement with the city which agreement provides a subsidy or financing mechanism for the construction and/or operation of a hotel or which involved an agreement of the former Lancaster Redevelopment Agency. 
"Administrative fee" means such fee, if any, as the city may establish from time to time; any amounts received by the city as an application fee will be retained by the city, whether the application is approved or disapproved, to defer the administrative costs of reviewing each application and otherwise administering the hotel stimulus program. 
"Applicable transient occupancy tax rate" means the lesser of the rate of transient occupancy tax as applicable from time to time or eleven (11) percent. The applicable transient occupancy tax rate shall apply for the calculation of any and all incentive payments pursuant to Section 3.37.050 without regard to any increases, at any time, in the rate of the transient occupancy tax. 
"Applicant" means a person or entity submitting an application pursuant to Section 3.37.040 hereof. 
"Application" means the application submitted to the city manager by an applicant pursuant to Section 3.37.040 hereof, in the form prescribed from time to time by the city manager. 
"Base transient occupancy tax" means the average annualized transient occupancy tax paid to the city with respect to an existing hotel for the last thirty-six (36) months prior to the date on which an existing hotel becomes pre-approved under the qualified renovation program. Base transient occupancy tax shall be adjusted annually on January 1 of each year based on increases in the CPI. 
"Brand" means the distinctive name of a hotel that, by virtue of its distinctive name, is identified by specific physical and operational features so that guests are assured that they will receive a specified level of service and amenities wherever the property is located. 
"City benefit package" means a compendium of goods or services made available to city having substantial value; the city benefit package shall be determined as to each hotel in connection with the negotiation and preparation of the applicable operating covenant agreement. An illustrative example of what the city manager may approve as a city benefit package is as follows: 
Owner shall make available to city without charge throughout that period required under the operating covenant agreement for the ongoing operation of the hotel as a qualifying hotel as follows; city shall be entitled to reserve and utilize rooms for official city business, including without limitation use by visiting consultants, artists/crews for the Lancaster Performing Arts Center, attorneys, consultants, as well as business prospects which city staff is seeking to attract to locate within the city limits for up to fifteen (15) nights per month. The following parameters shall apply to the reservation and use of rooms under this Section 501.1: (i) up to five room nights, valid Friday through Sunday nights only, are to be booked up to thirty (30) days in advance; (ii) an additional five room nights, valid any night of the week, are to be booked up to twenty four (24) hours in advance; and (iii) an additional five room nights, valid any night of the week, are to be booked the same day as use. Reservations shall be made by the city manager. In the event the allotted number of rooms is not utilized during a particular month, the unused nights shall not carry forward. No room rent or charges (including parking) shall apply with respect to the rooms reserved under this provision ("city rooms") and no transient occupancy tax will be payable with respect to the city rooms as utilized under this provision. Hotel guests using city rooms shall be subject to payment of meals and incidentals, as applicable. 
"City Code" means the Municipal Code of the City of Lancaster as may be amended from time to time, and includes, without limitation, the Uniform Codes. 
"City manager" means the city manager of the City of Lancaster or his/her designee. 
"CPI" means the Consumer Price Index-Urban for the Los Angeles-Orange-Riverside County Average, Subgroup "All Items," (1982-1984 = 100) as established by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the U.S. Department of Labor. 
"Deferred developer impact fees" means those developer impact fees as to which an owner, as a participant under this hotel stimulus program, elects to have payment deferred until the earlier to occur of (i) issuance by city of a certificate of occupancy as to a hotel or other improvements as to the site or (ii) the second anniversary of the issuance of building permits as to the hotel or other improvements as to the site; provided that any development impact fees so deferred shall bear interest at the designated interest rate. The payment of deferred developer impact fees shall also be subject to Section 3.37.050(D). 
"Deferred permit, plan check, and inspection fees" means those permit, plan check and inspection fees as to which an owner, as a participant under this hotel stimulus program, elects to have payment deferred until the earlier to occur of (i) issuance by city of a certificate of occupancy as to a hotel or other improvements as to the site or (ii) the second anniversary of the issuance of building permits as to the hotel or other improvements as to the site; provided that any development impact fees so deferred shall bear interest at the designated interest rate. 
"Deposit" means such amount, if any, as may be required by resolution of the city as adopted from time to time. Should a deposit be made, such deposit shall be (i) returned to the applicant, if the application is rejected, (ii) retained by the city in the event that the application is terminated pursuant to Section 3.37.040(B), or (iii) refunded within thirty (30) days after a pre-approved qualifying hotel opens for business. The city shall have no obligation to earn interest or apply interest or earnings with respect to the deposit. 
"Designated interest rate" means a rate equal to the rate of interest applicable to the construction loan for the hotel and, if there is no construction loan, then a rate of interest designated by the city manager as representing a market rate of interest for such deferral. 
"Development impact fees" means such developer impact fees as are imposed by city from time to time under this Code and any implementing resolutions or entitlements. 
"Eligibility phase" means the period commencing on the effective date of this chapter and terminating on the earlier to occur of: 
A.  December 31, 2022, subject to Section 3.37.100, or 
B.  The date on which there are a total of five thousand (5,000) guestrooms comprised of guestrooms of new qualifying hotels which have been pre-approved and have opened for business. 
"Entitlements" means the city approvals for the development or renovation of a hotel, including without limitation all conditions of land use, building, and environmental approvals. 
"Existing hotel" means a building that was constructed, occupied, and used as a facility referenced in Section 5.20.010 on or before January 1, 2018. 
"Financing" refers to the combination of debt and equity sufficient to construct and operate the qualifying hotel for which an application has been filed with the city manager. 
"Flag" means the entity whose brand is used to identify the hotel. 
"Governmental requirements" means all laws, ordinances, statutes, codes, rules, regulations, orders and decrees of the United States, the state, the county, the city, or any other political subdivision in which the hotel is located, and of any other political subdivision, agency or instrumentality exercising jurisdiction over the city, the owner or the site, including, without limitation, all applicable state labor standards, the Code, the entitlements, all applicable disabled and handicapped access requirements, including, without limitation all applicable federal, state, and local public works requirements, including if and to the extent required as a matter of law the payment of prevailing wages and hiring of apprentices pursuant to Labor Code Section 1720 et seq., the Americans With Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. Section 12101, et seq., Government Code Section 4450, et seq., Government Code Section 11135, et seq., the Unruh Civil Rights Act, Civil Code Section 51, et seq., and all other applicable federal, state, and local laws. 
"Guestroom(s)" means a room or suite within a hotel intended for transient occupancy by guests for compensation. 
"Hotel" means a building which: 
A.  Operates as a facility referenced in Section 5.20.010, 
B.  Directly generates transit occupancy tax to the city, and 
C.  Meets the minimum required density. 
"Hotel operator" means franchisee, manager, lessee, or licensee with whom an owner has a contract to open as a qualifying hotel and thereafter to operate the qualifying hotel as a AAA Three Diamond Hotel pursuant to a franchise, management, lease, or license arrangement. 
"Hotel stimulus program" means the program set forth in this ordinance to encourage the granting and operation of qualifying hotels and their ongoing operation as AAA Three Diamond Hotels. 
"Incentive payments" are the payments made by the city to the owner pursuant to Section 3.37.050. 
"Initial milestone" means the date which is the earlier to occur of: 
A.  Twelve (12) months following the date of approval of the application, or 
B.  December 31, 2023 subject to Section 3.37.100. 
"Minimum development standards" means development which complies with all of the following: 
A.  All fees shall have been paid by owner or, in the case of a deferral of deferred development impact fees pursuant to Section 3.37.050(D), so deferred, 
B.  All development shall conform to this Code, all applicable governmental requirements, and the entitlements, and 
C.  All development shall satisfy the requirements for a qualifying hotel. 
"Minimum required density" means a minimum density measured by hotel rooms for occupancy of: 
A.  One hundred ten (110) rooms per acre, or 
B.  Ninety (90) rooms per acre as part of a Hotel that includes improved meeting space of not less than three thousand (3,000) square feet and a restaurant of not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
"New qualifying hotel(s)" means a qualifying hotel(s) that was not operating in the city (as a qualifying hotel) as of January 1, 2018. 
"Open(s)(ing)(ed) for business" or "opening" means the day on which a hotel opens or re-opens for business to the general public as a qualifying hotel or a date mutually agreed upon by city and owner which date occurs within the hotel's first year of operation. In the case of a qualifying renovated hotel, the reopening of such hotel as a qualifying hotel shall be treated as the opening. 
"Operating covenant agreement" means an agreement containing covenants as referenced in Section 3.37.060. 
"Owner" means the person or entity who is the owner of a hotel or a site, whether in the capacity of fee simple owner, lessee, sub-lessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, franchisee, or any other capacity, or the assignee or designee of such owner. 
"Ownership" means fee simple, lease, license, franchise or other interest in property or a contract to purchase any such interest, which would entitle the owner to construct a qualifying hotel or to substantially rehabilitate an existing hotel to satisfy all criteria as a qualifying hotel. 
"Permit, plan check, and inspection fees" means permit, plan check, and inspection fees as imposed by city from time to time under this Code and any implementing regulations or entitlements. 
"Pre-approved" or "pre-approved qualifying hotel" means a qualifying hotel whose application has been approved by the city manager pursuant to Section 3.37.040. 
"Qualifying hotels" means a hotel which satisfies all of the following: 
A.  It opens as an upscale, upper upscale or luxury hotel as designated under the applicable STR chain scale; 
B.  It is approved during the eligibility phase; 
C.  It opens and operates with a Three Diamond Hotel designation by the American Automobile Association during the eligibility phase; and 
D.  It meets the minimum required density. 
"Qualified renovation program" means a property improvement program undertaken by the owner of an existing hotel which proposes to convert from a hotel which is not a qualifying hotel to a qualifying hotel. 
"Renovated qualifying hotel" means a hotel which qualifies as a qualifying hotel under the qualified renovation program. 
"Second milestone" means, in each case, the first anniversary of the first milestone, subject to Section 3.37.100. 
"Site" means a parcel or parcels of land upon which a qualifying hotel will open. 
"Site control" means fee ownership of an existing hotel or a site on which a qualifying hotel is proposed. 
"Transient occupancy" means an uninterrupted stay of no more than twenty-eight (28) consecutive calendar days. 
"Transient occupancy tax" means the transient occupancy tax levied and collected pursuant to Chapter 3.16, as it may be amended from time to time and held in the city's general fund for unrestricted use. Chapter 3.16, as it may be amended from time to time, is referred to therein as the "Transient Occupancy Tax Code." 
"Transient occupancy tax increment" means the annual difference between the transient occupancy tax base and the amount of transient occupancy tax paid to the city based on the applicable transient occupancy tax rate with respect to a renovated qualifying hotel after its opening (as a qualifying hotel). 
"Under construction" means that all necessary discretionary entitlements have been approved by the city, grading and building permits have been issued, and that inspection approvals by the city of grading and foundations to grade level have been obtained, vertical construction of guestrooms has begun, and the operating covenant agreement has been recorded. 
"Uniform Codes" means each of the following as in effect from time to time as approved by city: 
The Uniform Building Code, 
The Uniform Housing Code, 
The National Electrical Code, 
The Uniform Plumbing Code, 
The Uniform Mechanical Code, and 
The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. 
"Year" means a calendar year or such fiscal year as may be designated under the applicable operating covenant agreement. 
( Ord. No. 1042, § 1, 5-8-2018 )  
3.37.040 - Eligibility for participation in hotel stimulus program. 
A.  Application Process. To become eligible for the hotel stimulus program as a qualifying hotel, the Owner shall: 
1.  Complete and submit to the city manager, the application for the hotel stimulus program, which shall contain, at a minimum: 
a.  Evidence of site control. 
b.  Description of development team, including, the development entity, the architect(s), interior designer, landscape architect, and other professional disciplines related to the construction and operation of a qualifying hotel for the purposes of confirming that the hotel will be an a qualifying hotel when opened for business. 
c.  The operating plan for a qualifying hotel which sets forth with reasonable particularity the operational characteristics of the hotel focusing on those matters which are intended to result in the hotel being rated as a qualifying hotel and thereafter operated as a AAA Three Diamond Hotel. 
d.  Conceptual design of a qualifying hotel for the purpose of confirming that the hotel will be a qualifying hotel when opened for business. 
e.  Timeline for the commencement of operation. 
f.  Evidence of three million five hundred thousand dollars ($3,500,000.00) cash or its equivalent or more equity capital in the developer entity. 
g.  References from financial institutions. 
h.  Description of the city benefit package as proposed. 
i.  Independent, third-party certification, acceptable to the city, that the proposed hotel will open as a qualifying hotel; 
2.  Execute or agree to execute an operating covenant agreement which shall include provisions regarding continuing use, maintenance, indemnification regarding prevailing wage, a city benefit package approved by the city manager in his/her discretion, and such other provisions as the city manager, in his/her sole discretion, may reasonably determine are necessary or appropriate to preserve the goals and intent of this chapter. 
3.  Pay the administrative fee, if any, and the deposit, if any. 
B.  Consideration of the Application by the City Manager. The city manager shall approve or disapprove Applications based on the above within sixty (60) days after a complete submittal. 
C.  Treatment of the Administrative Fee and the Deposit. If the application is rejected, the city shall retain the administrative fee, if any, and return the deposit, if any, to the applicant. If the application is approved, the city shall retain the administrative fee and deposit. The deposit shall be refunded within thirty (30) days after a qualifying hotel opens (or re-opens) for business or retained by the city if the application is terminated pursuant to subsection (D). 
D.  Termination of Approved Application. An approved application shall be automatically terminated without further notice and the deposit, if any, shall be retained by the city unless (i) on or before the initial milestone, owner provides the city with written evidence, acceptable to the city manager acting in his/her sole and absolute discretion, that a brand and/or flag, hotel operator, and commitment to provide financing for a qualifying hotel is likely, and (ii) on or before the second milestone, owner shall have entered into written agreements with respect to the brand and/or flag, and hotel operator and financing shall have closed and the qualifying hotel shall be under construction. The application shall also terminate and the deposit retained by the city if, at any time prior to opening for business, any material factual representation(s) made in the application by the owner was not true when made or has become not true, as determined by the city manager acting in his/her reasonable discretion. 
E.  Effect of Termination of Pre-Approved Qualifying Hotel. If and to the extent an application for a hotel that was pre-approved as a qualifying hotel(s) is terminated pursuant to subsection (D) prior to opening, the next application in order of submittal shall be considered by the city manager for pre-approval as a qualifying hotel. 
F.  Vesting of Pre-Approved Qualifying Hotel. The right of an owner to receive incentive payments shall vest upon pre-approval subject only to voluntary withdrawal of an application by the owner or termination pursuant to subsection (D). 
( Ord. No. 1042, § 1, 5-8-2018 )  
3.37.050 - Incentive payments. 
A.  Confirmation of the fulfillment of the requirements of Section 3.37.040(A). Upon completion of a hotel for which an application has been approved pursuant to Section 3.37.040, the applicant shall provide the city with an independent third party audit confirming that the requirements in Section 3.37.040(A) have been met. The city manager shall approve or reject the results of such audit acting in his/her reasonable discretion. 
B.  Mechanics Regarding Incentive Payments. Subject to subsection (E), the city shall pay incentive payments to an owner of a hotel which opens as a qualifying hotel and is thereafter continuously operated as a AAA Three Diamond Hotel in compliance with the operating covenant agreement (including without limitation the continuous implementation of the city benefit package) as follows: (i) as to a new qualifying hotel, an amount equal to fifty (50) percent of the transient occupancy tax collected and remitted to the city for the preceding year based on the applicable transient occupancy tax rate with respect to such qualifying hotel pursuant to Chapter 3.16; such incentive payments shall be calculated and made for the ten (10) year annual period commencing on the opening and terminating on the tenth (10 th ) anniversary date of the opening; and (ii) as to a renovated qualifying hotel, an amount equal to fifty (50) percent of the transient occupancy tax increment collected and remitted to the city for the preceding year based on the applicable transient occupancy tax rate with respect to such qualifying hotel pursuant to Chapter 3.16; such incentive payments shall be calculated and made for the ten (10) year annual period commencing on the opening and terminating on the tenth (10 th ) anniversary date of the opening. The city shall endeavor to make payments which become applicable hereunder within a reasonable time following receipt of information and verification, to be more specifically set forth under the applicable operating covenant agreement. 
C.  Termination of Incentive Payments. Incentive payments under this Section 3.37.030 shall terminate upon the expiration of the terms described above or at such time as the hotel ceases to operate as a qualifying hotel for reasons other than temporary closure due to repair, casualty loss, or maintenance issues. 
D.  Deferred Developer Impact Fees. In the event an owner causes a hotel to open as a qualifying hotel and operate as a AAA Three Diamond Hotel as described in Section 3.37.020, the city shall waive collection of the deferred developer impact fees, including any interest applicable with respect thereto. This subsection (D) shall not apply to permit, plan check and inspection fees or any other fees. 
E.  Setoff as to Unpaid Fees. As to any permit, plan check and inspection fees, developer impact fees (excepting to the extent a waiver of developer impact fees has been made by city pursuant to subsection (D)), and any other fees collected by city in connection with the development undertaken by an applicant or owner, city shall setoff against any payments otherwise provided under subsection (B) any amounts which have not been paid to city together with interest determined using the designated interest rate. 
( Ord. No. 1042, § 1, 5-8-2018 )  
3.37.060 - Operating covenant agreement. 
Each owner eligible to participate in the hotel stimulus program shall execute an operating covenant agreement. An illustrative form of the operating covenant agreement will be maintained on file with the city clerk. Each operating covenant agreement or a memorandum thereof approved by the city manager, may be recorded by the corresponding owner or the city among the official land records of the county recorder; provided that the failure to record such operating covenant agreement or memorandum thereof shall not affect the validity of any such operating covenant agreement. Any fees associated with the recording of such an operating covenant agreement or memorandum shall be borne by the owner. Each operating covenant agreement shall include a city benefit package approved by the city manager. 
( Ord. No. 1042, § 1, 5-8-2018 )  
3.37.070 - General fund revenues. 
All transient occupancy tax revenues or transit occupancy tax increment remitted to the city with respect to a qualifying hotel shall be deemed general fund revenues of the city and shall be deposited in the city's general fund. 
( Ord. No. 1042, § 1, 5-8-2018 )  
3.37.080 - Administrative rules and regulations. 
Consistent with the intent and goals of this chapter, the city manager may interpret the provisions of this chapter and may adopt administrative rules and regulations for implementation and furtherance of the requirements of this chapter including, without limitation, the form of the application, the form of the operating covenant agreement and the manner of compliance with Government Code Section 53083. 
( Ord. No. 1042, § 1, 5-8-2018 )  
3.37.090 - Annual administrative review. 
The city manager shall cause a review of the hotel stimulus program each year and if amendment or termination is warranted present a proposed amendment to this chapter to the city council for its consideration. 
( Ord. No. 1042, § 1, 5-8-2018 )  
3.37.100 - Term. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be suspended as of the last day of the eligibility phase; provided that notwithstanding anything otherwise set forth in this chapter, the city may modify or terminate the hotel stimulus program at any time. 
( Ord. No. 1042, § 1, 5-8-2018 )  
Title 5 - BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS  
Chapter 5.04 - BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY  
Article I. - Business Licenses[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1010, § 1, adopted December 8, 2015, repealed ch. 5.04, arts. I, §§ 5.04.010—5.04.200, in its entirety; and enacted a new ch. 5.04, §§ 5.04.010—5.04.310. Inasmuch as arts. II—IV contain duplicate section numbering to those set out by the provisions of this ordinance, and at the direction of the city, those provisions have been included as set out herein. Former art. I pertained to "Business License Ordinance," and was derived from prior code §§ 6-4.1—6-4.20; Ord. 847 §§ 1—6, adopted 2005 and Ord. 875 § 1, adopted 2007. 
 
5.04.010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter: 
"Business" means professions, trades, occupations, and each and every kind of calling whether or not carried on for profit. 
"City manager" means the city manager of the city or his or her designee(s). 
"Finance director" means the finance director of the city or his or her designee(s). 
"Person" means all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, limited liability companies, partnerships of every kind, clubs, businesses, trusts, societies and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the city other than as an employee. 
"Sworn statement" means an affidavit sworn to before a person authorized to take oaths or a declaration or certification made under penalty of perjury. 
"Transact any business" or "transacting business" means engaging in any activity within the city in exchange for money or other material gain, or for which monetary or other compensation will be received, including, but not limited to providing goods or services, whether the business is physically located within the city or located outside the city. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 12-8-2015)  
5.04.020 - License required. 
It is unlawful for a person to transact any business in the city without first having obtained a business license. A person must have a current and valid business license at all times such person is transacting business. A business license authorizes the licensee to transact business at the location designated on the license. Nothing herein shall signify any approval by the city of the qualifications of the holder of the business license to engage in their business nor shall it signify that such holder of the business license has obtained all other required licenses or approvals to engage in such business. 
A.  Branch Establishments. Separate business licenses shall be obtained for each separate location in the city where a particular business is conducted. For purposes of this section, vending machines and games of skill and science including but not limited to video games, which are not owned by the person transacting a licensed business where such machines or games are located, shall constitute a separate business for which a separate business license shall be obtained by the owner of such machines or games. The owner of said machines shall obtain a business license, plus a branch license for each separate address where machines are placed. A separate business license shall not be required if such machines or games are owned and operated by the owner of the business where such machines are located and which are operated only as an incident to another licensed business conducted on the premises. 
B.  Delivery and Sales from Vehicles. Every person not having a fixed place of business in the city who sells goods, wares or other merchandise, or provides services for a fee from a vehicle shall be required to obtain a business license for engaging in such sales, and shall be required to comply with the provisions regulating vendors and peddlers set forth in Article II of this chapter. 
C.  Evidence of Transacting Business. Any person who uses signs, circulars, cards, telephone books, newspapers, internet advertising including but not limited to use of social media, or other form of advertisement to represent that he is transacting business in the city, or who holds an active license issued by another governmental agency indicating that such person is transacting business in the city, shall be deemed to be transacting business in the city for purposes of this chapter and shall be required to obtain a license, unless evidence is presented to the contrary to the city manager. 
D.  Independent Contractors. Independent contractors shall each obtain a business license without regard to whether they are operating separately or together with other independent contractors at the same location. Notwithstanding the previous provision, any independent contractor who is legally obligated to operate under the supervision and control of another person for whom a business license is required shall not be required to obtain a business license pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 12-8-2015)  
5.04.030 - Application for license. 
A.  It shall be the sole responsibility of every person required to obtain a business license to file an application with the city on a city-approved form and pay all applicable fees. The application must include a detailed, specific description of all activities to be conducted and/or services or goods to be provided at the business. An application for a new business license shall be filed a minimum of thirty (30) calendar days prior to the date the applicant intends to begin transacting business in the city. An application for a license renewal shall be filed a minimum of thirty (30) calendar days prior to the expiration date of the current license. Any person who knowingly makes a false statement in the application shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
B.  If the applicant is not the owner of the premises where the proposed business will be conducted, the applicant shall submit a copy of a lease, rental agreement or other documentation that establishes the applicant has the property owner's authorization to conduct such business. 
C.  The city manager may request such other additional information and/or documentation as deemed necessary to determine whether the proposed business operations and premises comply with applicable local, state or federal laws. Applicants for businesses identified in Section 5.04.050 shall also be required to undergo a background check as set forth in that section. 
D.  1.  Upon submittal of a complete application, the city manager shall investigate the information provided in the application. The city manager may coordinate with and obtain reports from city departments as well as other governmental entities as the city manager may deem necessary to ensure compliance with all applicable laws, including but not limited to the sheriff's department, fire department, animal control, public health department, the state board of equalization and the state department of alcoholic beverage control. 
2.  City personnel designated by the city manager may investigate and inspect the premises of the business for the purpose of assuring that the premises comply with all applicable local and state laws. 
3.  The city manager shall make a determination to approve, conditionally approve or deny the license within a reasonable period of time after submittal of a complete application. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 12-8-2015)  
5.04.040 - Exemption. 
Any business exempt from federal income taxes under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code or exempt under the United States or California Constitutions shall be exempt from paying city fees, but shall be required to pay any applicable state-imposed fees. Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this section shall file a sworn statement with the finance director stating the facts upon which the exemption is claimed and shall furnish such information and verification as required. In the absence of a sworn statement, persons claiming an exemption shall be liable for payment of the business license fee. After giving notice and a reasonable opportunity for hearing, the city manager may revoke a business license granted pursuant to this section if it is determined that the licensee is not entitled to the exemption. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 12-8-2015)  
5.04.050 - Additional application requirements of specific businesses. 
A.  Upon submittal of a complete application for a new or renewal license for one of the following businesses, the city manager shall conduct an investigation and criminal background check on the applicant(s): 
1.  Massage establishment (owner/operator and any massage therapist who does not have a current and valid state certificate), as set forth in Chapter 5.34. 
2.  Towing operation (owner/operator and individual tow truck drivers), as set forth in Chapter 5.32. 
3.  Taxicab operation (owner/operator and individual taxicab drivers), as set forth in Chapter 5.28. 
4.  Liquor store, mini-mart or convenience market, as defined in Title 17, that sells alcoholic beverages. 
5.  Smoke shop, tobacco shop. 
6.  Hookah lounge. 
7.  Internet lounge or internet café. 
B.  An applicant for any of the licenses identified in subsection A shall be required to pay for and obtain electronic fingerprint scans, known as live scan, the results of which will be used in conducting the criminal background check. 
C.  An applicant for a new or renewal license for any alcoholic beverage establishment, as defined in Title 17, shall ensure that any employee who serves or sells alcoholic beverages undergoes and passes responsible alcoholic beverage server training at least once every three (3) years, and shall maintain and make available for city inspection a list of employees who serve or sell alcoholic beverages and records documenting each employee's compliance with the responsible server training. New employees who will serve or sell alcoholic beverages shall undergo and pass such training within thirty (30) days of commencement of employment. 
D.  An applicant for a new or renewal license for any alcoholic beverage establishment, as defined in Title 17, shall develop and implement practices and procedures to prevent the purchase and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages by underage persons. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 12-8-2015)  
5.04.060 - Conditions of approval. 
A.  As an alternative to denial or revocation of a business license, as set forth in Section 5.04.070 the city manager may impose conditions on a new or renewal license if he or she determines that the business may have or is having a detrimental impact on neighboring properties or the community at large and/or may require or is requiring a greater use of city law enforcement and other resources than other businesses, whether due to its location, type of business or other reason, and further determines that such conditions will mitigate these negative effects. Conditions of approval may be appealed in accordance with the appeal provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The city manager may eliminate or modify a condition previously placed on a license upon receipt of written request by the business owner if, after investigation, he or she makes the determination that the reason for the original imposition of a condition has been corrected or no longer exists. A denial of elimination or modification of a condition may be appealed in accordance with the appeal provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 12-8-2015)  
5.04.070 - Denial, suspension, revocation. 
A.  Every business license granted under Title 5 is granted and accepted by all parties with the express understanding that the city may revoke the license if it is in the best interest of the public health, safety or welfare to do so and if grounds for such revocation exist as described in this section. 
B.  An application for a new or renewed license may be denied and a license issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the city manager upon any of the following grounds: 
1.  Conviction of a crime within the previous ten (10) years, if the crime is related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of the business, profession or trade for which the license was issued; 
2.  Conviction of a felony within the previous ten (10) years; 
3.  Commission of acts within the previous ten (10) years which would constitute a felony or which would constitute a crime if the crime is related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of the business, profession or trade for which the license was issued; 
4.  The applicant or licensee has owned, leased, rented or used property and/or has operated any business in a manner that has been the subject of an administrative, civil or criminal action, and a court judgment or administrative determination has found the maintenance or use of the premises or business operation to be unlawful and/or a nuisance within the previous ten (10) years; 
5.  The applicant or licensee has operated the current or any previous business in a manner determined to constitute a threat or hazard to public health, safety or welfare; 
6.  The applicant or licensee has sold, possessed for sale, served or distributed any controlled substance, as defined in the California Health & Safety Code, and/or any synthetic substance including cannabinoids, stimulants, opiates, depressants or hallucinogens in any form or compound; 
7.  Knowingly making a false statement of fact or omitting a fact required to be revealed in the application for the license or in any documentation required to be submitted with or in supplement to the application; 
8.  The premises on which the business will operate or is operating, or the proposed use for which the license is sought, is in violation of any building, zoning, health, safety, fire or other provision of this Code or of county, state or federal law; 
9.  Violation of any condition of approval of the license; 
10.  A license application has been denied or a license has been revoked by any state, county or local agency within the past twelve (12) months; 
11.  The applicant or licensee has operated the current or any previous business in a manner that creates or results in a public nuisance, as defined in this Code, on or within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the business premises; 
12.  The applicant has delinquent or otherwise unpaid city fees, citations or penalties of any kind. 
C.  The city manager shall develop guidelines for determining whether denial, suspension, revocation or the imposition of conditions is appropriate in a particular instance, and shall consider mitigating circumstances in making said determination. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 12-8-2015)  
5.04.080 - Effect of business license denial. 
If an applicant's license application has been denied, the city shall not process a new application by that applicant: 
A.  For a period of twelve (12) months after the date of the denial, unless the city manager has determined that the reason for the denial has been cured and no longer exists; or 
B.  Until the time period during which the conduct which was the basis for denial or revocation, set forth in Section 5.04.070 B.1.—4., has elapsed. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 12-8-2015)  
5.04.090 - Appeal. 
A.  A business license applicant or licensee who is aggrieved by any decision of the city manager regarding the issuance, conditioning, denial, suspension or revocation of a business license may contest the decision by filing a written appeal on a city-approved form, and paying the applicable fee, with the city clerk within ten (10) calendar days from the date of the decision. The basis for the appeal must be specified in detail on the appeal form. If a timely appeal is filed, the effect of the decision shall be stayed pending the outcome of the appeal, unless the city manager specifically finds that the public health and safety is endangered, in which case the decision shall take effect immediately. 
B.  Failure of the city manager to receive a timely appeal constitutes a waiver of the right to contest a decision; in this event, the decision is final and binding. 
C.  As soon as practicable after a timely appeal is filed, the city manager shall fix a date, time and place for a hearing. The hearing shall be conducted by an independent and impartial hearing officer. Written notice of the time and place for the hearing shall be served by first class mail, at the return address indicated on the appeal form, at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. 
D.  An appellant may request, in writing, that the city manager reschedule the hearing if the request is made at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the hearing. The city manager shall grant one continuance of the hearing date. 
E.  Failure of an appellant to appear at the scheduled hearing shall constitute the appellant's waiver of the right to appeal. In this event, the decision is final and binding. 
F.  Appeal hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. The hearing officer shall accept testimony and consider any relevant evidence presented by the city manager or his or her designee concerning the grounds for the contested decision. The hearing officer shall take the testimony of the appellant, and/or his or her witnesses, and will consider any other evidence the hearing officer deems reliable, relevant and not unduly repetitious. The appellant may represent himself or herself or be represented by anyone of his or her choice, including counsel, at his or her sole expense. The appellant may bring an interpreter to the hearing at his or her sole expense. 
G.  The hearing officer shall make findings based on the record of the hearing, and shall prepare a written decision, based on those findings, to uphold, dismiss or modify the city manager's decision concerning the issuance, conditioning, denial, suspension or revocation of the business license. A copy of the written decision shall be served on the appellant by first class mail within ten (10) days after the hearing. 
H.  An appellant who is aggrieved by the hearing officer's decision may appeal to the city council following the uniform appeal procedures as outlined in Chapter 2.44. All inquiries regarding appeals shall be directed to the city clerk's office. Failure of the city clerk to receive a timely appeal constitutes a waiver of the right to further contest the decision; in this event, the hearing officer's decision is final and binding. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 12-8-2015)  
5.04.100 - Informal procedure for resolution of an imminent threat. 
A.  When the city manager determines that the operation of a business poses an imminent threat to public health, safety or welfare requiring immediate action, the city manager will attempt to informally contact the licensee by telephone, in-person meeting, or by such other means of communication that the city manager deems satisfactory, to discuss with the licensee the circumstances resulting in the imminent threat to public health, safety or welfare. The city manager will further attempt to obtain the licensee's commitment to implement immediate voluntary compliance measures that will, in the judgment of the city manager, effectively abate the imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare. 
B.  The requirements set out in subsection A shall not prohibit the city manager from issuing a notice of summary suspension pursuant to Section 5.04.110 if: 
1.  The attempt to contact the licensee fails; 
2.  The licensee fails or refuses to immediately implement voluntary compliance measures that the city manager deems will effectively abate the imminent threat; 
3.  The city manager determines that the compliance measures the licensee immediately implements are insufficient to effectively abate the imminent threat; or 
4.  The city manager determines that the threat to the public health, safety or welfare is so urgent that compliance with the informal resolution procedures set out in this section will further jeopardize the public health, safety, or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 12-8-2015)  
5.04.110 - Summary suspension. 
A.  If the city manager determines there is an imminent threat to the health, safety or welfare of the public as set out in subsection B, a license may be summarily suspended for a period of time not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
B.  The city manager's determination that there is an imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare shall be based on one or more of the following: 
1.  There is an urgent need to take immediate action to protect the public from a substantial threat of serious bodily injury or death existing on or within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the licensed premises; or 
2.  There has been a violation of a license condition or other requirement of this Code or of any other applicable law that creates an imminent danger to the public health, safety or welfare on or within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the licensed premises; or 
3.  The licensee has conducted the business in a manner that creates or results in a public nuisance, as defined in this Code, and that public nuisance creates an imminent danger to the public health, safety or welfare on or within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the licensed premises. 
C.  The summary suspension shall take effect immediately upon service of a written notice of suspension by the city manager. Notice given to the licensee shall include the following information: 
1.  The effective date and time period of the summary suspension; 
2.  The grounds and reasons upon which the summary suspension is based; 
3.  The licensee who wishes to challenge the summary suspension may request a hearing before the City Manager or his or her designee; 
4.  The method for requesting a hearing before the city manager or his or her designee; and 
5.  The notice of summary suspension shall become final unless the city manager receives a written request for a hearing from the licensee within the time period specified in subsection E. 
D.  The summary suspension shall remain in effect unless and until the city manager either: 
1.  Amends the notice of summary suspension to shorten the time period provided in the earlier notice of summary suspension; or 
2.  Issues a decision after holding a hearing pursuant to the requirements of this section that modifies or overrules the summary suspension. 
E.  If the licensee wishes to challenge the summary suspension, the licensee must file a written request for a hearing before the city manager within three (3) business days after service of the notice of summary suspension. If the city manager does not receive a request for a hearing from the licensee within this time period, the notice of summary suspension shall become final. 
F.  The city manager or his or her designee must respond to the licensee's request for a hearing by holding a hearing to affirm, modify or overrule the summary suspension within five (5) business days of the licensee's request for a hearing, unless the licensee requests an extension of the time within which the city manager can hold the hearing. 
G.  The city manager shall serve a written notice of hearing on the licensee not later than two (2) business days after receiving the licensee's written request for a hearing. The notice of hearing shall contain the date, time and place at which the hearing shall be conducted. 
H.  At the hearing before the city manager or his or her designee, the licensee shall be given the opportunity to present evidence that either rebuts the ground(s) for which the summary suspension was issued or demonstrates that the reason or reasons leading to the summary suspension have been mitigated or corrected. 
I.  The hearing will be conducted informally and technical rules of evidence shall not apply. Any and all evidence that the city manager deems reliable, relevant and not unduly repetitious may be considered. 
J.  Following the conclusion of the hearing, the city manager shall issue a decision, as specified in subsection K, which affirms, modifies or overrules the summary suspension. If the city manager affirms or modifies the summary suspension, the city manager may impose additional conditions upon the license if those conditions were reviewed at the hearing and the conditions are intended to protect the health, safety or welfare of the public or prevent the conduct or condition that led to the summary suspension. 
K.  The city manager shall issue an oral decision upon the close of the hearing or may communicate the decision by telephone, within twenty-four (24) hours of the close of the hearing. The city manager shall also serve the licensee with a written decision within three (3) business days of the close of the hearing. 
L.  The decision of the city manager is final and conclusive, subject only to review by the superior court in accordance with the time limit set forth in Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 12-8-2015)  
5.04.120 - Method of service. 
A.  All written notices and decisions required by this chapter shall be served via first class mail or personal service. Alternatively, any written notice required by this chapter may be served by conspicuously posting a copy of the written notice at the licensed premises. 
B.  The failure of any licensee to receive any notice required under this part shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this part. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 12-8-2015)  
5.04.130 - Term of license. 
Licenses shall be for a term of twelve (12) months commencing on the first day of the month when the business began operating in the city or when the city issued the business license, whichever is earlier. Business owners who began operating before applying for and receiving a business license will be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in Section 5.04.160. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 12-8-2015)  
5.04.140 - Fees. 
Each application shall pay all applicable fees when application for a new or renewal license is made, unless exempt under Section 5.04.040. The city's issuance of a receipt to the business license applicant for payment of the fees shall not constitute the receipt of a business license. The fees shall be refunded only if the license is denied. Applicable fees are those that have been established by resolution of the city council and may be amended from time to time. 
A.  Error in Calculating Fees. In no case shall any error in calculating or in stating the amount of fees prevent the collection of the correct amount due from any person transacting business in the city. 
B.  License Fees a Debt. The amount of any fee and penalty imposed by this chapter shall constitute a debt to the city. 
C.  Refunds. Upon approval of the finance director, the city treasurer may refund any fee or penalty erroneously collected. However, no fee shall be refunded if the applicant engaged in the business for which the license is sought prior to application for the license. License fees shall not be refunded for any fraction of a year that business is not conducted. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 12-8-2015)  
5.04.150 - Due date for license fees. 
All license-related fees are due upon application for a new or renewal license, in accordance with the time period set forth in Section 5.04.030. Business owners who began operating before applying for and receiving a business license will be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in Section 5.04.160. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 12-8-2015)  
5.04.160 - Penalty. 
A.  Failure to Obtain License. If a person fails to obtain a business license, the fees due shall be that amount due and payable from the first date the person began transacting business in the city, in accordance with Sections 5.04.010 and 5.04.020 C, together with the penalty described in subsection B. 
B.  Failure to Pay Fees. For failure to pay fees when due, the finance director shall add a penalty of twenty (20) percent of the applicable fees on the first date of the month following the due date and ten (10) percent of each month thereafter while the fees remain unpaid, provided that the amount of the penalty shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the amount of the fees due. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 12-8-2015)  
5.04.170 - Issuance of license. 
Upon the approval of an application for a business license and payment of the required fees, the finance director shall issue a business license to the applicant within fourteen (14) calendar days. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 12-8-2015)  
5.04.180 - Contents of license. 
Each license issued shall contain: 
A.  The name and mailing address of the person to whom the license is issued; 
B.  The name of business; 
C.  The address of the business; 
D.  The expiration date of the license; 
E.  Telephone number of business; 
F.  Exact nature of business (business code); 
G.  Such other information as deemed necessary and established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 12-8-2015)  
5.04.190 - Amendment of licenses. 
A license may be amended to reflect a change in business name and, for businesses based outside city limits a change in business address, upon filing a statement of such fact and payment of a fee to the finance director, which shall be established by resolution of the city council. The unexpired business license previously issued shall be returned to the finance director prior to the issuance of the amended license. A license may be amended, without fee, to reflect a change in business phone number or mailing address. A license may not be amended to reflect a change in the person(s) transacting the business, the ownership type, the business address for a Lancaster-based business or the type of business transacted; a new business license must be obtained as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 12-8-2015)  
5.04.200 - Transfer of licenses. 
Licenses are non-transferable. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 12-8-2015)  
5.04.210 - Duplicate license. 
A duplicate license may be issued to replace any business license previously issued which has been lost or destroyed upon filing a statement that the license has been lost or destroyed and paying a fee to the finance director, which shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 12-8-2015)  
5.04.220 - Posting licenses. 
A.  Fixed Location. Any licensee transacting business at a fixed location in the city shall post their business license in a conspicuous location on the premises, open to public view and available for inspection where such business is transacted. 
B.  Not at Fixed Location. Any licensee who does not transact business at a fixed location in the city shall keep his or her business license upon his person at all times while transacting business. Any licensee who does not transact business at a fixed location in the city and uses a vehicle for the purpose of transacting such business shall display his or her business license on the rear of such vehicle, in public view, to indicate that business license fees have been paid for that period of time. Persons using a vehicle solely for the purpose of delivering goods, wares or merchandise are not required to display a business license on their vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 12-8-2015)  
5.04.230 - Regulatory measure. 
Persons required to pay fees for transacting business under this chapter shall not be relieved from the payment of any applicable fee under any other provision of this Code, and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions set forth in this chapter and all other applicable provisions in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 12-8-2015)  
5.04.240 - Compliance with other laws. 
The payment of fees and the issuance of a license shall not entitle the licensee to transact any business unless the licensee has complied with all requirements of this chapter and any other applicable federal, state or local regulations pertaining to such business including, but not limited to all applicable provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 12-8-2015)  
5.04.250 - Information confidential. 
Any statement or information filed pursuant to this chapter shall be confidential and shall not be subject to public inspection except for the following information provided in the business license application: business name, business telephone, business owner, ownership type, business mailing and street address, the nature of the business for which the license is required (business code), and license expiration date. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 12-8-2015)  
5.04.260 - Enforcement; entry to inspect. 
A.  1.  The city manager is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
2.  The city manager is authorized to designate certain city personnel to assist in the enforcement of this chapter. The designees shall have such enforcement powers as are delegated by the city manager. 
3.  The city manager is authorized to promulgate rules, regulations, policies and procedures to implement the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The city manager and any other person empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter shall have the power and authority to enter into a business, free of charge and at any reasonable time, to see the business license posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 12-8-2015)  
5.04.270 - Violation. 
A.  Any person violating this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
B.  The business owner/licensee shall be liable for every violation of the requirements of this chapter, whether committed by the licensee or his or her manager(s) or employee(s). The city manager shall have the discretion to take enforcement action against the licensee, the licensee's employee, the manager who was present at the business at the time the employee committed the violation, or against any combination of them. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 12-8-2015)  
5.04.280 - Penalty. 
In accordance with Chapter 1.12, any person convicted of a misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day or any portion thereof that a person violates any provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 12-8-2015)  
5.04.290 - Administrative citations. 
The city manager may issue an administrative citation to any person who causes, allows or permits the violation of any provision of this chapter. Issuance of a citation shall be in accordance with and as provided in Chapter 1.16. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 12-8-2015)  
5.04.300 - Remedies not exclusive. 
Any administrative citation issued pursuant to this chapter shall not prejudice or adversely affect any other civil, administrative or criminal action that may be brought to address any violation of this chapter. A civil or criminal action may be brought concurrently with any other process regarding the same violation. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 12-8-2015)  
5.04.310 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council declares that it would have adopted this chapter, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, phrases, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 12-8-2015)  
Article II. - Peddlers and Vendors 
 
5.04.210 - Definition. 
For the purpose of this chapter, a "peddler" or "vendor" is any person who travels from place to place within the city offering services, carrying, transporting or conveying goods, wares, merchandise of any kind, fruit, vegetables, drinks, or any foodstuffs or refreshments, displaying or offering the same for sale, taking orders for, or soliciting orders for goods, wares or merchandise for present or future delivery, or who, without traveling from place to place, sells or offers the same for sale from his person or from any wagon, pushcart, vehicle or other means of transportation or conveyance. The word "peddler" or "vendor" shall include the words "hawker," "huckster" and "street merchant." 
(Prior code § 6-4.21)  
5.04.220 - Posted premises. 
No person shall engage in the sale of, taking orders or soliciting orders for goods, services, wares or merchandise as defined in Section 5.04.210 upon any premises without a prior invitation from the occupant thereof if such premises is posted against such solicitation by means of a notice prominently displayed on or near the main entrance to the premises or on or near any residence located thereon upon which is printed the legend: "NO SOLICITORS" (or words of similar import). 
(Prior code § 6-4.22)  
5.04.230 - Failure to leave premises. 
No person shall engage in the acts specified in Section 5.04.210 upon any premises after having been asked by the owner or occupant thereof to leave such premises. 
(Prior code § 6-4.23)  
5.04.240 - Prohibited practices. 
A.  Other than upon prior initiation of the occupant, the activities defined in Section 5.04.210 shall be prohibited prior to nine a.m. and after six p.m. 
B.  At the time of initial contact with a prospective customer no person shall fail to verbally identify himself. 
C.  No person shall misrepresent his purpose or use any false, deceptive or misleading misrepresentation to induce the sale or use any plan, scheme or ruse which misrepresents the true status or mission of the person making the call. 
D.  No person shall engage in the act of peddling or vending on public property, within five hundred (500) feet of and abutting or adjacent to any elementary, junior high or high school on those days that school is in session during the hours of seven a.m. to five p.m. This prohibition shall not apply to anyone engaged in that act of vending or peddling at the request of the owner of public property, including schools, or agent of the owner, for the purpose of providing services to the owner, the owner's employees, tenants, contractors or others on their property with the consent of the owner. The prohibition shall also not apply to anyone engaged in the act of vending who has been granted specific written permission by the principal of the school to vend in an area designated by that principal. The school principal shall identify such areas that he or she determines to be safe for the purpose of vending to students and not potentially disruptive to the orderly operation of the school. 
(Ord. 716 § 1, 1995; prior code § 6-4.24)  
Article III. - (Repealed by Ord. 805)  
Article IV. - Registration of Secondhand Purchases 
 
5.04.270 - Secondhand dealers—Required to keep records of purchases and sales. 
A.  Every person, firm or corporation dealing in secondhand goods (wares, merchandise, or articles of any description, or any tangible personal property as defined in the Business and Professions Code Section 21627, in accordance with the provisions of the Business and Professions Code Section 21638) or licensed to deal in secondhand goods shall keep a record of (all such articles) the purchase and sale of all items of tangible personal property (as that term is defined in Section 5.04.280 sold or purchased (including the signature of the person selling the same), which shall at all times during business hours be open to the inspection of the Los Angeles County sheriff's department. 
B.  Such person, firm or corporation shall at least once a day make and deliver to the Los Angeles County sheriff's department on a form to be furnished or approved by the State Department of Justice for that purpose at cost, a full, true and complete record of all transactions in (secondhand goods, wares, merchandise, or articles of any description) tangible personal property by such person, firm or corporation within the city during the twenty-four (24) hours preceding said report, together with the time (meaning the hour of the day) when purchased or sold or otherwise dealt in or with, and a description of the person or persons from whom bought or to whom sold, or with whom dealt, and also the true name thereof as nearly as the same is known to the person making such report. Said report shall be written in the English language in a clear, legible manner. 
C.  Such report shall bear a legible fingerprint from the intended seller, on the space provided on the Department of Justice buy form. The print shall be of the right thumb, if available, or if the right thumb is not available, of another finger, which shall be identified on the buy form. 
D.  The identity of the seller shall be verified in accordance with Business and Professions Code Section 21628(b) and shall be considered valid if the person taking the information reasonably relies on any of the following documents, provided the document is currently valid or has been issued within five years and contains a photograph or description, or both, of the person named on it and bears a serial or other identifying number: (1) a passport of the United States: (2) a driver's license issued by any state: (3) an identification card issued by any state: (4) an identification card issued by any branch of the Armed Forces of the United States. 
E.  The licensed secondhand dealers shall retain in their possession for thirty (30) days all second- hand tangible personal property acquired in the course of business unless an exception is granted by the sheriff in accordance with the provisions of Business and Professions Code Section 21636. 
F.  The licensed secondhand dealers shall display the license on the premises where it can be easily seen and shall conduct business only in the building designated on the license. 
(Prior code § 6-4.27)  
5.04.280 - Permit from Los Angeles County sheriff's department—Rules and regulations—Definitions. 
Before any person shall engage in the business of secondhand dealer, secondhand jewelry dealer, secondhand clothing dealer, secondhand furniture and household goods dealer, or secondhand book dealer, either exclusively or in conjunction with some other business, (he) that person must make application to the Los Angeles County sheriff's department for a permit therefor, for which permission may be granted to said applicant to receive a license upon the payment of the license fee required; provided, however, secondhand dealers in tangible personal property, as that term is hereinafter defined, must also obtain a state secondhand dealer license. The Los Angeles County sheriff's department shall not issue any permit nor shall any license be issued to any person, firm or corporation to conduct the business of a secondhand furniture and household goods dealer within two hundred (200) feet of the property line of any church or school. Such restrictions shall not apply to any secondhand furniture and household goods dealer now conducting business within such distance. Said Los Angeles County sheriff's department shall have the power to revoke said permit after a hearing and upon good cause being shown. The city council may adopt, after a noticed public hearing, such rules and regulations regarding secondhand dealers as will effectuate the purposes of this title and are not in conflict therewith. Said rules and regulations shall become effective ten (10) days after adoption by the city council. 
"Tangible personal property" is defined as set forth in the California Business and Professions Code sections governing secondhand dealers and shall include all personal property commonly sold by secondhand dealers which is determined by the Attorney General to be frequently stolen and is contained in that list of such personal property which is compiled and periodically revised by the Attorney General and supplied to local law enforcement agencies. The city council may by rule or regulations amend the Attorney General's list to include additional items which have been determined to be frequently stolen in the city. Such additional items shall thereafter be considered tangible personal property for purposes of this title. 
(Prior code § 6-4.28)  
Chapter 5.08 - BINGO FOR CHARITABLE PURPOSES 
 
5.08.010 - Bingo games for charitable purposes permitted. 
Bingo games for charitable purposes are authorized pursuant to Section 19, Article IV, of the California Constitution, and Section 326.5 of the Penal Code and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6-6.1)  
5.08.020 - Licenses required. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the operation of a bingo game in the city without first having secured a license from the city to do so. Such licenses to operate a bingo game shall be issued by the city manager or his designee only after receipt of an application form properly and fully completed; after determination by the city manager or his designee that the applicant is an organization qualified to receive such a license, as hereinafter provided; and upon payment by such applicant of a license fee in an amount which shall be established by the council and which may be, from time to time, amended. If an application for a license is denied, one-half of the application fee shall be refunded to the organization. An additional fee of one percent of the monthly gross receipts over five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) derived from bingo games shall be collected monthly by the city. Each applicant shall on or before the last day of each month following the close of each calendar quarter make a report to the city manager or his designee of the monthly gross receipts derived from bingo games and remit the full amount of the additional fee with the report. In the event of any proposed change in the location of any such bingo game, or the date or dates thereof, or the party or parties responsible for the conduct of any such game, the applicant shall file an application amendment with the city manager or his designee. Any licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be valid for a period of twelve (12) months. 
(Prior code § 6-6.2)  
5.08.030 - Information required on application. 
Every organization desiring a license pursuant to this chapter shall file an application with the city clerk upon a form to be provided by the city clerk, and at such time pay the required fee. The application shall be filed at least sixty (60) days prior to the conduct of any bingo game(s), and shall specify: 
A.  The name, address and telephone number of the local applicant organization, the nature of the organization, and a statement that applicant is an eligible organization as defined by Section 5.08.040; 
B.  The names and addresses of all officers and directors of the eligible organization; 
C.  A list of the names of all members of the applicant organization who will operate and staff bingo games, and the date they became members; 
D.  A detailed schedule of the date(s), hours, location(s) and occupancy capacity of such location(s) of each bingo game to be held; 
E.  A detailed description of the record system to account for the receipts, prizes, expenses and profits of each bingo game; 
F.  A detailed description of the purpose and business of the organization which must be other than the conduct of bingo games; 
G.  The location and signatures of the special bank account(s) required by Section 5.08.110; 
H.  Whether the maximum number of players at any time will be less than one hundred (100); 
I.  The specific charitable purpose(s) which the bingo proceeds will benefit; 
J.  A statement that the applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in strict accordance with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code and this chapter, as they may be amended from time to time, and agrees that the license to conduct bingo games may be revoked upon violation of any such provision; 
K.  The address to which notice, when required, is to be sent or mailed, and the names of any individual or individuals, in addition to those set forth elsewhere in the application, who are authorized to accept service of process on behalf of the licensee; 
L.  Whether the application is for a new license or a renewal of an existing license; 
M.  The application shall be signed by at least two officers, including the presiding officer of the local organization; 
N.  The application shall be verified as provided in the Code of Civil Procedure for the verification of pleadings. 
(Prior code § 6-6.3)  
5.08.040 - Organizations permitted to operate bingo games. 
A.  Bingo games shall be operated within the city only by or for the benefit of organizations exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Revenue and Taxation Code Sections 23701(a) (labor, agricultural, or horticultural organizations); 23701(b) (fraternal beneficiary societies, orders or organizations; conditions); 23701(d) (religious, charitable, scientific, literary, educational and humanitarian corporations); 23701(e) (business leagues, chambers of commerce, real estate boards, and boards of trade; conditions); 23701(f) (civic leagues, social welfare and employees' organizations; conditions); 23701(g) (nonprofit pleasure and recreation clubs); 23701(l) (voluntary government employees' beneficiary organizations; conditions); and by mobilehome park associations and senior citizens organizations; provided that the receipts of those games are used only for charitable purposes. 
B.  No individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity except the organization authorized to conduct the bingo game, shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such a bingo game. 
(Ord. 695 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6-6.4)  
5.08.050 - Suspension or revocation of license. 
Any holder of a license whose license is revoked under this section shall have the right to file a written appeal to the city council in accordance with the uniform appeal procedure. Such appeal shall set forth the specific ground or grounds on which the appeal is based. At the appeal hearing the appellant or its authorized representative shall have the right to present evidence either written or oral in support of the appeal. The determination of the city council on the appeal shall be final. 
(Prior code § 6-6.5)  
5.08.060 - No person to receive a profit, wage or salary. 
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to receive or pay a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game authorized by this chapter. A violation of any provision of this section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) which fine shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. A violation of any other section of this chapter other than this section is a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 6-6.6)  
5.08.070 - Participation by minors. 
No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game, or in the operation thereof. 
(Prior code § 6-6.7)  
5.08.080 - Location of bingo games. 
An organization authorized to conduct bingo games pursuant to this chapter shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, or property whose use is donated to the organization, and which property is used by that organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. Nothing herein shall be construed to require that the property owned or leased by, or whose use is donated to, the organization be used or leased exclusively by, or donated exclusively to, that organization. Said property may be used for the conduct of bingo games no more than three times per week. 
(Ord. 695 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6-6.8)  
5.08.090 - Games open to the public. 
All bingo games authorized by this chapter shall be open to the public, and shall not be limited to members of the authorized organization conducting such bingo games. 
(Prior code § 6-6.9)  
5.08.100 - Operation and conduct of bingo games. 
A bingo game authorized by this chapter shall be operated and staffed only by members of the charitable or nonprofit organization authorized to conduct such game. Only the organization licensed to conduct a bingo game shall operate such game or participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game. In addition, no individual, corporation, partnership or other entity except the organization licensed to conduct the bingo game shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game. At least two members of the licensed organization shall jointly count all bingo proceeds. 
(Prior code § 6-6.10)  
5.08.110 - Requirement for segregation of funds. 
With respect to organizations authorized to conduct bingo games pursuant to this chapter, all profits and/or proceeds derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. As part of the application, the city manager shall be notified of the location of the bank account set up for the bingo proceeds, as well as the signatures required thereon. Any and all disbursements from the special fund or account shall be by check, with the exception of the award of cash prizes as provided in Section 5.08.120. The city shall have the right to examine and audit the records of an organization authorized to conduct a bingo game pursuant to this chapter, and such records shall be made available at reasonable times. 
(Ord. 695 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6-6.11)  
5.08.120 - Use of profits and proceeds. 
With respect to organizations exempt from payment of the bank and corporation tax by Section 23701(d) of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account, in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.08.110. Those profits shall be used only for charitable purposes. With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct bingo games pursuant to this chapter, all proceeds derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.08.110. Proceeds are the receipts of bingo games conducted by organizations, other than those organizations which are exempt from payment of the bank and corporation tax by Section 23701(d) of the Revenue and Taxation Code. Those proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes, except as follows: 
A.  The proceeds may be used for prizes. 
B.  A portion of the proceeds, not to exceed twenty (20) percent of the proceeds before deduction for prizes, or two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per month, whichever is less, may be used for the rental of property and for overhead, including the purchase of bingo equipment, administrative expenses, security equipment, and security personnel. 
C.  The proceeds may be used to pay license fees. 
D.  If the monthly gross receipts from bingo games of an organization within this chapter exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), no less than eighty (80) percent of the proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes not relating to the conducting of bingo games and the balance shall be used for prizes, rental of property, overhead, administrative expenses, and payment of license fees. The amount of proceeds used for rental of property, overhead, and administrative expenses is subject to the limitations specified in subsection B of this section. 
(Ord. 695 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 6-6.12)  
5.08.130 - All participants must be physically present. 
No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game authorized by this chapter unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. 
(Prior code § 6-6.13)  
5.08.140 - Prizes. 
A.  The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo games shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held. For purposes of this section, the word "kind" shall mean any prize other than cash, and shall be given a value equal to the cost to the charitable organization for the acquisition of such item. 
B.  A record shall be kept on forms approved by the City by the licensee showing the name and written signature of the winner and the consecutive serial number of the receipt for the prize. 
(Ord. No. 929, § 1, 7-28-09; prior code § 6-6.14)  
5.08.150 - General operating rules. 
The following rules and regulations shall apply to all bingo operators: 
A.  No person who is intoxicated shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game. 
B.  No bingo game shall be conducted between the hours of twelve (12) midnight and ten (10) a.m., nor shall any licensee conduct bingo games on more than three days per week unless otherwise authorized by the city council. 
C.  No licensee shall issue chips or money to a patron on credit or loan or allow any patron to play on credit. 
(Prior code § 6-6.15)  
5.08.160 - Manager required on premises. 
No organization shall engage in, conduct or carry on, or permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises within the city the operation of a bingo game unless such game is conducted under the personal direction of a bingo manager, duly licensed pursuant to Sections 5.08.170 and 5.08.180, for each bingo game. The bingo manager shall be present on the premises during the operation of all bingo games. 
(Prior code § 6-6.16)  
5.08.170 - Manager—License—Application. 
To obtain a bingo manager license, such applicant shall file with the city clerk an application therefor in writing. The application shall set forth, in addition to such information as may be required by the city: 
A.  A statement that neither the bingo manager nor the members of the nonprofit organization which operate any bingo game organized by such organization, will receive any profit, wage or salary from any bingo game; 
B.  A statement that the bingo manager applicant has read and understands all requirements of the law in regard to conducting bingo games in the city, and that such bingo manager will accept full responsibility for the conduct of such bingo games and all members who will operate and staff the bingo games. 
(Prior code § 6-6.17)  
5.08.180 - Compensation restriction. 
No person may be licensed as a bingo manager unless he is a nonsalaried, noncompensated member of the organization licensed to conduct bingo games, and has been a member for at least six months. 
(Prior code § 6-6.18)  
Chapter 5.12 - FORTUNETELLING AND HYPNOTISM 
 
5.12.010 - Purposes and findings. 
A.  The practice of fortunetelling, as defined in this chapter, has historically been subject to abuse by certain unscrupulous practitioners using the practice to commit fraud and larceny upon clients. 
B.  It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate the practice of fortunetelling in such a manner as to reduce the risk of fraud and larceny to clients while allowing fortunetellers to provide their services to clients with only minimal restrictions. 
C.  The provisions of this chapter requiring a license, posting of fees, providing receipts and allowing client recordation of the consultation, will make it more difficult for an unscrupulous fortuneteller to commit fraud or larceny and yet, as informational regulations, will not affect the nature of the information conveyed by the fortuneteller nor the manner in which it is conveyed. These regulations require only minimal expense and effort on the part of the fortuneteller and will not, therefore, impose any undue burden on their practices. 
D.  Fortunetelling for entertainment purposes, as defined in this chapter, does not create the same risk of fraud and larceny by an unscrupulous practitioner as would the practice with an individual client because it is done with a group at a public place for the purpose of entertaining and not to deal with the private concerns of an individual. 
E.  For these and other reasons, the provisions of this chapter are necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(Prior code § 6-3.1)  
5.12.020 - License required. 
No person shall conduct, engage in, carry on, participate in, or practice fortunetelling or cause the same to be done for pay without having first obtained a license therefor. 
(Prior code § 6-3.2)  
5.12.030 - Definitions. 
As used in this code: 
"For pay" means for a fee, reward, donation, loan or receipt of anything of value. 
"Fortunetelling" means and includes telling of fortunes, forecasting of future events or furnishing of any information not otherwise obtainable by the ordinary process of knowledge, by means of any occult or psychic power, faculty or force, including, but not limited to, clairvoyance, clairaudience, cartomancy, phrenology, spirits, tea leaves or other such reading, mediumship, seership, prophecy, augury, astrology, palmistry, necromancy, mindreading, telepathy, or other craft, art, cards, talisman, charm, potion, magnetism, magnetized article or substance, crystal gazing, or magic, of any kind or nature. 
"Tax collector" means the tax collection for the county of Los Angeles or his/her designee. 
(Prior code § 6-3.3)  
5.12.040 - Permit application. 
Every natural person who, for pay, conducts, engages in, carries on, or practices fortunetelling shall file a separate verified application for a license with the tax collector. The application shall contain: 
A.  The name, home and business address, and home and business telephone numbers of the applicant; 
B.  The record of conviction for violations of the law, excluding minor traffic violations; 
C.  The fingerprints of the applicant on a form provided by the Los Angeles County sheriff's department; 
D.  The address, city and state, and the approximate dates where and when the applicant practiced a similar business, either alone or in conjunction with others; 
E.  A nonrefundable application fee in an amount set by council resolution. 
(Prior code § 6-3.4)  
5.12.050 - Approval of license. 
The tax collector shall approve or conditionallyapprove the license if he or she makes all the following findings: 
A.  All the information contained in the application and supporting data is true; and 
B.  The applicant has not, within one year from the date of the application, been convicted of any violation of this chapter or crimes involving prediction of future events by the occult arts, larceny, perjury, bribery, extortion, fraud, or similar crimes involving moral turpitude; and 
C.  The applicant has paid the required business license fee; and 
D.  The applicant agrees to abide by and comply with all conditions of the permit and applicable laws. 
(Prior code § 6-3.5)  
5.12.060 - Posting of fees. 
A.  Each person required to obtain a permit pursuant to Section 5.12.010 shall post on his or her business premises a sign containing the following information: 
1.  The true name of the fortunetelling practitioner; 
2.  Each service provided by the fortunetelling practitioner; 
3.  The fees charged for each service provided by the fortunetelling practitioner; 
4.  The statement, "By law, this business is prohibited from charging or soliciting any fee, payment or remuneration beyond these established rates." 
B.  The sign required by this section shall be prominently posted in the interior of the business premises at a point near the entry and shall be conspicuously visible to every person seeking the services of the fortuneteller. The sign lettering shall be of uniform size with each letter at least one-half inch in height. 
C.  No person shall charge any fee, payment, remuneration, or item of value for fortunetelling services in excess of the fees set forth on the sign or paper required in this section. 
(Prior code § 6-3.6)  
5.12.070 - Receipts. 
Prior to the acceptance of any money or item of value from a client, other than the acceptance of a gratuitous tip given voluntarily by the client, the fortuneteller shall issue a written receipt to the client, clearly showing: 
A.  Date; 
B.  Name of client; 
C.  Amount of money received or specific description of item of value received; and 
D.  Purpose for which the money or item of value was received. 
(Prior code § 6-3.7)  
5.12.080 - Client's record of consultation. 
No person engaging in fortunetelling services shall prohibit a client from making an audio recording or taking written notes of the information conveyed by the fortuneteller. 
(Prior code § 6-3.8)  
5.12.090 - Exception—Entertainment. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any person engaged solely in the business of entertaining the public by demonstrations of fortunetelling at public places and in the presence of and within the hearing of all other persons in attendance, and at which no questions are answered as part of such entertainment except in a manner to permit all persons present at such public place to hear such answer. 
(Prior code § 6-3.9)  
5.12.100 - Practice and teaching. 
No person shall carry on, practice, exhibit or teach, for a fee, the business or the art or practice of hypnosis, nor teach for a fee, self-hypnosis to any person undergoing a course of treatment or program of self-improvement except for the following: 
A.  A person licensed in the practice of psychology pursuant to the Psychology Licensing Law set forth in Business and Professional Code Sections 2900 et seq., may render or offer to render for a fee, services which include hypnosis or the teaching of self-hypnosis. 
B.  A person may render for a fee, services involving hypnosis or the teaching of self-hypnosis, pursuant to the provisions of and for the purposes set forth in Section 2908 of the Business and Professional Code. 
C.  A peace officer, as defined in Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 830) of Title 3 of Part 2 of the California Penal Code, may utilize hypnosis in the fulfillment of his or her duties as a peace officer. 
(Ord. 696 § 1, 1995: prior code § 6-3.10)  
Chapter 5.16 - FRANCHISES  
Article I. - Terms and Conditions of Operation of CATV Franchise 
 
5.16.010 - Intent. 
A.  Authority. The city pursuant to applicable federal and state laws, is authorized to grant one or more non-exclusive franchises to construct, operate, maintain and reconstruct cable systems within the city limits. 
B.  Findings. The city council finds that the development of cable systems has the potential of having great benefit and impact upon the residents of the city. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable systems, the city council further finds that the public convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers which should be vested in the city or such persons as the city may designate. It is the intent of this article and any subsequent amendments to provide for and specify the means to attain the best possible cable service to the public and any franchises issued pursuant to this article shall be deemed to include this as an integral finding thereof. It is the further intent of this article to establish regulatory provisions that permit the city to regulate cable system franchises to the full extent permitted by federal and state laws, including but not limited to the Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Federal Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 as amended or hereafter amended, applicable Federal Communications Commission regulations and applicable California law. 
(Ord. 840 § 2 (part), 2005)  
5.16.020 - Short title. 
This article shall constitute the "cable system regulatory ordinance" of the city and may be referred to as such. 
(Ord. 840 § 2 (part), 2005)  
5.16.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
"Basic cable service" means any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals. 
"Cable operator" means any person or group of persons who: 
1.  Provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system; or 
2.  Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such cable system. 
"Cable service" means: 
1.  The one-way transmission to subscribers of: 
a.  Video programming; or 
b.  Other programming service; and 
2.  Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. 
"Cable system" or "system," means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include: 
1.  A facility that serves only to retransmit television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; 
2.  A facility that serves subscribers without using any public rights-of-way; 
3.  A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, except that such facility shall be considered a Cable System (other than for the purposes of 47 U.S.C. 541) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; 
4.  An open video system that complies with Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 573) as amended; or 
5.  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system. 
"Channel" or "cable channel" means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system which is capable of delivering a television channel as defined by the Federal Communications Commission. 
"Council" means the city council of the city of Lancaster. 
"Franchise" means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the council, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not supersede the requirement to obtain any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting business within the city as required by the other ordinances and laws of the city. 
"Franchise agreement" means a franchise grant ordinance or a contractual agreement, containing the specific provisions of the franchise granted, including references, specifications, requirements and other related matters. 
"Franchise fee" means any tax, fee or assessment of any kind imposed by the city on a grantee as compensation for the grantee's use of the public rights-of-way. The term "franchise fee" does not include: 
1.  Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services, but not including a tax, fee or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or cable subscribers); 
2.  Capital costs which are required by the franchise to be incurred by grantee for public, educational, or governmental access facilities; 
3.  Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or 
4.  Any fee imposed under Title 17, United States Code. 
"Grantee" means any "person" receiving a franchise pursuant to this article and under the granting franchise ordinance or agreement, and its lawful successor, transferee or assignee. 
"Grantor" or "city" means the city as represented by the council or any delegate, acting within the scope of its jurisdiction. 
"Gross annual cable service revenues" means the annual gross revenues received directly or indirectly by a grantee from the provision of cable service within the city utilizing the public rights-of-way for which a franchise is required. Gross annual cable service revenues shall include, but not be limited to, subscriber revenue, equipment charges, late fees, advertising revenue, home shopping revenue and franchise fee revenue. If advertising is marketed by an affiliate of grantee, agency fees and commissions and any similar type fees shall be included within gross annual cable service revenues. Gross annual cable service revenues shall not include refundable deposits, rebates or credits, or any sales, excise or other taxes or charges imposed externally to the franchise, and collected for direct pass-through to local, state or federal government and paid to such government. 
"Installation" means the connection of the system to subscribers' terminals, and the provision of service. 
"Normal operating conditions" means those service conditions which are within the control of grantee. Those conditions which are not within the control of the grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system. 
"Person" means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation or governmental entity. 
"Public, educational or government access facilities" or "PEG access facilities" means the total of the following: 
1.  Channel capacity designated for noncommercial public, educational, or government use; and 
2.  Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity. 
"Section" means any section, subsection or provision of this article. 
"Service area" or "franchise area" means the entire geographic area within the municipal boundaries of the city as it is now constituted or may in the future be constituted, unless otherwise specified in the franchise. 
"Service tier" means a category of cable service or other services provided by a cable operator and for which a separate rate is charged. 
"State" means the state of California. 
"Street" or "public way" or "public rights-of-way" means each of the following which have been dedicated to the public or are hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by others and located within the service area: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way and similar public property. 
"Subscriber" or "customer" or "consumer" means any person who or which elects to subscribe to, for any purpose, cable service provided by the grantee by means of or in connection with the cable system, and who pays the charges therefore. 
(Ord. 840 § 2 (part), 2005)  
5.16.040 - Franchise terms and conditions. 
A.  Franchise Purposes. A franchise granted by the city under the provisions of this article shall encompass the following purposes: 
1.  To permit the grantee to engage in the business of providing cable service, and such other services as may be permitted by law which grantee provides to subscribers within the designated service area. 
2.  To permit the grantee to erect, install, construct, repair, rebuild, reconstruct, replace, maintain, and retain, cable lines, related electronic equipment, supporting structures, appurtenances, and other property in connection with the operation of the cable system in, on, over, under, upon, along and across streets, public rights-of-way or other public places within the designated service area. 
3.  To permit the grantee to maintain and operate said cable system properties for the origination, reception, transmission, amplification, and distribution of television and radio signals and for the delivery of cable services and such other services as may be permitted by law. 
4.  To set forth the obligations of the grantee under the franchise. 
B.  Franchise Required. After the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or operate a cable system in the city within any public way without a properly granted franchise awarded pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
C.  Term of the Franchise. 
1.  A franchise granted hereunder shall be for a term established in the franchise agreement, commencing on the grantor's adoption of an ordinance or resolution authorizing the franchise. 
2.  A franchise granted hereunder may be renewed upon application by the grantee pursuant to the provisions of applicable state and federal law. 
D.  Franchise Territory. Any franchise shall be valid within all the municipal limits of the city, and within any area added to the city during the term of the franchise, unless otherwise specified in the franchise agreement. 
E.  Federal or State Jurisdiction. This article shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state laws, and shall apply to all franchises granted or renewed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article to the extent permitted by applicable law. 
F.  Franchise Non-Transferable. 
1.  Grantee shall not sell, transfer, lease, assign or dispose of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, contract, consolidation or otherwise (collectively "transfer"), the franchise or any of the rights or privileges therein granted, without the prior consent of the council, which consent shall not be unreasonably denied, withheld or delayed; provided, however, that the prior written consent of the council shall not be required for an intra-corporate or intra-company transfer from one wholly-owned subsidiary to another wholly-owned subsidiary. Any attempt to sell, transfer, lease, assign or otherwise dispose of the franchise without the consent of the council shall be null and void. The granting of a security interest in any grantee assets, or any mortgage or other hypothecation or assignment of any right, title or interest in the cable system, or use of the cable system as collateral in order to secure indebtedness, shall not be considered a transfer for the purposes of this section. 
2.  The requirements of subsection A shall apply to any change in control of grantee. The word "control" as used herein includes majority ownership, and actual working control in whatever manner exercised. In the event that grantee is a corporation, prior consent of the council shall be required where ownership or control of more than twenty (20) percent of the voting stock of the grantee is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom own or control the voting stock of the grantee as of the effective date of the franchise, singularly or collectively. 
3.  Grantee shall notify grantor in writing of any foreclosure or any other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the franchise property of the grantee or upon the termination of any lease or interest covering all or a substantial part of said franchise property. Such notification shall be considered by grantor as notice that a change in control or ownership of the franchise has taken place and the provisions under this section governing the consent of grantor to such change in control or ownership shall apply. 
4.  For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer, or acquisition of control, grantor may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective transferee or controlling party, in accordance with the guidelines set forth herein, and grantee shall assist grantor in such inquiry. In seeking grantor's consent to any change of ownership or control, grantee shall have the responsibility of insuring that the grantee and/or the proposed transferee completes an application in accordance with Federal Communications Commission Form 394 or equivalent. An application shall be submitted to grantor not less than one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the proposed date of transfer. The transferee shall be required to establish that it possesses the legal, technical and financial qualifications to operate and maintain the system and comply with all franchise requirements for the remainder of the term of the franchise. If the grantee is then in compliance with the requirements of the franchise, and the legal, financial and technical qualifications of the applicant are satisfactory, the grantor shall consent to the transfer of the franchise in accordance with federal regulations. The grantor may impose such reasonable conditions upon the transfer as are within the grantor's legal authority, and are considered necessary to protect the interest of subscribers and the general public. If the grantor has not taken action on the grantee's request for transfer within one hundred twenty (120) days after receiving such request, grantor's consent to such transfer shall be deemed given. The consent of the grantor to such transfer shall not be unreasonably denied or delayed. 
5.  Any financial institution having a pledge of the grantee or its assets for the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the franchise shall have the right to notify the grantor that it or its designee satisfactory to the grantor shall take control of and operate the cable system, in the event of a grantee default of its financial obligations. Further, said financial institution shall also agree in writing to continue cable service and comply with all franchise requirements during the term the financial institution exercises control over the system. 
6.  Any submission of an application for transfer of a franchise shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable franchise processing fee in the amount of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00). Upon transfer, grantee shall reimburse grantor for grantor's reasonable processing and review expenses in connection with the transfer of the franchise, to the extent such expenses exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00), including without limitation, costs of administrative review, financial, legal and technical evaluation of the proposed transferee, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by such experts), notice and publication costs and document preparation expenses, as specified in any franchise agreement. Any such reimbursement shall not be charged against any franchise fee due to grantor during the term of the franchise. 
G.  Geographical Coverage. 
1.  Grantee shall design, construct and maintain the cable system to have the capability to pass every residential dwelling unit in the service area, subject to any service area line extension requirements of the franchise agreement. 
2.  Business and commercial facilities shall be passed and/or served in accordance with the provisions of the franchise agreement. 
3.  After service has been established by activating trunk and/or distribution cables for any service area, grantee shall provide service to any requesting subscriber within that service area within thirty (30) days from the date of request, provided that the grantee is able to secure all rights-of-way, permits and landlord agreements necessary to extend service to such subscriber within such thirty (30) day period on reasonable terms and conditions. 
H.  Nonexclusive Franchise. Any Franchise granted pursuant to this article shall be nonexclusive. The grantor specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a cable system, as it deems appropriate, subject to applicable state and federal law. 
I.  Multiple Franchises. 
1.  Grantor may grant any number of franchises subject to applicable state or federal law. Grantor may limit the number of franchises granted, based upon, but not necessarily limited to, the requirements of applicable law and specific local considerations, such as: 
a.  The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate multiple cables in addition to the cables, conduits and pipes of the utility systems, such as electrical power, telephone, gas and sewerage. 
b.  The benefits that may accrue to subscribers as a result of cable system competition, such as lower rates and improved service. 
c.  The disadvantages that may result from cable system competition, such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on residents' property, and the disruption arising from numerous excavations of the public rights-of-way. 
d.  Where electric and telephone utilities are to be placed underground in any new residential housing developments, grantor and the developer of such new residential housing shall give each grantee serving the franchise area within which the new residential housing development is located at least seventy two (72) hours prior written notice of the date on which open trenching will be available for the grantee's installation of conduit, pedestals and vaults. On request of the grantor or developer, the grantee shall provide specifications needed for trenching. Developers of new residential housing with underground utilities shall provide conduit to accommodate cables for at least two new entrant cable systems and dedicate the use of such conduit to the city. 
e.  Grantor may require that any new entrant, non-incumbent grantee be responsible for its own underground trenching and the costs associated therewith, if, in grantor's opinion, the public rights-of-way in any particular area cannot feasibly and reasonably accommodate additional cables. 
(Ord. 840 § 2 (part), 2005)  
5.16.050 - Franchise applications and renewal. 
A.  Filing of Applications. Any person desiring an initial franchise for a cable system shall file an application with the city. A reasonable nonrefundable initial application fee established by the city shall accompany the initial franchise application to cover all validly documented reasonable costs associated with processing and reviewing the application, including without limitation costs of administrative review, financial, legal and technical evaluation of the applicant, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by such experts), notice and publication requirements with respect to the consideration of the application and document preparation expenses. In the event such validly documented reasonable costs exceed the application fee, the selected applicant(s) shall pay the difference to the city within thirty (30) days following receipt of an itemized statement of such costs. 
B.  Applications—Contents. An application for an initial franchise for a cable system shall contain: 
1.  A statement as to the proposed franchise and service area; 
2.  A resume of prior history of the applicant, including the expertise of applicant in the cable system field; 
3.  A list of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant, if a partnership, or the percentage of stock owned or controlled by each stockholder having a five percent or greater interest, if a corporation; 
4.  A list of officers, directors and managing employees of the applicant, together with a description of the background of each such person; 
5.  The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant or any other business entity owning or controlling the applicant in whole or in part, or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant; 
6.  A current financial statement of the applicant verified by a certified public accountant audit or otherwise certified to be true, complete and correct to the reasonable satisfaction of the city; 
7.  A proposed construction and service schedule; and 
8.  Any reasonable relevant additional information that the city deems applicable. 
C.  Consideration of Initial Applications. 
1.  Upon receipt of any application for an initial franchise, the city manager or a delegate shall prepare a report and make recommendations respecting such application to the council. 
2.  A public hearing shall be set prior to any initial franchise grant, at a time and date council shall make a decision based upon the evidence received at the hearing as to whether or not the initial franchise(s) should be granted, and, if granted, subject to what conditions. The council may grant one or more franchises, or may decline to grant any franchise. 
D.  Franchise Renewal. Franchise renewals shall be in accordance with applicable law and regulation. Grantor and grantee, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal negotiations at any time during the term of the franchise. 
(Ord. 840 § 2 (part), 2005)  
5.16.060 - Minimum consumer protection and service standards. 
A.  Operational Standards. 
1.  Except as otherwise provided in the franchise agreement, grantee shall meet or exceed the following consumer protection and service standards under normal operating conditions: 
a.  Sufficient toll-free telephone line capacity during normal business hours to assure that telephone answer time by a customer service representative, including wait time, shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds; and callers needing to be transferred shall not be required to wait more than thirty (30) seconds before being connected to a service representative. Under normal operating conditions, a caller shall receive a busy signal less than three percent of the time. 
b.  Emergency toll free telephone line capacity on a twenty-four (24) hour basis, including weekends and holidays. After normal business hours, the telephone calls may be answered by a service or an automated response system, including an answering machine and calls received after normal business hours by such service or automated response system must be responded to by a trained company representative by the next business day. During periods when an answering device, including, but not limited to voice-mail, is used, grantee shall provide personnel who shall contact the answering device or machine, at a minimum, every four hours to check on requests for service or complaints. 
c.  A business and service and/or payment office located within the city open during normal business hours where grantee provides adequate staffing to accept subscriber payments and the return or exchange of subscriber equipment. Normal business hours shall include some evening hours after six p.m., at least one night per week, and/or some weekend hours. The grantee may petition the grantor to reduce its business hours if the extended hours are not justified by subscriber demand, and grantor may not unreasonably deny the petition. 
d.  An emergency system maintenance and repair staff, capable of responding to and repairing major system malfunctions on a twenty-four (24) hour per day basis. 
e.  An installation staff, capable of installing service to any subscriber requiring a standard installation within seven days after receipt of a request, in all areas where trunk and feeder cable have been activated. "Standard installations" shall be those that are located up to one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from the existing distribution system, unless otherwise defined in any franchise agreement. 
f.  Grantee shall schedule, within a specified four hour time period during normal business hours, all appointments with subscribers for installation of service, service calls and other activities at the subscriber location. Grantee may schedule installation and service calls outside of normal business hours for the express convenience of the customer. Grantee shall not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. If a grantee representative is running late for an appointment with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the customer shall be contacted and the appointment rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is mutually agreeable to the grantee and the customer. 
2.  Under normal operating conditions, the standards of subsections (a) and (b) above shall be met not less than ninety (90) percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis. The standards of subsections (d)—(f) above shall be met not less than ninety-five (95) percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis. 
3.  Grantee shall not be required to acquire equipment or perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards above unless an historical record of complaints indicates a clear failure to comply. 
B.  Service Standards. 
1.  Grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Scheduled interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during a period of minimum use of the cable system, preferably between midnight and six a.m. local time. 
2.  The grantee shall maintain a repair force of technicians normally capable of responding to subscriber requests for service within the following time frames: 
a.  For a System Outage. Within two hours, including weekends, of receiving subscriber calls or requests for service which by number identify a system outage of sound or picture of one or more channels, affecting at least ten (10) percent of the subscribers of the system. 
b.  For an Isolated Outage. Within twenty-four (24) hours, including weekends, of receiving requests for service identifying an isolated outage of sound or picture for one or more channels that affects five or more subscribers. On weekends, an outage affecting fewer than five subscribers shall result in a service call no later than the next business day. 
c.  For Inferior Signal Quality. Within two business days of receiving a request for service identifying a problem concerning picture or sound quality. 
3.  Grantee shall be deemed to have responded to a request for service under the provisions of this section when a technician arrives at the service location and begins work on the problem. In the case of a subscriber not being home when the technician arrives, the technician shall leave written notification of arrival. 
4.  Grantee shall not charge for the repair or replacement of defective or malfunctioning equipment provided by grantee to subscribers, unless the defect was caused by the subscriber, or the equipment owned by the subscriber requires repair or replacement. 
5.  Unless excused, grantee shall determine the nature of the problem resulting in a request for service within two business days of beginning work and resolve all cable system related problems within five business days unless technically infeasible. 
C.  Billing and Information Standards. 
1.  Subscriber bills shall be clear, concise and understandable. Bills shall be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills shall also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates and credits. 
2.  In case of a billing dispute, the grantee shall respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within thirty (30) days. 
3.  Upon request, grantee shall provide pro rata credits or refunds to subscribers whose service has been interrupted for two or more hours if the interruption was not caused by the subscriber. 
Credits or refunds shall automatically be provided by grantee on a pro rata basis to any subscriber(s) affected by interruption(s) of service for more than three hours due to actions or outages under the control of the grantee, exclusive of scheduled repairs, maintenance or franchise-required construction that grantee has provided advance written notice of to subscribers. In cases where advance written notice is provided to subscribers, the time period detailed in said notice shall not exceed six hours in any twenty-four (24) hour period. In cases where said notice has been given to subscribers and the service interruption exceeds the period detailed in said notice, the provisions of this section shall apply. 
In the event grantee has improperly or inadvertently disconnected cable services to a subscriber, grantee shall provide for restoration without charge to subscriber as soon as possible, but no later than within two days of discovery of disconnection. Grantee shall credit or provide refunds to any subscriber improperly or inadvertently disconnected from receiving cable services for the period of time without cable service. 
All credits or refunds for service shall be issued no later than the customer's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. For subscribers terminating service, refunds shall be issued promptly, but no later than thirty (30) days after the return of any grantee-supplied equipment. 
4.  Grantee shall provide written information on each of the following areas: (i) at the time of the installation of service; (ii) at least annually to all subscribers; and (iii) at any time upon request: 
a.  Products and services offered; 
b.  Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services; 
c.  Installation and service maintenance policies; 
d.  Instructions on how to use the cable service; 
e.  Channel positions of programming carried on the System; and 
f.  Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and telephone number of the grantor office designated for dealing with cable-related issues. 
5.  Subscribers shall be notified of any changes in rates, programming services or channel positions as soon as possible in writing and in accordance with state and federal law. Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of thirty (30) days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the grantee. In addition, grantee shall notify subscribers thirty (30) days in advance of any significant changes in the information required in subsection (C)(4) above. 
D.  Verification of Compliance with Standards. 
1.  Upon ten (10) days prior written notice, grantee shall respond to a request for information made by grantor regarding grantee's compliance with any or all of the standards required in subsections (A)—(C) above. Grantee shall provide sufficient documentation to permit grantor to verify grantee's compliance. 
2.  A repeated and verifiable pattern of non-compliance with the consumer protection standards of subsections (A)—(C) above, after grantee's receipt of due notice and not less than a thirty (30) day opportunity to cure, may be deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement. 
3.  The grantor, pursuant to subsection (A)(3) of the ordinance codified in this article, may require grantee to acquire equipment to determine compliance with the telephone answering standards of this section. Should grantee have its own telephone equipment which can report on telephone line(s) usage, the grantee, upon written request from the grantor, shall submit such report from its own system in order to verify compliance with the telephone answering standards of this section. 
4.  Grantee shall take necessary steps to ensure that adequate telephone lines and/or staffing are available to permit grantee to satisfy its obligations under the ordinance codified in this article and the franchise. Consideration shall be given for periods of promotional activities or outages. The monthly billing period shall be considered as a normal, daily activity for purposes of determining the availability of adequate telephone lines and/or staffing. 
E.  Subscriber Complaints and Disputes. 
1.  Grantee shall establish written procedures for receiving, acting upon and resolving subscriber complaints without intervention by the grantor. The written procedures shall prescribe the manner in which a subscriber may submit a complaint either orally or in writing specifying the subscriber's grounds for dissatisfaction. Grantee shall file a copy of these procedures with grantor. The written procedures shall include a requirement that grantee respond to any written complaint from a subscriber within thirty (30) days of receipt. 
2.  Upon prior written request, grantor shall have the right to review grantee's response to any subscriber complaints in order to determine grantee's compliance with the franchise requirements, subject to the subscriber's right to privacy. 
3.  Subject to applicable law, it shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving cable service insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. In the event that the grantee elects to rebuild, modify, or sell the system, or the grantor gives notice of intent to terminate or not to renew the franchise, the grantee shall act so as to ensure that all subscribers receive cable service so long as the franchise remains in force. 
4.  In the event of a change of control of grantee, or in the event a new operator acquires the system, the original grantee shall cooperate with the grantor, new grantee or operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During such period, grantee shall be entitled to the revenues for any period during which it operates the system. 
5.  Grantee response to subscriber complaints, as well as complaints made by subscribers to grantor and provided by grantor to grantee, shall be initiated within one business day of receipt by grantor. The resolution of subscriber complaints shall be effected by grantee not later than three business days after receipt of the complaint, or a longer period if such complaint cannot reasonably be resolved within three business days. Should a grantee supervisor not be available when requested by a subscriber, a supervisor shall respond to the subscriber's complaint at the earliest possible time, and in no event later than the end of the next business day. For complaints received by grantor and provided by grantor to grantee, grantee shall notify grantor of grantee's progress in responding to, and resolving, said complaints. 
F.  Other Requirements. 
1.  All officers, agents or employees of grantee or its contractors or subcontractors who, in the normal course of work come into contact with members of the public or who require entry onto subscribers' premises shall carry a photo-identification card in a form approved by grantor. Grantee shall account for all identification cards at all times. Every vehicle of the grantee or its major subcontractors shall be clearly identified as working for grantee. 
2.  Additional service standards and standards governing consumer protection and response by grantee to subscriber complaints not otherwise provided for in the ordinance codified in this article may be established in the franchise agreement or by separate ordinance as permitted by federal law. If grantor establishes such additional service standards which exceed any standards established by the Federal Communications Commission, grantee may be permitted by federal law or regulation to recover the incremental cost associated with meeting the more stringent standard (i.e., the incremental cost differential between meeting the existing standard and that of the newly established standard). A verified and continuing pattern of repeated and substantial noncompliance may be deemed a material breach of the franchise, provided that grantee shall receive due process, including prior written notification and a reasonable opportunity to cure, prior to any sanction being imposed. 
(Ord. 840 § 2 (part), 2005)  
5.16.070 - Franchise fee and financial requirements. 
A.  Franchise Fee. 
1.  Following the issuance and acceptance of the franchise, the grantee shall pay to the grantor a franchise fee on gross annual cable service revenues in the amount and at the times set forth in the franchise agreement. 
2.  The grantee shall provide to the grantor, on an annual basis, and at the grantee's sole cost and expense, a statement within one hundred twenty (120) days of the close of the calendar year, either audited and certified by an independent certified public accountant or certified by an officer or authorized financial representative of the grantee, reflecting the total amounts of gross revenues and all payments, deductions and computations for the period covered by the payment. Upon thirty (30) days prior written notice, grantor shall have the right to conduct an independent financial audit of grantee's gross annual cable service revenue and franchise fee records, in accordance with generally accepted accounting procedures (GAAP), and if such audit indicates a franchise fee underpayment of two percent or more, the grantee shall assume all reasonable documented costs of such audit. 
3.  Except as otherwise provided by law, no acceptance of any payment by the grantor shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the grantor may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under the ordinance codified in this article or for the performance of any other obligation of the grantee for a period of four years from the date the payment is due. 
4.  In the event that any franchise fee payment or payment of any adjustment to any franchise fee is not made on or before the dates specified in the franchise agreement, unless otherwise excused, grantee shall pay: 
a.  An interest charge, computed from such due date, at an annual rate of eight percent or the maximum rate allowed by law; and 
b.  If the payment is late by thirty (30) days or more, a sum of money equal to five percent of the amount due in order to defray those additional expenses and costs incurred by the grantor due to grantee's delinquent payment. 
5.  Franchise fee payments shall be made in accordance with the schedule indicated in the franchise agreement. 
B.  Security. 
1.  Grantor may require grantee to provide security, in an amount and form established in the franchise agreement. The amount of the security shall be established based on the extent of the grantee's obligations under the terms of the franchise. 
2.  The security shall be available to grantor to satisfy all claims, liens and/or taxes due grantor from grantee which arise by reason of construction, operation, or maintenance of the system, and to satisfy any actual or liquidated damages arising out of a material breach of the franchise agreement, subject to the procedures and amounts designated in the franchise agreement. 
3.  If the security is drawn upon by grantor in accordance with the procedures established in the ordinance codified in this article and the franchise agreement, grantee shall cause the security to be replenished to the original amount no later than thirty (30) days after receiving written confirmation from the issuer where such security is maintained that grantor has made a draw against the security. Failure to replenish the security shall be deemed a material breach of the franchise. 
(Ord. 840 § 2 (part), 2005)  
5.16.080 - Construction requirements. 
A.  System Construction. 
1.  Grantee shall not construct any cable system facilities until grantee has secured the necessary permits from grantor, or other responsible public agencies. The grantee shall be subject to all permit and bonding requirements applicable to contractors working within the public rights-of-way. No provision of the ordinance codified in this article or the franchise agreement shall be deemed a waiver of the obligation of a grantee to pay grantor for the issuance of a permit. 
2.  In those areas of the city where transmission lines or distribution facilities of all public utilities providing telephone and electric power service are underground, the grantee likewise shall construct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities underground. 
3.  In those areas of the city where the grantee's cables are located on the above-ground transmission or distribution facilities of the public and/or municipal utility providing telephone or electric power service, and in the event that the facilities of both the telephone and electric power utilities subsequently are placed underground, then the grantee likewise shall reconstruct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities underground, at grantee's cost. Certain of grantee's equipment, such as pedestals, amplifiers and power supplies, which normally are placed above ground, may continue to remain in above-ground enclosures, unless otherwise provided in the franchise agreement. 
4.  Any changes in or extensions of any poles, anchors, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals or other fixtures and equipment (herein referred to as "structures"), or the construction of any additional structures, in, upon, along, across, under or over the streets, alleys and public ways shall be made under the direction of city engineer or a designee, who shall, if the proposed change, extension or construction conforms to the provisions hereof, issue written permits therefor. The height above public thoroughfares of all aerial wires shall conform to the requirements of the California regulatory body having jurisdiction thereof. 
a.  All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by the grantee shall be installed at the sole cost of the grantee, and shall be located so as not to interfere with the proper use of the public rights-of-way, and to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said public rights-of-way, and not to materially interfere with existing public and municipal utility installations. 
b.  In the event that any property or improvement of the grantor in the public rights-of-way is disturbed or damaged by the grantee or any of its contractors, agents or employees in connection with undertaking any and all work pursuant to the rights granted to the grantee pursuant to the ordinance codified in this article and the franchise agreement, the grantee shall promptly, at the grantee's sole cost and expense, restore said property or improvement which was so disturbed or damaged to the condition as it existed immediately prior to grantee's disturbance or damage. If such property or improvement shall within two years (or in the case of street improvement, until the street is resurfaced if resurfaced prior to the expiration of the two years) of the date the restoration was completed, become uneven, unsettled or otherwise require additional restorative work, repair or replacement because of the initial disturbance or damage to the property by the grantee, then the grantee, as soon as reasonably possible, shall, promptly upon receipt of written notice from the grantor and at the grantee's sole cost and expense, restore to the grantor's satisfaction said property or improvement which was disturbed or damaged. Any such restoration by the grantee shall be made in accordance with such materials and specifications as may, from time to time, be established by the grantor. 
c.  Prior to commencing any work on the system in the public rights-of-way, the grantee shall obtain any and all permits, licenses and authorizations lawfully required for such work. If emergency work on the system in the public right-of-way is required, the grantee shall with all due diligence, seek to obtain any and all such required permits, licenses and authorizations within three working days after commencing such emergency work. Prior to performing any work in the public right-of-way, grantee shall give appropriate notice to the "underground service alert" ("USA"), or any similar type service provider as designated by the grantor. 
d.  There shall be no unreasonable or unnecessary obstruction of the public rights-of-way by the grantee in connection with any of the work provided for herein. The grantee shall maintain any barriers, signs and warning signals during any work performed on or about the public rights-of-way or adjacent thereto as may be necessary to reasonably avoid injury or damage to life and property. 
e.  If the grantor lawfully elects to alter or change the grade or location of any public right-of-way, the grantee shall, upon reasonable notice by the grantor, and in a timely manner, remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense provided that grantee shall be entitled to share in any grantor-provided funds or reimbursements provided to utilities or other users of the public rights-of-way for such location. 
f.  The grantee shall not place poles, conduits or other fixtures above or below ground where the same will interfere with any gas, electric, telephone fixtures, water hydrants or other utility, and all such poles, conduits or other fixtures placed in any street shall be so placed as to comply with all ordinances of the grantor. 
g.  In accordance with applicable law, the grantee or any utility user of the public rights-of-way may be required by the grantor to permit joint use of its poles and/or conduit located in the public rights-of-way, insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of a reasonable rental fee for such usage. In the absence of agreement regarding such joint use, each party shall be entitled to exercise any rights and defenses provided by applicable law. 
h.  The grantee, on request of any person holding a moving permit issued by the grantor, shall temporarily raise or lower its wires or fixtures to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary raising or lowering of wires or fixtures shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not less than five business days prior written notice to arrange for the temporary wire or equipment changes. 
i.  Subject to provisions of city code, the grantee shall have the authority to trim any trees or other natural growth overhanging the public rights-of-way so as to prevent the branches of such trees or other natural growth from coming in contact with the grantee's wires, cables and other equipment. The grantor may require all trimming of trees and natural growth to be done under its supervision and direction, at the expense of the grantee. 
j.  Grantee shall be subject to any and all requirements established by the grantor with regard to the placement and screening of grantee's facilities and equipment located in the public rights-of-way. Such requirements may include, but not be limited to, use of landscaping to screen pedestals and cabinets and requiring that construction be flush with the natural grade of the surrounding area. 
B.  Multiple Franchises. If the grantor authorizes or permits another cable system to operate within the municipal limits of the city, it shall do so on conditions that such new cable system entrant indemnify and hold harmless and reimburse the grantee from and against all costs and expenses incurred in strengthening poles, replacing poles, rearranging attachments, placing underground facilities and all other costs including those of grantee, the city and utilities, incident to inspections, make ready, and construction of an additional cable system in the franchise area; and grantee shall be designated a third party beneficiary of such conditions as are incorporated into the authorization(s) granted to such new entrant cable system. 
(Ord. 840 § 2 (part), 2005)  
5.16.090 - Standards. 
A.  Applicable Standards. 
1.  The grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its cable system in a manner consistent with all applicable laws, regulations, construction standards, governmental requirements, FCC technical standards, and any detailed standards set forth in its franchise agreement. In addition, the grantee shall provide to the grantor, upon written request, a written report of the results of the grantee's periodic proof of performance tests conducted pursuant to FCC standards and guidelines. 
2.  Should the FCC no longer require proof of performance tests, the grantee shall make and submit such proof of performance tests and reports in response to a written request from the grantor. Such report shall be submitted to the grantor within thirty (30) days of issuance of the grantor request. 
B.  Non-Compliance with Standards. Repeated and verified failure to maintain specified technical standards shall constitute a material breach of the franchise. 
C.  Costs of Technical Assistance. If the grantor determines through the use of an independent third party that grantee's cable system does not comply with any material franchise-imposed technical requirements and such findings are not demonstrated to be incorrect by the grantee, the grantee shall pay the reasonable costs incurred by the grantor for obtaining any technical assistance deemed necessary by the grantor to determine said compliance. Any such payment by grantee shall not be credited against any franchise fees due to the grantor. 
(Ord. 840 § 2 (part), 2005)  
5.16.100 - Indemnification and insurance requirements. 
A.  Hold Harmless. Grantee shall indemnify, defend and hold grantor, its officers, agents and employees harmless from any liability, claims, damages, costs or expenses, to the extent provided in the franchise agreement. 
B.  Insurance. 
1.  On or before commencement of franchise operations, the grantee shall furnish to grantor certificates of insurance for liability, workers' compensation and property insurance from appropriately qualified insurance companies, which shall be "admitted" in the state of California. The certificates of insurance shall provide that the insurance is in force and will not be cancelled or modified without thirty (30) days prior written notice to grantor. The certificates of insurance shall be in a form reasonably satisfactory to grantor. The grantee shall maintain at its cost throughout the term of the franchise, the insurance required herein and in any franchise agreement. 
2.  The policy of liability insurance shall: 
a.  Name grantor, its elected and appointed officials, boards and commissions, agents, employees and representatives (collectively the "grantor parties") as additional insured; 
b.  Indemnify the grantor parties against all liability for personal and bodily injury, death and damage to property arising from activities conducted and premises used pursuant to the ordinance codified in this article by providing coverage therefor, including but not limited to: 
i.  Acts or omissions of grantee, and its agents, servants and employees, committed in the conduct of franchise operations, and/or 
ii.  Use of motor vehicles; 
c.  Provide a combined single limit for comprehensive general liability and comprehensive automobile liability insurance in the amount provided for in the franchise agreement. 
3.  The policy of workers' compensation insurance shall comply with the laws of the state of California. 
4.  The policy of property insurance shall provide fire insurance with extended coverage on the cable system property used by grantee in the conduct of franchise operations in an amount adequate to enable grantee to resume franchise operations following the occurrence of any risk covered by this insurance. 
The certificates of insurance shall indicate the following information: 
a.  The policy number; 
b.  The date upon which the policy will become effective and the date upon which it will expire; 
c.  The names of the primary insured and any additional insured required by the franchise agreement; 
d.  The subject of the insurance; 
e.  The type of coverage provided by the insurance; and 
f.  The amount or limit of coverage provided by the insurance. 
If the certificates of insurance do not provide all of the above information, grantor reserves the right to inspect the relevant insurance policies. 
5.  The commencement of franchise operations shall not begin until grantee has complied with the aforementioned provisions of this section. 
6.  In the event grantee fails to maintain any of the above-described policies in full force and effect, grantor shall, upon forty-eight (48) hours notice to grantee, have the right to procure the required insurance and recover the cost thereof from grantee. Grantor shall also have the right to suspend the franchise during any period that grantee fails to maintain said policies in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 840 § 2 (part), 2005)  
5.16.110 - Records and reports. 
A.  Records Required. 
1.  Grantee shall at all times maintain: 
a.  A written or computer-stored record of all service calls and interruptions or degradation of service experienced for the preceding two years, provided that such complaints result in or require a service call, subject to the subscriber's right of privacy. 
b.  A full and complete set of plans and record drawings showing the locations of the cable system installed or in use in the city, exclusive of subscriber service drops and equipment provided in subscriber's homes. 
c.  If requested by grantor, a summary of service calls, identifying the number, general nature and disposition of such calls, on a monthly basis. A summary of such service calls shall be submitted to the grantor within thirty (30) days following any written request by grantor, in a form reasonably acceptable to the grantor. 
d.  If requested by grantor, a complaint record which shall contain a semi-annual (through June 30th and December 31st) breakdown indicating the total number of complaints received for the preceding reporting period, and shall indicate the classifications of complaints as follows: construction, billing, customer relations/service and miscellaneous. 
e.  A full and complete record of rates for programming services, equipment, installations and other subscriber charges. This information shall include, but not be limited to, rates for the basic service tier, tiers of service beyond the basic tier, premium service, pay-per-view services, late fees, additional outlets, converters, remote controls and any charges for installation or service at the subscriber premises. 
2.  The grantor may impose requests for additional information, records and documents from grantee, provided they reasonably relate to the scope of the city's rights under the ordinance codified in this article or the grantee's franchise agreement. 
3.  Upon reasonable notice, and during normal business hours, grantee shall permit examination by any duly authorized representative of the grantor of all: 
a.  Franchise property and facilities, together with any appurtenant property and facilities of grantee situated within the service area; and 
b.  All records relating to the franchise, provided they are necessary to enable the grantor to carry out its regulatory responsibilities under the ordinance codified in this article or the franchise agreement. Grantee shall have the right to be present at any such examination. 
B.  Reports. 
1.  Upon written request from grantor, grantee shall submit a written report to grantor with respect to the preceding calendar year in a form approved by grantor, including, but not limited to, the following information: 
a.  A summary of the previous year's (or in the case of the initial reporting year, the initial year's) activities in development of the cable system, including but not limited to, services begun or discontinued during the reporting year; 
b.  A list of grantee's officers and members of its board of directors; 
c.  A list of stockholders or other equity investors holding ten (10) percent or more of the voting interest in grantee; 
d.  An indication of any areas in grantee's service area where service is not available, and a schedule for providing service; 
e.  Information as to: 
(i)  The number of homes passed; 
(ii)  Total subscribers; and 
(iii)  The number of basic and pay subscribers. 
f.  A full and complete set of maps showing the underground locations of the cable system installed or in use in the city, exclusive of subscriber service drops and equipment provided in subscriber's homes. It is the intent of this section that the grantor have a complete set of "as-built" maps for the underground construction areas, and access to reviewing said maps for above ground construction. After the initial submission of drawings for underground areas, the grantee may satisfy the provisions of this section by providing updated portions of those sections of the drawings which have changed. 
g.  Any other information relevant to franchise regulation which the grantor shall reasonably request, and which is relevant to its regulatory responsibilities. 
2.  The grantor may impose requests for additional reports, information, records and documents from grantee, provided they reasonably relate to the scope of the city's rights under the ordinance codified in this article or the grantee's franchise agreement. 
3.  Upon request, grantee shall submit to grantor copies of all pleadings, applications and reports submitted by grantee to any federal, state or local court, regulatory agency, or other governmental body as well as copies of all decisions issued in response to such pleadings, applications and reports, which are non-routine in nature and which will materially affect its cable system within the franchise area. 
4.  Information otherwise confidential by law and so designated by grantee, which is submitted to grantor, shall be retained in confidence by grantor and its authorized agents to the extent permitted under state and federal law and shall not be made available for public inspection except as legally required. Notwithstanding the foregoing, grantee shall have no obligation to provide copies of documents to grantor which contain trade secrets of grantee or which are otherwise of a confidential or proprietary nature to grantee unless it receives satisfactory assurances from grantor, as expressed in a written confidentiality agreement, that such information can and will be held in strictest confidence and protected by the grantor. To the extent possible, grantee may provide grantor with summaries of any required documents or copies thereof with trade secrets and proprietary matters deleted therefrom. The burden of proof shall be on grantee to establish the confidential nature of any information submitted, to the reasonable satisfaction of the grantor. 
5.  If grantee is publicly held, a copy of each grantee's annual and other periodic reports and those of its parent, shall be submitted to grantor upon request. 
6.  All reports required under the ordinance codified in this article, except those required by law to be kept confidential, shall be available for public inspection in the grantor's offices during normal business hours. 
7.  All reports and records required to be delivered to grantor under the ordinance codified in this article shall be furnished at the sole expense of grantee, except as otherwise provided in the franchise agreement. 
8.  The refusal or failure of grantee to file any of the reports required as and when due under this ordinance, may be deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement if such reports are not provided to grantor within thirty (30) days after written request therefore, and may subject the grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to grantor under the ordinance codified in this article or the franchise agreement. 
9.  Any materially false or misleading statement or representation made knowingly and willfully by the grantee in any report required under the ordinance codified in this article or under the franchise agreement may be deemed a material breach of the franchise and may subject grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to grantor. 
(Ord. 840 § 2 (part), 2005)  
5.16.120 - Review of system performance. 
B.  Bi-annual Review. 
1.  Every two years throughout the term of the franchise, if reasonably requested by prior written notice from the grantor, grantor and grantee shall meet to review system performance and quality of service. The various reports required pursuant to the ordinance codified in this article, results of technical performance tests, the record of subscriber complaints and grantee's response to those complaints, shall be utilized as the basis for review. In addition, any subscriber may submit comments or complaints during the review meetings, either orally or in writing, and these shall be considered. Within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of such a review meeting, grantor may issue findings with respect to the cable system's franchise compliance. Within thirty (30) days of the issuance of such findings, the grantee shall provide the grantor with grantee's written response to the findings. 
2.  If grantor determines that grantee is not in compliance with the requirements of the ordinance codified in this article or the grantee's franchise agreement, grantor shall provide grantee, in the form of written findings, the specific details of each alleged noncompliance. Grantor may then direct grantee to correct the areas of noncompliance within a reasonable period of time. Failure of the grantee, after due notice: 
a.  To correct the area(s) of noncompliance within the period specified therefore; 
b.  To the extent full compliance is not practicable within the period specified, to commence compliance within such period and diligently achieve compliance thereafter; or 
c.  To demonstrate that the allegations of noncompliance are incorrect; shall be considered a material breach of the franchise, and grantor may exercise any remedy within the scope of the ordinance codified in this article and the franchise agreement considered appropriate under the circumstances. 
(Ord. 840 § 2 (part), 2005)  
5.16.130 - Franchise violations. 
A.  Remedies for Violations. If grantee fails to perform in a timely manner any material obligation required by the ordinance codified in this article or a franchise granted hereunder, following reasonable written notice from the grantor and a not less than thirty (30) day opportunity to cure such nonperformance in accordance with the provisions of the ordinance codified in this article and the franchise, grantor may at its option and in its sole discretion: 
1.  Cure the violation and recover the actual cost thereof from the security fund established in the franchise agreement, if such violation is not cured within thirty (30) days after written notice to the grantee of grantor's intention to cure and draw upon the security, unless grantor has provided grantee with additional time to effectuate a cure, the granting of additional time not to be unreasonably withheld; 
2.  Assess against grantee liquidated damages in an amount set forth in the franchise agreement for any such violations(s) if such violation is not cured, or if grantee has not commenced a cure, on a schedule reasonably acceptable to grantor, within thirty (30) days after written notice to the grantee of grantor's intention to assess liquidated damages. such assessment may be withdrawn from the security fund, and shall not constitute a waiver by grantor of any other right or remedy it may have under the franchise or applicable law, including without limitation, its right to recover from grantee such additional damages, losses, costs and expenses, including actual attorney's fees, as may have been suffered or incurred by grantor by reason of or arising out of such material breach of the franchise. 
3.  Seek to recover actual damages, by any means legally available, in lieu of liquidated damages that may be provided for in the franchise. 
B.  Procedure for Remedying Franchise Violations. Prior to imposing any remedy or other sanction against grantee specified in the ordinance codified in this article, grantor shall give grantee notice and opportunity to be heard on the matter, in accordance with the following procedures: 
1.  Grantor shall first notify grantee of the alleged violation in writing by personal delivery or registered or certified mail, and demand correction, or evidence of non-violation, within a reasonable time, which shall not be less than thirty (30) calendar days. If grantee fails: 
a.  To correct the alleged violation within the time prescribed; 
b.  To the extent correction is not practicable within the time period, to commence correction of the alleged violation within the time prescribed and diligently remedy such alleged violation thereafter; or 
c.  To provide evidence that there is no violation, the grantor shall then give, by personal delivery or registered or certified mail written notice of not less than thirty (30) days of a public hearing to be held before the council. Said notice shall set forth in detail each of the violations alleged to have occurred. 
2.  At the public hearing, the council shall hear and consider all other relevant evidence, and thereafter render findings and its decision. 
3.  If the council finds that 
a.  The grantee has corrected the alleged violation; 
b.  The grantee has diligently commenced correction of such alleged violation after notice thereof and is diligently proceeding to fully remedy such alleged violation; or 
c.  No material violation has occurred, the proceedings shall terminate and no penalty or other sanction shall be imposed. 
4.  If the council finds that material violations exist and that grantee: 
a.  Has not corrected the same in a satisfactory manner; or 
b.  To the extent full correction is not practicable within the time prescribed, has not diligently commenced correction of such violation after notice thereof and is not diligently proceeding to fully remedy such violation. 
Then the council may impose one or more of the remedies provided in the ordinance codified in this article and the franchise agreement as it, in its discretion, deems appropriate under the circumstances. 
C.  Grantor's Power to Revoke. 
1.  Grantor may revoke any franchise granted pursuant to the ordinance codified in this article and rescind all rights and privileges associated with it in the following circumstances, each of which shall represent a default by grantee and a material breach under the franchise: 
a.  If grantee repeatedly fails to perform any of its material obligations under the ordinance codified in this article or the franchise agreement and continues such failure to perform after receipt of due notice and an opportunity to cure as set forth herein or in the franchise agreement; 
b.  If grantee fails to provide or maintain in full force and effect the insurance coverage or security fund as required in the franchise agreement; 
c.  If grantee willfully violates any order or ruling of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to the grantee's franchise, unless such order or ruling is being contested by grantee in good faith in an appropriate proceeding; 
d.  If grantee knowingly practices any material fraud or deceit upon grantor; and 
e.  If grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged a bankrupt. 
2.  After completing the procedures set forth in subsection B above, the council may vote to revoke grantee's franchise. The council shall cause to be served on the grantee written notice of its intent to consider revoking grantee's franchise. Such notice shall be served on grantee at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing on the issue. The notice shall contain the time and place of the hearing and shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation within the franchise area ten (10) days prior to the hearing date. 
3.  The council shall hear any person(s) interested in the revocation and within ninety (90) days after the date of the hearing shall make its determination whether the grantee has committed a material breach of the franchise. 
4.  If the grantor determines that the grantee has committed a material breach, then the grantor may: 
a.  If the material breach is curable by the grantee, direct the grantee to take appropriate remedial action within the time and manner and under the terms and conditions reasonably specified by the grantor; or 
b.  Declare the franchise revoked and any security fund and bonds forfeited. 
The termination and forfeiture of the grantee's franchise shall in no way affect any right of grantor to pursue any remedy under the franchise or any provision of law. 
D.  Appeal of Finding of Revocation. The grantee may appeal a finding of revocation made pursuant to subsection C to an appropriate court of jurisdiction. Any such appeal must be taken by the grantee within ninety (90) days of the issuance of the grantor's decision to revoke the franchise. 
(Ord. 840 § 2 (part), 2005)  
5.16.140 - Force majeure—Grantee's inability to perform. 
In the event grantee's performance of any of the terms, conditions or obligations required by the ordinance codified in this article or a franchise granted hereunder is prevented by a cause or event not within grantee's control, such inability to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof; provided, however, that such inability to perform shall not relieve a grantee from the obligations imposed by Section 5.16.060(C)(3) pertaining to refunds and credits for interruptions in service. For the purpose of this section, causes or events not within the control of grantee shall include, but are not limited to, acts of God, war, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, labor disputes, restraints imposed by order of a governmental agency or court, explosions, acts of public enemies, and natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes, landslides, and fires, but shall not include financial inability of the grantee to perform or failure of the grantee to obtain any necessary permits or licenses from other governmental agencies or the right to use the facilities of any public utility where such failure is due solely to the acts or omissions of grantee, or the failure of the grantee to secure supplies, services or equipment necessary for the installation, operation, maintenance or repair of the cable system where the grantee has failed to exercise reasonable diligence to secure such supplies, services or equipment. 
(Ord. 840 § 2 (part), 2005)  
5.16.150 - Abandonment or removal of franchise property. 
A.  Abandonment or Removal. 
1.  If the grantee discontinues the use of any of its property within the public rights-of-way for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, such property shall be deemed to have been abandoned by grantee. Any part of the cable system that is parallel or redundant to other parts of the system and is intended for use only when needed as a backup for the system or a part thereof, shall not be deemed to have been abandoned because of its lack of use. 
2.  Grantor, upon such reasonable terms as grantor may lawfully impose, may give grantee permission to abandon, without removing, any system facility or equipment laid, directly constructed, operated or maintained under the franchise. Unless such permission is granted or unless otherwise provided in the ordinance codified in this article, the grantee shall remove all abandoned above-ground facilities and equipment upon receipt of written notice from grantor and shall restore to grantor's satisfaction any affected public right-of-way. In removing its plant, structures and equipment, grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it and shall leave all public rights-of-way in as good condition as that prevailing prior to such removal without materially interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires, poles, or attachments. Grantor shall have the right to inspect and approve the condition of the public rights-of-way, cables, wires, attachments and poles prior to and after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of the ordinance codified in this article and the security fund as provided herein shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by grantee with the terms and conditions of this section. 
3.  Upon the approved abandonment of any franchise property, the grantee, if required by the grantor, shall submit to the grantor an instrument, satisfactory in form to the grantor, transferring to the grantor the ownership of the abandoned franchise property. 
4.  At the expiration, without renewal or extension, of the term for which the franchise is granted, or upon its revocation, as provided herein, the grantor shall have the right to require grantee to remove, at its own expense, all above-ground portions of the cable system from all streets and public ways within the service area within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be less than one hundred eighty (180) days. 
5.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in the ordinance codified in this article, the grantee may abandon any underground Franchise property in place so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the public rights-of-way in which such property is located or with the use thereof by any public utility or other franchise holder. 
B.  Restoration by Grantor—Reimbursement of Costs. Upon reasonable written notice and upon the failure of the grantee to commence, pursue or complete any work to be done in any public right-of-way required by law or by the provisions of the ordinance codified in this article or the franchise agreement, within the time prescribed and to the reasonable satisfaction of the grantor, the grantor may cause the work to be commenced and/or completed. The grantor shall provide to the grantee an itemized work order setting forth in detail the exact nature of the work completed and the supplies used in such work. The grantee shall pay to the grantor the reasonable costs for such work no later than thirty (30) days after receipt of the itemized work order. 
C.  Extended Operation and Continuity of Services. Upon expiration or revocation of the franchise, the grantor shall have the discretion to permit grantee to continue to operate the cable system for an extended period of time. Grantee shall continue to operate the system under the terms and conditions of the ordinance codified in this article and the franchise agreement as it existed immediately prior to said expiration or revocation, and to provide the regular subscriber service and any and all of the services that may be provided at that time. It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue to receive all available services provided that financial and other obligations to grantee are honored. The grantee shall use reasonable efforts to provide continuous, uninterrupted service to its subscribers, including operation of the system during transition periods following franchise expiration or termination. 
D.  Receivership and Foreclosure. 
1.  At the option of the grantor and subject to applicable law, a franchise granted hereunder may be revoked one hundred twenty (120) days after appointment of a receiver(s) or trustee(s) to take over and conduct the business of grantee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless: 
a.  The receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated within said one hundred twenty (120) days; 
b.  Such receivers or trustees within said one hundred twenty (120) days shall have remedied all the defaults under the franchise or provided a plan for the remedy of such defaults which is satisfactory to the grantor; or 
c.  Such receivers or trustees shall, within said one hundred twenty (120) days, have executed an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of the franchise. 
2.  In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the cable system, in whole or in part, the grantor may serve notice of revocation upon grantee and the successful bidder at such sale, and all rights and privileges of the grantee hereunder shall be revoked thirty (30) days after service of such notice, unless: 
a.  Grantor shall have approved the transfer of the franchise, in the manner provided by law including, without limitation, the ordinance codified in this article; and 
b.  The successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with grantor to assume and be bound by all terms and conditions of the franchise. 
(Ord. 840 § 2 (part), 2005)  
5.16.160 - Grantor and subscriber rights. 
A.  Reservation of Grantor Rights. In addition to any rights specifically reserved to the grantor by the ordinance codified in this article, the grantor reserves to itself every right and power which is required to be reserved by a provision of any ordinance or under the franchise agreement, or under applicable state or federal law. 
B.  Waiver. 
1.  The grantor shall have the right to waive any provision of the franchise imposing an obligation on grantee, except those required by federal or state regulation, if the grantor determines: (1) that it is in the public interest to do so; or (2) that the enforcement of such provision will impose an undue hardship on the grantee or on the subscribers. To be effective, such waiver shall be evidenced by a statement in writing signed by a duly authorized representative of the grantor. Waiver of any provision in one instance shall not be deemed a waiver of such provision subsequent to such instance nor be deemed a waiver of any other provision of the franchise unless the statement so recites. 
2.  The grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the requirements of the ordinance codified in this article or the franchise agreement by any failure of the grantor on any one or more occasions to require or seek compliance with any such terms or conditions. 
C.  Rights of Individuals. 
1.  Grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users, or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age, sex or marital status. Grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations relating to nondiscrimination. 
However, nothing in the ordinance codified in this article or the franchise shall limit the right of the grantee to deny service to any household or individual who has a negative credit or service history with the grantee, which may include non-payment of bills or theft or damage to grantee's equipment, or who has threatened or assaulted employees of the grantee in the course of their employment. In cases of bad or negative credit, grantee may require the payment of a deposit. 
2.  Grantee shall adhere to the applicable equal employment opportunity requirements of federal, state and local regulations, as now written or as amended from time to time. 
3.  Without a lawful court order or applicable valid legal authority, neither grantee, nor any person, agency, or entity shall, without the subscriber's consent, tap, or arrange for the tapping, of any cable, line, signal input device, or subscriber outlet or receiver for any purpose except routine maintenance of the system, detection of unauthorized service, polling with audience participation, or audience viewing surveys to support advertising research regarding viewers where individual viewing behavior cannot be identified. 
4.  In the conduct of providing its cable services or in pursuit of any collateral commercial enterprise resulting therefrom, grantee shall take reasonable steps to prevent the invasion of a subscriber's or general citizen's right of privacy or other personal rights through the use of the system as such rights are delineated or defined by applicable law. The grantee shall not without lawful court order or other applicable valid legal authority utilize the system's interactive two-way equipment or capability, if such equipment or capability exists, for unauthorized personal surveillance of any subscriber or general citizen. 
5.  No cable line, wire amplifier, converter, or other piece of equipment owned by grantee shall be installed by grantee in any subscriber's premises, other than in appropriate easements, without first securing any required consent. If a subscriber requests service, permission to install upon subscriber's property shall be deemed granted. 
6.  Grantee shall comply with all laws and regulations regarding subscriber privacy including, but not limited to, Section 631 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. 551). 
(Ord. 840 § 2 (part), 2005)  
Article II. - Granting Franchise to Jones Intercable Company (Repealed by Ord. 840)  
Article III. - Electric Service Franchise 
 
5.16.270 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this article the words or phrases hereinafter in this section defined are used, it is intended that they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions (unless, in the given instance, the context wherein they are used shall clearly import a different meaning): 
"City" means the City of Lancaster, a municipal corporation of the state of California, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form. 
"Construct and use" means to lay, construct, erect, install, operate, maintain, use, repair, replace or relocate. 
"Grantee" means the corporation to which the franchise contemplated in this article is granted and its lawful successors or assigns. 
"Poles, wires, conduits and appurtenances" means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, cables, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, conduits, ducts, vaults, manholes, meters, cut-outs, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments, appurtenances and any other property located or to be located in, along, across, upon, over or under the streets of said city, and used or useful, directly or indirectly, for the purpose of transmitting or distributing electricity. 
"Streets" means the public streets, ways, alleys and places as the same now or may hereafter exist within said city. 
(Prior code § 6-7.31)  
5.16.280 - Franchise granted. 
The franchise to use and to construct and use, for transmitting and distributing electricity for any and all purposes, poles, wires, conduits and appurtenances, including communication circuits, necessary or proper therefor, in, along, across, upon, over and under the streets within the city, is granted to Southern California Edison Company, its lawful successors and assigns, under and in accordance with the provisions of the Franchise Act of 1937. 
(Prior code § 6-7.32)  
5.16.290 - Franchise is indeterminate. 
Said franchise shall be indeterminate, that is to say, said franchise shall endure in full force and effect until, with the consent of the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California, the same shall be voluntarily surrendered or abandoned by the grantee, or until the state or the municipal or public corporation thereunto duly authorized by law shall purchase by voluntary agreement or shall condemn and take under the power of eminent domain, all property actually used and useful in the exercise of said franchise and situate within the territorial limits of the state, municipal or public corporation purchasing or condemning such property, or until said franchise shall be forfeited for noncompliance with its terms by the grantee. 
(Prior code § 6-7.33)  
5.16.300 - Franchise fee. 
The grantee of said franchise, during the life thereof, will pay to said city two percent of the gross annual receipts of said grantee arising from the use, operation or possession of said franchise; provided, however, that such payment shall in no event be less than one percent of the gross annual receipts derived by grantee from the sale of electricity within the limits of said city. 
(Prior code § 6-7.34)  
5.16.310 - Statement to be filed by grantee. 
The grantee shall file with the city clerk of said city, within three months after the expiration of the calendar year, or fractional calendar year, following the date of the granting of this franchise, and within three months after the expiration of each calendar year thereafter, a verified statement showing in detail the total gross receipts of said grantee derived during the preceding calendar year, or such fractional calendar year, from the sale of electricity within the limits of said city. The grantee shall pay to said city within fifteen (15) days after the time for filing said statement, in lawful money of the United States, the aforesaid percentage of its gross receipts for the calendar year, or fractional calendar year, covered by said statement. Any neglect, omission or refusal by said grantee to file said verified statement, or to pay said percentage at the times or in the manner hereinbefore provided, shall constitute grounds for the declaration of a forfeiture of this franchise and of the rights of grantee hereunder. 
(Prior code § 6-7.35)  
5.16.320 - Grantee to reimburse grantor for publication expenses. 
The grantee of this franchise shall pay to the city a sum of money sufficient to reimburse it for all publication expenses incurred by it in connection with the granting of this franchise; said payment to be made within thirty (30) days after the city shall have furnished said grantee with a written statement of such expenses. 
(Prior code § 6-7.36)  
5.16.330 - Acceptance by grantee. 
The franchise granted by this article shall not become effective until written acceptance thereof shall have been filed by the grantee with the city clerk of said city. 
(Prior code § 6-7.37)  
Article IV. - Gas Service Franchise 
 
5.16.340 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this article the words or phrases hereinafter in this section defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions (unless, in the given instance, the context wherein they are used shall clearly import a different meaning): 
"City" means the city of Lancaster, a municipal corporation of the state of California, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated or reincorporated form. 
"Engineer" means the city engineer of the city. 
"Gas" means natural or manufactured gas, or a mixture of natural and manufactured gas. 
"Grantee" means the corporation to which the franchise contemplated in this article is granted and its lawful successors or assigns. 
"Lay and use" means to lay, construct, erect, install, operate, maintain, use, repair, replace or remove. 
"Pipes and appurtenances" means pipe, pipeline, main, service, trap, vent, vault, manhole, meter, gauge, regulator, valve, conduit, appliance, attachment, appurtenance and any other property located or to be located in, upon, along, across, under or over the streets of the city, and used or useful in transmitting and distributing gas. 
"Streets" means the public streets, ways, alleys and places as the same now or may hereafter exist within said city. 
(Prior code § 6-7.38)  
5.16.350 - Franchise granted. 
That the right, privilege and franchise, subject to each and all of the terms and conditions contained in this article, and pursuant to the provisions of Division 3, Chapter 2 of the Public Utilities Code of the state of California, known as the Franchise Act of 1937, be and the same is granted to Southern California Gas Company, a corporation organized and existing under and by virtue of the laws of the state of California, herein referred to as the "grantee," to lay and use pipes and appurtenances for transmitting and distributing gas for any and all purposes, under, along, across or upon the streets, of the city, for an indeterminate term or period from and after the effective date hereof, that is to say, this franchise shall endure in full force and effect until the same shall, with the consent of the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California, be voluntarily surrendered or abandoned by its possessor, or until the state of California or some municipal or public corporation thereunto duly authorized by law shall purchase by voluntary agreement or shall condemn and take under the power of eminent domain, all property actually used and useful in the exercise of this franchise, and situate within the territorial limits of the state, municipal or public corporation purchasing or condemning such property, or until this franchise shall be forfeited for noncompliance with its terms by the possessor thereof. 
(Prior code § 6-7.39)  
5.16.360 - Franchise fee and statement. 
A.  The grantee shall pay to the city at the times hereinafter specified, in lawful money of the United States, a sum annually which shall be equivalent to two percent of the gross annual receipts of grantee arising from the use, operation or possession of said franchise; provided, however, that such payment shall in no event be less than one percent of the gross annual receipts of the grantee derived from the sale of gas within the limits of the city under this franchise. 
B.  The grantee of this franchise shall file with the clerk of the city within three months after the expiration of the calendar year, or fractional calendar year, following the date of the grant of this franchise, and within three months after the expiration of each and every calendar year thereafter, a duly verified statement showing in detail the total gross receipts of the grantee, its successors or assigns, during the preceding calendar year, or such fractional calendar year, from the sale of the utility service within the city for which this franchise is granted. It shall be the duty of the grantee to pay to the city within fifteen (15) days after the time for filing such statement in lawful money of the United States, the specified percentage of its gross receipts for the calendar year, or such fractional calendar year, covered by such statement. Any neglect, omission or refusal by said grantee to file such verified statement, or to pay said percentage, at the times or in the manner hereinbefore provided, shall be grounds for the declaration of a forfeiture of this franchise and of all rights thereunder. 
(Prior code § 6-7.40)  
5.16.370 - Franchise is exclusive. 
This grant is made in lieu of all other franchises owned by the grantee, or by any successor of the grantee to any rights under this franchise, for transmitting and distributing gas within the limits of the city, as said limits now or may hereafter exist, and the acceptance of the franchise granted by this article shall operate as an abandonment of all such franchises within the limits of this city, as such limits now or may hereafter exist, in lieu of which this franchise is granted. 
(Prior code § 6-7.41)  
5.16.380 - Acceptance by grantee. 
The franchise granted hereunder shall not become effective until written acceptance thereof shall have been filed by the grantee thereof with the clerk of the city. When so filed, such acceptance shall constitute a continuing agreement of the grantee that if and when the city shall thereafter annex or consolidate with additional territory, any and all franchise rights and privileges owned by the grantee therein shall likewise be deemed to be abandoned within the limits of such territory. 
(Prior code § 6-7.42)  
5.16.390 - Rights of grantor not impaired by franchise. 
The franchise granted hereunder shall not in any way or to any extent impair or affect the right of the city to acquire the property of the grantee hereof either by purchase or through the exercise of the right of eminent domain, and nothing herein contained shall be construed to contract away or to modify or to abridge, either for a term or in perpetuity, the city's right of eminent domain in respect to the grantee or any public utility. Nor shall this franchise ever be given any value before any court or other public authority in any proceeding of any character in excess of the cost to the grantee of the necessary publication and any other sum paid by it to the city therefor at the time of the acquisition thereof. 
(Prior code § 6-7.43)  
5.16.400 - Duties of grantee. 
The grantee of this franchise shall: 
A.  Construct, install and maintain all pipes and appurtenances in accordance with and in conformity with all of the ordinances, rules and regulations heretofore, or hereafter adopted by the legislative body of this city in the exercise of its police powers and not in conflict with the paramount authority of the state of California, and, as to state highways, subject to the provisions of general laws relating to the location and maintenance of such facilities; 
B.  Pay to the city, on demand, the cost of all repairs to public property made necessary by any operations of the grantee under this franchise; 
C.  Indemnify and hold harmless the city and its officers from any and all liability for damages proximately resulting from any operations under this franchise; and be liable to the city for all damages proximately resulting from the failure of said grantee well and faithfully to observe and perform each and every provision of this franchise and each and every provision of Division 3, Chapter 2 of the Public Utilities Code of the state of California; and 
D.  Remove or relocate, without expense to the city, any facilities installed, used and maintained under this franchise if and when made necessary by any lawful change of grade, alignment or width of any public street, way, alley or place, including the construction of any subway or viaduct by the city, subject to existing and future legislation regarding the grantee's right to recover such removal or relocation expenses; and 
E.  File with the legislative body of the city within thirty (30) days after any sale, transfer, assignment or lease of this franchise, or any part thereof, or of any of the rights or privileges granted thereby, written evidence of the same, certified thereto by the grantee or its duly authorized officers. 
(Prior code § 6-7.44)  
5.16.410 - Construction guidelines. 
A.  The engineer shall have power to give the grantee such actions for the location of any pipes and appurtenances as may be reasonably necessary to avoid sewers, water pipes, conduits or other structures lawfully in or under the streets; and before the work of constructing any pipes and appurtenances is commenced, the grantee shall file with said engineer plans showing the location thereof, which shall be subject to the approval of said engineer (such approval not to be unreasonably withheld); and all such construction shall be subject to the inspection of said engineer and done to his reasonable satisfaction. All street coverings or openings of traps, vaults and manholes shall at all times be kept flush with the surface of the streets; provided, however, that vents for underground traps, vaults and manholes may extend above the surface of the streets when said vents are located in parkways, between the curb and the property line. 
B.  Where it is necessary to lay any underground pipes through, under or across any portion of a paved or macadamized street, the same, where practicable and economically reasonable shall be done by a tunnel or bore, so as not to disturb the foundation of such paved or macadamized street; and in the event that the same cannot be so done, such work shall be done under a permit to be granted by the engineer upon application therefor. 
(Prior code § 6-7.45)  
5.16.420 - Grantee responsible for damages. 
If any portion of any street shall be damaged by reason of defects in any of the pipes and appurtenances maintained or constructed under this grant, or by reason of any other cause arising from the operation or existence of any pipes and appurtenances constructed or maintained under this grant, said grantee shall, at its own cost and expense, immediately repair any such damage and restore such street, or portion of street, to as good a condition as existed before such defect or other cause of damage occurred, such work to be done under the direction of the engineer, and to his reasonable satisfaction. 
(Prior code § 6-7.46)  
5.16.430 - Noncompliance by grantee. 
A.  If the grantee of this franchise shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions or conditions hereof, and shall not, within ten (10) days after written demand for compliance, begin the work of compliance, or after such beginning shall not prosecute the same with due diligence to completion, then the city, by its legislative body, may declare this franchise forfeited. 
B.  The city may sue in its own name for the forfeiture of this franchise, in the event of noncompliance by the grantee, its successors or assigns, with any of the conditions thereof. 
(Prior code § 6-7.47)  
5.16.440 - Grantee to reimburse grantor for publication expenses. 
The grantee of this franchise shall pay to the city a sum of money sufficient to reimburse it for all publication expenses incurred by it in connection with the granting of this franchise; such payment to be made within thirty (30) days after the city shall furnish such grantee with a written statement of such expenses. 
(Prior code § 6-7.48)  
5.16.450 - Acceptance by grantee. 
Not later than thirty (30) days after the publication of the ordinance, the grantee shall file with the city clerk a written acceptance of the franchise granted by this article, and an agreement to comply with the terms and conditions hereof. 
(Prior code § 6-7.49)  
Article V. - City Regulation of Basic Service Rates and Charges of All Cable Television Systems Operating in City 
 
5.16.460 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this article, shall be construed as hereafter set forth, unless it is apparent from the text that such words and phrases have a different meaning: 
"Basic service rates and charges" means the basic service tier rates and charges for related equipment, installation and services all as more fully set forth in the Federal Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992. 
"FCC Rate Regulations" means those regulations released May 3, 1993 by the FCC in the Report and Order, In the Matter of Implementation of Sections of Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992: Rate Regulation, MM Docket 92-266, FCC 93-177 and all successor regulations thereto. 
(Ord. 649 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 6-7.50)  
5.16.470 - Regulation of basic service rates and charges. 
Grantor shall regulate basic service rates and charges of all grantees operating in the city pursuant to the Federal Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, as that Act may be amended. Grantor shall follow the FCC Rate Regulations in its regulation of the basic service rates and charges of any grantee and any other cable television system operating in the city, notwithstanding any different or inconsistent provisions in any franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 649 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 6-7.51)  
5.16.480 - Rate regulations hearings. 
In connection with the regulation of basic service rates and charges, grantor will provide a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties. The city manager, or his or her designee, shall provide for rate regulation hearings which are consistent with the FCC Rate Regulations. 
(Ord. 649 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 6-7.52)  
Chapter 5.18 - STATE VIDEO FRANCHISES 
 
5.18.010 - Purpose and application. 
This chapter is designed to regulate video service providers holding state video franchises and operating within the city. 
On January 1, 2007, the state became the sole authority with power to grant state video franchises pursuant to the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 (California Public Utilities Code Section 5800 et seq.) ("DIVCA"). Pursuant to DIVCA, the city shall receive a franchise fee and a fee for public, educational and/or government ("PEG") purposes from all state video franchise holders operating within the city. Additionally, the city acquired the responsibility to establish and enforce penalties, consistent with state law, against all state video franchise holders operating within the city for violations of customer service standards. DIVCA precludes the city from adopting its own standards and grants all authority to adopt customer service standards to the state. DTVCA leaves unchanged the city's authority to regulate the city's existing cable franchises until the expiration of any such franchises. 
(Ord. 897 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008) 
( Ord. No. 1038, § 1, 3-13-2018 )  
5.18.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section. Unless otherwise expressly stated, words not defined in this chapter shall be given the meaning set forth in DIVCA, as amended from time to time. When not inconsistent with the context, words in the present tense include words in the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, words in the singular number include the plural number, and "including" and "include" are not limiting. The word "shall" is always mandatory. 
"City" means the City of Lancaster, California. 
"City manager" means the city manager of the City of Lancaster or his or her designee. 
"PEG" means the availability of a cable or video system for public, educational and/or governmental use by various agencies, institutions, organizations, groups, and individuals, including the city and its exclusive city use channels or any existing agreement between the city and any incumbent cable operator, to acquire, create, and distribute programming not under a state franchise holder's editorial control. 
"State franchise holder," "holder of a state franchise," or "holder" means any person or group of persons who has been issued a franchise by the California Public Utilities Commission to provide cable service or video service, as those terms are defined in Section 5830 of the Public Utilities Code, within any portion of the city. 
(Ord. 897 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008) 
( Ord. No. 1038, § 1, 3-13-2018 )  
5.18.030 - State video franchise and PEG fees. 
A.  Any state video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the city shall pay a fee to the city equal to five (5) percent of the gross revenue of that state video franchise holder. 
B.  Any state video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the city shall also pay the city a fee equal to one (1) percent of the gross revenue of that state video franchise holder, which fee shall be used by the city for any public, educational, and/or governmental (PEG) purposes consistent with state and federal law. 
C.  Any state franchisee that has held a locally issued franchise agreement shall, consistent with Section 5870 of the Public Utilities Code, continue to fully provide and support PEG channel facilities and institutional networks and to provide cable services to community buildings to the maximum extent permitted by law. 
D.  Gross revenue, for the purposes of subsection (a), [and] (b), shall have the definition set forth in Section 58600 of the California Public Utilities Code. 
(Ord. 897 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008) 
( Ord. No. 1038, § 1, 3-13-2018 )  
5.18.040 - Audit authority. 
Not more than once annually, the city manager may examine and perform an audit of the business records of a holder of a state video franchise to ensure compliance with Section 5.18.020. 
(Ord. 897 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008) 
( Ord. No. 1038, § 1, 3-13-2018 )  
5.18.050 - Customer service penalties under state video franchises. 
A.  The holder of a state video franchise shall comply with all applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service. 
B.  The city manager shall monitor the compliance of state video franchise holders with respect to state and federal customer service and protection standards. The city manager will provide the state video franchise holder written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer service standards, and will allow the state video franchise holder thirty (30) days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within the thirty (30) day time period will be subject to the following penalties to be imposed by the city: 
1.  For the first occurrence of a violation, a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each violation. 
2.  For a second violation of the same nature within twelve (12) months, a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for each violation. 
3.  For a third or further violation of the same nature within twelve (12) months, a fine of up to two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) for each violation. 
C.  A state video franchise holder may appeal a penalty assessed by the city manager to the city council pursuant and subject to the procedures contained in Chapter 2.44. 
(Ord. 897 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008) 
( Ord. No. 1038, § 1, 3-13-2018 )  
5.18.060 - City response to state video franchise applications. 
A.  Applicants for state video franchises within the boundaries of the City must concurrently provide complete copies to the city of any application or amendments to applications filed with the California Public Utilities Commission ("PUC") by providing one complete copy of such document(s) to the city manager. 
B.  Within thirty (30) days of receipt, the city manager will provide any appropriate comments to the PUC regarding an application or an amendment to an application for a state video franchise. 
(Ord. 897 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008) 
( Ord. No. 1038, § 1, 3-13-2018 )  
Chapter 5.20 - HOTEL REGISTERS 
 
5.20.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Hotel" means and includes a motel, lodging house, rooming house or other building or structure maintained, advertised or held out to the public as a place where sleeping or rooming accommodations area furnished to the whole or any part of the public, whether with or without meals. 
"Peace officer" means a peace officer as defined in Penal Code Sections 830 et seq. 
"Person" means and includes every person, firm, partnership and corporation. 
(Ord. 698 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 4-1.35)  
5.20.020 - Register required for hotels. 
Every person who owns or operates a hotel shall keep a register in which shall be entered the name and address of each guest. 
(Prior code § 4-1.36)  
5.20.030 - Register retained for three years. 
Every person who owns or operates a hotel shall keep the register which is required by Section 5.20.020 available and in good condition for a period of not less than three years from the entry of each name and address of each guest. 
(Ord. 698 §§ 1 (part), 3, 1995: prior code § 4-1.37)  
5.20.040 - Right of inspection. 
Any peace officer, or other city official designated in writing by the city manager, shall have access to and right to inspect at any time any register kept by any hotel pursuant to Section 5.20.020. 
(Ord. 698 §§ 1 (part), 4, 1995: prior code § 4-1.38)  
5.20.050 - Violation—Penalty. 
Every person, including but not limited to, the operator or owner of any hotel who denies, prevents, or obstructs or attempts to deny, prevent or obstruct, any peace officer in the examination of any register referred to in this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by not more than six months imprisonment in the county jail or by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 698 §§ 1 (part), 5, 1995: prior code § 4-1.39)  
Chapter 5.24 - PAY TO ENTER PARTIES 
 
5.24.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Charge admission" means the demand and receipt of a tangible benefit, monetary or otherwise, which is a motivating influence for admission to the party. The customary courtesies and clearly noncommercial activity such as gifts by guests, sharing of expenses for dinner and beverages, or reciprocal hospitality, shall not be considered to be charge for admission. "Charge admission" does not include a donation for a political, charitable or religious purpose. 
"Party" means a group of persons meeting together for social, recreational or amusement purposes. 
"Residential zone" means residential zones as defined in Title 17. 
(Ord. 655 § 1 (part), 1994: prior code § 4-1.117)  
5.24.020 - Charging admission to parties in residential zones prohibited. 
It is unlawful to charge admission to any party conducted in a residential zone. 
(Ord. 655 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 4-1.118)  
5.24.030 - Violation—Penalty. 
Violation of this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 655 § 1 (part), 1994: prior code § 4-1.119)  
Chapter 5.26 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
 
5.26.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the commercial operation of vehicles for hire in the city that are not otherwise specifically regulated by state law and/or any other chapter, section or provision of this code, in order to ensure that such vehicles are operated safely and to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 1, 2-14-2012)  
5.26.020 - Definitions. 
Except as otherwise expressly set forth herein, the following words and terms as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
"City" means the City of Lancaster. 
"City manager" means the city manager of the city or his or her duly authorized representative. 
"Darkness" means any time from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise and any time when visibility is not sufficient to render clearly discernible any person or vehicle on the public street at a distance of 1000 feet. 
"DMV" means the California Department of Motor Vehicles. 
"Driver" means any person who drives or operates a vehicle for hire on the public streets of the city. 
"Driver's permit" means a permit issued to a driver of a vehicle for hire in the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
"Horse-drawn vehicle" means any hack or carriage that is operated by being drawn by a horse, mule or other animal, for the transportation for hire of passengers. 
"Owner's permit" means a permit issued to an owner of a vehicle for hire business operating in the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
"Public street" means any street, avenue, highway or other public way in the city, and shall include the entire right-of-way thereof. 
"Vehicle for hire" means any automobile, motor-propelled vehicle, or other vehicle or conveyance of any nature and however propelled, used in the business of transporting passengers over public streets, irrespective of whether such operations extend beyond the city, for which any fee, compensation or consideration is paid for such transportation. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 1, 2-14-2012)  
5.26.030 - Owner's and driver's permit required. 
A.  It is unlawful to operate or cause to be operated a vehicle for hire business within the city without first having obtained an owner's permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  It is unlawful to drive or operate a vehicle for hire within the city without first having obtained a driver's permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 1, 2-14-2012)  
5.26.040 - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the operation of any of the following: 
(i)  A horse-drawn vehicle; 
(ii)  A taxicab as defined and regulated by Chapter 5.28 of this Code; 
(iii)  A towing unit as defined and regulated by Chapter 5.32 of this Code; 
(iv)  An ambulance or ambulette as defined and regulated by Chapter 5.48 of this Code; and/or 
(v)  A vehicle licensed by the California Public Utilities Commission. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 1, 2-14-2012)  
5.26.050 - Owner's permit—Application, issuance and denial. 
A.  An application to operate or cause to be operated a vehicle for hire business shall be submitted to the city manager, on a form supplied by the city manager, and shall contain or be accompanied by the following information: 
1.  The name, age, California driver's license number (as issued by the DMV), business address, residence and telephone number of the applicant, if a natural person; if a corporation, its name, date and place of incorporation, address of its principal office, federal employer and/or tax identification number, telephone number, and the name of its principal officers together with their respective addresses; if a partnership, association, or other unincorporated entity, the names of the partners or persons comprising the association or company, the place of business and residence of each. 
2.  A summary of the past experience of applicant in the service proposed. 
3.  The name, address and past experience of the person to be in charge of the applicant's business. 
4.  A statement as to whether a license, permit or certificate issued to applicant, any person listed in the application, or a transportation business in which the applicant or any person listed in the application is or was a partner, director or officer has been revoked, cancelled or suspended by any federal, state or local governmental agency or entity. 
5.  Such facts that applicant believes tend to prove or support the granting of a permit. 
6.  The number of vehicles for hire to be operated or controlled by applicant, and a description of each vehicle for hire, including its model, serial number, its seating capacity, and the name of its manufacturer. 
7.  The color scheme or insignia to be used to designate applicant's vehicle(s) for hire. 
8.  The location of the proposed vehicle for hire business and satisfactory proof that the premises are in compliance with all applicable laws, regulations, statutes and ordinances. 
9.  Evidence acceptable to the city manager that applicant is the registered owner of each vehicle for hire to be utilized in applicant's vehicle for hire business. 
10.  A copy of the insurance policy naming the city as an additional insured, with appropriate limits, as required by and further described in this chapter. 
11.  One of the following: 
a.  A receipt from the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department evidencing that the applicant has: 
(i)  Submitted fingerprint a card Form FD258 or such other fingerprint card as is accepted by the Department of Justice and the Federal Bureau of Investigation; and 
(ii)  Paid any and all fees required to conduct a background check on the applicant; or 
b.  A receipt evidencing that the applicant has: 
(i)  Obtained electronic fingerprint scans, also known as Livescan, to the extent such technology is available, for the applicant; and 
(ii)  Paid any and all fees required to conduct background checks on the applicant; or 
c.  Written authorization that permits the city to utilize data retrieved pursuant to a background check completed within forty-five (45) days of the applicant's submission of his or her application to the city. Such authorization letter shall state the name and include the signature of the applicant and shall state the name of the jurisdiction or entity that conducted the previous background check. Data retrieved pursuant to a background check conducted by the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department shall be presumed valid. Data retrieved pursuant to a background check conducted by any other jurisdiction or entity shall be accepted upon approval by the city manager. 
12.  Such other information as the city manager may require. 
B.  Within thirty (30) days of receipt of an application for an owner's permit and the required fee, the city manager shall issue an owner's permit unless substantial record evidence demonstrates one of the following bases for denial: 
1.  The application is incomplete or inaccurate; or 
2.  A vehicle for hire described in the application is inadequate or unsafe for the purposes for which it is to be used; or 
3.  The name, monogram, or insignia to be used imitates or is substantially similar to any name, monogram or insignia used by any other person or entity in such manner as to be misleading or tending to deceive, confuse or defraud the public; or 
4.  A license, permit or certificate issued to applicant, any person listed in the application, or a transportation business in which the applicant or any person listed in the application is or was a partner, director or officer has been revoked, cancelled or suspended by any federal, state or local governmental agency or entity; or 
5.  The applicant has operated a vehicle for hire or vehicle for hire business within the city in violation of this code; or 
6.  The operation of a vehicle for hire as stated in the application will threaten public peace, health, safety and/or welfare. 
C.  The city manager may require a criminal background investigation of any applicant by the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department as part of determining whether or not to issue a permit pursuant to this section. 
D.  The permit issued pursuant to this section shall state on its face such information as shall be determined by the city manager. A duplicate of the permit issued pursuant to this section may be issued by the city manager to replace a permit that has been lost or destroyed upon the filing of a statement that such permit has been lost or destroyed and payment of a duplicate permit fee as established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 1, 2-14-2012)  
5.26.060 - Driver's permit—Application, issuance and denial. 
A.  An application for a permit to drive a vehicle for hire shall be submitted to the city manager, on a form supplied by the city manager, and shall contain or be accompanied by the following information: 
1.  The name, age, address, telephone number and California driver's license number (as issued by the DMV) of the applicant. 
2.  A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of a violation of any federal law, the law of any state or of this code, and, if so, a description of the circumstances of such conviction and the sentence of the court. 
3.  A letter or certificate from a licensed physician certifying that, in his or her opinion, the applicant is not afflicted with any contagious disease or infirmity that may make the applicant an unsafe and unsatisfactory driver. 
4.  A copy of the driver's license issued to applicant by the DMV and evidence that such driver's license is not suspended or revoked. 
5.  A copy of applicant's driving record for the previous twelve (12) months, including a driving record issued by the DMV and any other state in which applicant was licensed to drive within the previous twelve (12) months. 
6.  One of the following: 
a.  A receipt from the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department evidencing that the applicant has: 
(i)  Submitted fingerprint a card Form FD258 or such other fingerprint card as is accepted by the Department of Justice and the Federal Bureau of Investigation; and 
(ii)  Paid any and all fees required to conduct a background check on the applicant; or 
b.  A receipt evidencing that the applicant has: 
(i)  Obtained electronic fingerprint scans, also known as Livescan, to the extent such technology is available, for the applicant; and 
(ii)  Paid any and all fees required to conduct background checks on the applicant; or 
c.  Written authorization that permits the city to utilize data retrieved pursuant to a background check completed within forty-five days of the applicant's submission of his or her application to the city. Such authorization letter shall state the name and include the signature of the applicant and shall state the name of the jurisdiction or entity that conducted the previous background check. Data retrieved pursuant to a background check conducted by the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department shall be presumed valid. Data retrieved pursuant to a background check conducted by any other jurisdiction or entity shall be accepted upon approval by the city manager. 
7.  Such other information as the city manager may require. 
B.  Within thirty (30) days of receipt of an application for driver's permit and the required fee, the city manager shall issue a driver's permit unless substantial record evidence demonstrates one of the following bases for denial: 
1.  The application is incomplete or inaccurate; or 
2.  The applicant is not at least eighteen (18) years of age; or 
3.  The applicant is afflicted with a disease or infirmity that may make the applicant an unsafe and unsatisfactory driver; or 
4.  The applicant has been convicted of operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of an intoxicating beverage or drug within one year prior to the date of the application submitted pursuant to this section, or has been convicted of such an offence three or more times within two years prior to the date of the application submitted pursuant to this section; or 
5.  The applicant does not possess a current and valid driver's license issued by the DMV; or 
C.  The city manager may require a criminal background investigation of any applicant by the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department as part of determining whether or not to issue a permit pursuant to this section. 
D.  The permit issued pursuant to this section shall state on its face such information as shall be determined by the city manager. A duplicate of the permit issued pursuant to this section may be issued by the city manager to replace a permit that has been lost or destroyed upon the filing of a statement that such permit has been lost or destroyed and payment of a duplicate permit fee as established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 1, 2-14-2012)  
5.26.070 - Operating regulations—Generally. 
A.  The owner of a vehicle for hire business issued a permit pursuant to this chapter, including each driver and any person operating in the employ of such a business, shall comply with the following regulations and requirements in the conduct of such business: 
1.  The insurance requirements imposed by this Chapter shall be satisfied. 
2.  Each vehicle for hire operated on a public street shall have a sign plainly painted or affixed on each side, in letters not less than four inches high, containing the full name of the owner and the name of the vehicle for hire business. 
3.  There shall be painted or affixed on each side and on the rear of each vehicle for hire operated on a public street a number at least six inches high, such number to be a separate and distinct number from that on any other public vehicle or taxicab in the city. The number shall be assigned to such vehicle for hire, and the owner thereof, by the city manager and shall not be altered or changed without the written consent of the city manager. 
4.  Each vehicle for hire operated on a public street shall be maintained in a safe mechanical condition, with all safety equipment remaining intact and operative at all times when the vehicle for hire is in service. 
5.  Each vehicle for hire operated on a public street shall be kept painted and in a clean and sanitary condition, free of litter and debris at all times suitable for public transportation of passengers. 
6.  No vehicle for hire operated on a public street may stop in traffic, or delay any on-street traffic, for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers, or for any other purpose. 
7.  No vehicle for hire shall remain standing upon any portion of any public street within the city, except for loading and unloading persons for a period not to exceed five minutes; provided, however, that such prohibition shall not apply to any vehicle for hire while the same is engaged by and being paid for by persons. This Section 5.26.070(A)(7) shall not be interpreted or construed to permit a vehicle for hire to remain standing upon any portion of any public street or sidewalk within the city, if to do so would otherwise violate any federal, state or local law, regulation or ordinance. 
8.  No owner or driver may charge a greater sum for the use of a vehicle for hire than the rate published, advertised and indicated on a rate card that is posted in or on the vehicle for hire. Such rate card shall be displayed in such a place as to be conspicuous and to be in clear view of all passengers. 
9.  No driver may permit more persons to be carried in a vehicle for hire as passengers than the rated seating capacity of his or her vehicle for hire, which rated seating capacity shall be indicated on the rate card that is posted in or on the vehicle for hire. 
10.  No driver may refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person or persons, upon request, unless previously engaged, or unable, or forbidden by the provisions of this chapter. 
11.  No driver may solicit business for any hotel or other business or attempt to divert patronage from one hotel or business to another or use his or her vehicle for any purpose other than the transportation of passengers. 
12.  No driver may collect fares, make change, take on or discharge passengers, use headphones, or text or talk on a mobile telephone without a hands-free application while his or vehicle for hire is in motion. 
13.  The driver's permit issued pursuant to Section 5.26.060 shall be displayed in such a place as to be conspicuous and to be in clear view of all passengers. 
14.  The driver of a vehicle for hire being operated on a public street shall have in his or her possession either the original or a copy of the owner's permit issued pursuant to Section 5.26.050. 
B.  The city manager may promulgate additional operating requirements pursuant to this section in order to implement this chapter; provided, however that such additional operating requirements may not conflict with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 1, 2-14-2012)  
5.26.080 - Reserved.  
5.26.090 - Indemnity and insurance. 
A.  An owner issued a permit pursuant to this chapter shall hold the city, its officers, agents, servants and employees, harmless against any and all liability, loss, damages or expenses that may accrue to the city by the reason of negligence, default or misconduct of the owner in connection with the rights granted to the owner pursuant to this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall be considered to make the city, its officers, agents, servants or employees liable for damages because of any negligent act or omission or commission by any owner, its servants, agents, drivers or other employees, during the operation by the owner of a vehicle for hire business or service, either in respect to injury to persons or with respect to damage to property which may be sustained. 
B.  Any owner desiring a permit pursuant to this chapter shall give and maintain a policy of insurance from a company authorized to do business in the state of California for each vehicle in use as a vehicle for hire. The minimum coverage shall be $250,000 for bodily injury to any one person, $1,000,000 for injury to more than one person which is sustained in the same accident, and $100,000 for property damage resulting from one accident. The indemnity insurance shall inure to the benefit of any person who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property caused by the negligence of an owner, its employees, drivers, servants or agents. 
C.  Any owner desiring a permit pursuant to this chapter shall give a separate policy of insurance for each separate vehicle for hire, except where such owner actually owns or holds legal title to more than one vehicle for hire, in which event such owner may give one policy of insurance covering all the vehicles for hire actually owned. This latter provision, however, shall not apply to any group of persons separately owning vehicles for hire who may be jointly operating or doing business under a single owner's license. 
D.  Any owner desiring a permit pursuant to this chapter shall maintain from a licensed insurance company comprehensive general liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000 for its undertakings associated with activities pursuant to this chapter. 
E.  Before any policy of insurance required by this chapter is voided for any cause, nonpayment of premium or otherwise, notice thereof shall be given, in writing, to the city at least ten days before the same shall take effect. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 1, 2-14-2012)  
5.26.100 - Reserved.  
5.26.110 - Fees for permit. 
The city council shall establish by resolution, and from time to time may amend, the fees for the administration of this chapter. The fees and permits required by this chapter shall be in lieu of any fee or business license required by Chapter 5.04 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 1, 2-14-2012)  
5.26.120 - Revocation of owner's or driver's permit. 
The city manager shall revoke a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, in addition to any other basis provided by this code, upon determination that any of the following conditions exist: 
A.  The holder of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter has failed to perform in accordance with this chapter and has violated one or more of the provisions of this chapter on two or more separate occasions. For purposes of the preceding sentence, the term "on two or more separate occasions" shall mean on two or more separate days; or 
B.  The holder of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter made a material false, misleading, or fraudulent statement or omission of fact to the city, or engaged in fraud, in the application for such permit; or 
C.  The holder of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter has violated any federal, state or local law, regulation or ordinance while engaged in activity pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 1, 2-14-2012)  
5.26.130 - Transfer, amendment, duration and renewal of permits. 
A.  No permit issued under this chapter shall be transferable to any other person or entity. 
B.  A permit issued under this chapter may be amended to reflect a change in mailing address, telephone number, website address and/or similar information upon filing a statement of such fact and payment of a fee as established by resolution of the city council. The unexpired permit previously issued shall be returned to the finance director prior to the issuance of the amended permit. A permit may not be amended to reflect a change in the person(s) transacting the business, the name of the business, the physical address of the business or a change in the type of business transacted; under such circumstances a new permit must be obtained. 
C.  Permits issued under this chapter shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed on a year-to-year basis provided that the permit holder continues to meet the requirements of this chapter. Applications for the next ensuing permit shall be filed with the city manager before the expiration of the existing permit. 
D.  Renewal applications shall require such information as may be required by the city manager to update the information contained in the original permit application. The applicant shall accompany the application for renewal with the appropriate filing fee. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 1, 2-14-2012)  
5.26.140 - Appeal. 
If any person is aggrieved by a decision of the city manager regarding the issuance, denial or revocation of a permit pursuant to this chapter, such person may appeal the decision by submitting a notice of appeal in accordance with the uniform appeal procedure set forth in Chapter 2.44 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 1, 2-14-2012)  
5.26.150 - Violation and penalty. 
A.  Violations of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable in the manner provided in Section 1.12.020(A) of this code. 
B.  Any violation of this chapter shall be and the same is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city attorney or the district attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecution in a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law, and shall take such other steps, and shall apply to such other courts or court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such public nuisance and restrain and enjoin any person from violating the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  For failure to pay a permit fee when due, the finance director shall add a penalty of twenty (20) percent of the permit fee on the first date of the month following the due date and ten (10) percent each month thereafter while the fee remains unpaid, provided that the amount of the penalty shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the amount of the permit fee due. 
D.  If an owner or driver required to obtain a permit pursuant to this chapter fails to obtain such permit, the permit fee due shall be that amount due and payable from the first date the person or entity engaged in activity that requires a permit pursuant to this chapter, together with the penalty described in subsection C of this section. 
E.  The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 1, 2-14-2012)  
5.26.160 - Severability. 
If any part or provision of this chapter is found to be invalid or unenforceable by a court of law, such invalidity shall not affect any other part or provision herein, and all remaining provisions of this chapter will be valid and enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 974, § 1, 2-14-2012)  
Chapter 5.28 - TAXICAB OPERATOR'S AND DRIVER'S LICENSE REQUIREMENTS 
 
5.28.010 - Definitions. 
A.  For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases have the following meanings: 
"City" means the city of Lancaster. 
"City council" means the city council of the city of Lancaster. 
"City manager" means the city manager of the city of Lancaster or his or her designee. 
"Code enforcement officer" means any city employee appointed by the city manager and authorized to inspect taxicabs pursuant to this chapter. 
"Finance director" means the finance director of the city of Lancaster or his or her designee. 
"Operating license" means a taxicab operating license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
"Operator" means any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company or association that is the registered owner or has the use or control of any vehicle used as a taxicab, whether as owner, lessee or otherwise. 
"Permit" means an operating permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this part. 
"Taxicab" means every motorized vehicle which transports passengers for hire under the direction of those passengers or other persons hiring the vehicle, at rates based on the distance, duration or waiting time of a trip, or any combination of such rates. 
"Taxicab driver" means any individual who drives or is in actual physical control of a taxicab. 
"Taxicab driver's license" means a taxicab driver's license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 859 Att. A (part), 2006: Ord. 777 § 1 (part), 2000: Ord. 763 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.28.020 - Operating license requirement. 
A.  Unlawful to Operate a Taxicab Without a License. It is unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab in the city without first obtaining a license authorizing such operation pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Any such unlawful operation shall constitute a misdemeanor. This chapter shall not apply to a taxicab operator based outside the city, an incidental portion of whose business involves the transport of passengers from points outside the city to destinations within the boundaries of the city. 
B.  Application for License. It shall be the sole responsibility of every person required to obtain an operating license to apply on a form provided by the city manager. Any person who makes a false statement on the application shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
1.  Contents of Application. Applications for an operating license shall contain the following information, as applicable: 
a.  The name of the applicant; 
b.  The residence address and telephone number of the applicant; 
c.  The business address and telephone number of the applicant; 
d.  The fictitious business name, if any, under which the applicant does business or proposes to do business and a copy of the applicant's fictitious business name statement filed with the county of Los Angeles; 
e.  The name, address and telephone number of all directors, officers, shareholders, partners, employees or other individuals who are financially interested in the proposed operation of the taxicab business or who are involved or proposed to be involved, directly or indirectly, with the management of the business; 
f.  The number of taxicabs for which a permit is desired. A description of each vehicle, giving the license number, vehicle identification number, model, make, year of manufacture and passenger seating capacity; 
g.  The color scheme, name and other distinguishing insignia proposed to be used on each vehicle; 
h.  The make and type of taximeter to be installed in each taxicab; 
i.  The proposed schedule of rates or fares to be charged for providing taxicab services, including the method by which such rates are to be determined; 
j.  A current financial statement of the applicant; 
k.  A statement outlining the past experience of the applicant in the taxicab business; 
l.  Evidence of insurance coverage as required pursuant to subsection D of this section; 
m.  Completed taxicab driver's license applications for each of the taxicab drivers the applicant employs or intends to employ, or with whom the applicant contracts or intends to contract for taxicab driving purposes; 
n.  One of the following: 
i.  A receipt from the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department evidencing that the applicant has (i) submitted fingerprint cards for each of the individuals listed pursuant to subsections (B)(1)(a), (e) and (m) of this section on Form FD258 or such other fingerprint card as is accepted by the Department of Justice and the Federal Bureau of Investigation; and (ii) paid any and all fees required to conduct background checks on such individuals, or 
ii.  A receipt evidencing that the applicant has (i) obtained electronic fingerprint scans, also known as Livescan, to the extent such technology is available, for each of the individuals listed pursuant to subsections (B)(1)(a), (e) and (m) of this section; and (ii) paid any and all fees required to conduct background checks on such individuals, or 
iii.  A letter authorizing the city to utilize data retrieved pursuant to a background check completed within forty-five (45) days of the applicant's submission of its application to the city. Such authorization letter shall state the names and include the signatures of each of the individuals listed pursuant to subsections (B)(1)(a), (e) and (m) and shall state the name of the jurisdiction or entity that conducted the previous background check. Data retrieved pursuant to a background check conducted by the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department shall be presumed valid. Data retrieved pursuant to a background check conducted by any other jurisdiction or entity shall be accepted upon approval by the city manager; 
o.  One of the following: 
i.  A receipt evidencing that the applicant and each of the individuals identified pursuant to subsections (B)(1)(a), (e) and (m) of this section have tested negative for each of the controlled substances identified in Part 40 (commencing with Section 40.1) of Title 4901 of the Code of Federal Regulations pursuant to a controlled substances test administered pursuant to the requirements of such regulations; or 
ii.  A letter authorizing the city to use data retrieved pursuant to a controlled substances test completed within forty-five (45) days of the applicant's submission of the application to the city. Such authorization letter shall include the names and the signatures of each of the individuals listed pursuant to subsections (B)(1)(a), (e) and (m) of this section and shall state the name of the jurisdiction or entity that conducted the previous controlled substances test. Data retrieved pursuant to a controlled substances test conducted by the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department shall be presumed valid. Data retrieved pursuant to a controlled substances test conducted by any other jurisdiction or entity shall be accepted upon approval by the city manager; 
p.  A "status of taximeter registration" form from the County of Los Angeles Department of Weights and Measures which has been signed by an authorized representative of said department and which shows that taximeter registration is valid at time of decaling; 
q.  A vehicle inspection report completed by a city authorized auto inspection center confirming the vehicle has satisfactorily passed all safety inspection requirements; 
r.  A statement of the street number and exact location of any and all taxi stands that the applicant proposes to use; 
s.  Certification of satisfactory completion of the controlled substance and alcohol testing program as set forth in subsection S of this section by all of the individuals listed under subsections (B)(1)(a), (e) and (m) of this section; 
t.  Such additional information as the city manager deems necessary. 
2.  Extension of Time. The city manager may extend the time required for filing an operating license application for good cause, for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, and may waive any penalty that would otherwise accrue thereon. 
C.  Color Scheme Restrictions. If the city manager finds that the color scheme or insignia specified in an application for an operator's license is so similar to that of an existing operator as to deceive or confuse the public, the applicant must amend such application to designate a different color scheme or insignia. The city manager shall not issue an operating license if the application specifies a color scheme or insignia similar enough to that of an existing operator so that the public will be deceived or confused by it. 
D.  Insurance. Every applicant for an operating license shall obtain and maintain commercial comprehensive general liability insurance and comprehensive automobile liability insurance in full force and effect. 
1.  The amount of the commercial comprehensive general liability insurance shall be determined by the city manager. However, in no event shall such insurance be written with a combined single limit of less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence. Such insurance shall be endorsed for premises/operations and contractual liability, and shall name the city as an additional insured and shall be primary to and not contributing with any other insurance covering or maintained by the city. 
2.  The amount of comprehensive automobile liability insurance shall be determined by the city manager. However, in no event shall such insurance be written with a combined single limit of less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per occurrence, or limits of less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per person/three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per accident/fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) property damage, or any combination of commercial insurance which provides less than the equivalent limits. Such insurance may include a property damage deductible or self-insured retention less than or equal to two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per occurrence. 
3.  Such insurance shall be provided by insurer(s) satisfactory to the city manager. Evidence of such insurance shall be attached to the operating license application. 
4.  The limits of such insurance shall be subject to review and alteration by the city manager. 
5.  Failure to maintain insurance in full force and effect as required by this Section 5.28.020(D) shall constitute a basis for immediate revocation of any license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
E.  Term of Operating License. Operating licenses shall be valid for a term of not more than twelve (12) months commencing on the first day of the month when the license application and fee are received by the city manager. 
F.  License Fee. Each applicant shall pay an annual operating license fee when application is made for the license. The city's issuance of a receipt to the operating license applicant for payment of the fee shall not constitute the receipt of an operating license. The fee is non-refundable. The amount of the license fee shall cover the costs of processing the application and shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
1.  Error in Calculating Fee. In no case shall any error in calculating or in stating the amount of a license fee prevent the collection of the correct amount due from any person operating or intending to operate a taxicab in the city. 
2.  License Fee a Debt. The amount of any license fee or penalty imposed by this chapter shall constitute a debt to the city. 
3.  Refunds. Upon approval of the city manager or his or her designee, the finance director may refund any license fee or penalty erroneously collected. However, no license fee shall be refunded if the applicant engaged in the taxicab business prior to application for the license. License fees shall not be refunded for any fraction of a year that business is not conducted. 
G.  Due Date for License Fee. The license fee for an operating license is due when the application is submitted to the city manager. The fee for renewal of all operating licenses is due the first day of the month following the expiration date stated on the license. 
H.  Penalties. 
1.  Failure to Pay Fee. In the event of failure to pay an operating license fee when due, the finance director shall add a penalty of twenty (20) percent of the license fee on the first day of the month following the due date, and ten (10) percent each month thereafter while the fee remains unpaid. In no event shall the amount of the penalty exceed fifty (50) percent of the amount of the license fee due. 
2.  Failure to Obtain License. If a person fails to obtain an operating license, the license fee due shall be the amount due and payable from the first date when the person engaged in taxicab operation in the city, together with the penalty described in subsection (H)(1) of this section. 
I.  Issuance of License. Upon the approval of an application for an operating license and payment of the required fee, the city manager shall issue an operating license to the applicant. 
J.  Contents of License. Each operating license issued shall contain the following: 
1.  The name of the taxicab operator; 
2.  The address of the taxicab operator; 
3.  The telephone number of the taxicab operator; 
4.  The expiration date of the operating license; 
5.  Such other information as deemed necessary by the city manager. 
K.  Grounds for Denial of License. The city manager or his or her designee may deny issuance of a taxicab operating license for any of the following reasons: 
1.  Failure to comply with this chapter, an ordinance of the city, federal or state law; or 
2.  Receipt of a negative recommendation by the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department, or any other jurisdiction or entity as designated by the city manager, upon completion of background checks or upon review of data retrieved pursuant to previously conducted background checks as set forth in subsection (B)(1)(n) of this section, which data reveals any of the following: 
a.  Conviction or guilty plea to one or more crimes against persons. Crimes against persons shall include, but shall not be limited to, murder, manslaughter, robbery, rape or other sexual crimes, extortion, assault, or battery, or 
b.  Conviction or guilty plea to two or more crimes against property during the seven years preceding submission of the application. Crimes against property shall include, but shall not be limited to, burglary, grand theft, forgery and fraud, or 
c.  Conviction or guilty plea to two or more drug-related crimes during the seven years preceding submission of the application. Drug-related crimes shall include, but shall not be limited to, possession, sale or possession for sale of any Schedule I or Schedule II narcotic, 
d.  Conviction or guilty plea to such other crimes as the city manager deems a threat to public safety; 
3.  A positive test for controlled substances and/or alcohol as set forth in subsection S of this section. 
L.  Appeal. If an applicant for an operating license is aggrieved by any decision of the city manager regarding the issuance, denial or revocation of a license, the applicant may appeal the decision by submitting a notice of appeal in accordance with the uniform appeal procedure set forth in Chapter 2.44 of this code. 
M.  Amendment of License. An operating license may be amended to reflect a change in business name and/or mailing address upon filing a statement of such fact and payment of a fee to the finance director. The fee shall be established by resolution of the city council. The unexpired operating license previously issued shall be returned to the city manager prior to the issuance of the amended license. An operating license may not be amended to reflect a change in the person(s) operating the taxicab business; a new license must be obtained as provided herein. 
N.  Transfer of Licenses. Operating licenses issued pursuant to this chapter are not transferable. 
O.  Duplicate License. A duplicate operating license may be issued by the city manager to replace any operating license previously issued which has been lost or destroyed, upon filing a statement that the license has been lost or destroyed and paying a fee to the finance director. The fee shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
P.  Revocation of License. The city manager may revoke any operating license issued under this chapter for any of the following reasons: 
1.  The city manager determines that the licensee has obtained the license by misrepresentation or has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
2.  The city manager receives a negative recommendation from the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department, or any other jurisdiction or entity as designated by the city manager, regarding any of the individuals listed under subsection (B)(1)(a) or (e) of this section based upon data that reveals any of the following: 
a.  Conviction or guilty plea to one or more crimes against persons. Crimes against persons shall include, but shall not be limited to, murder, manslaughter, robbery, rape or other sexual crimes, extortion, assault, or battery; or 
b.  Conviction or guilty plea to two or more crimes against property during the preceding seven years. Crimes against property shall include, but shall not be limited to, burglary, grand theft, forgery and fraud; or 
c.  Conviction or guilty plea to two or more drug-related crimes during the preceding seven years. Drug-related crimes shall include, but shall not be limited to, possession, sale or possession for sale of any Schedule I or Schedule II narcotic; or 
d.  Conviction or guilty plea to one or more crimes chargeable as a felony in the preceding twenty-four (24) months; or 
e.  A positive test for controlled substances and/or alcohol as set forth in subsection S of this section; or 
f.  Conviction or guilty plea to such other crimes as the city manager deems a threat to public safety. 
3.  The licensee or any individual listed under subsection (B)(1)(a) or (e) of this section tests positive for controlled substances and/or alcohol as set forth in subsection S of this section. 
4.  The licensee continues to employ or to maintain an independent contracting relationship with a taxicab driver for more than twenty-four (24) hours following the licensee's actual knowledge of any of the following regarding such taxicab driver: 
a.  Conviction or guilty plea to one or more crimes against persons. Crimes against persons shall include, but shall not be limited to, murder, manslaughter, robbery, rape or other sexual crimes, extortion, assault, or battery; or 
b.  Conviction or guilty plea to two or more crimes against property during the preceding seven years. Crimes against property shall include, but shall not be limited to, burglary, grand theft, forgery and fraud; or 
c.  Conviction or guilty plea to two or more drug-related crimes during the preceding seven years. Drug-related crimes shall include, but shall not be limited to, possession, sale or possession for sale of any Schedule I or Schedule II narcotic; or 
d.  Conviction or guilty plea to one or more crimes chargeable as a felony in the preceding twenty-four (24) months; or 
e.  A positive test for controlled substances and/or alcohol as set forth in subsection S of this section; or 
f.  Conviction or guilty plea to such other crimes as the city manager deems a threat to public safety. 
5.  The licensee permits an individual not licensed pursuant to this chapter to operate a taxicab. 
6.  The city manager receives notice from the licensee's insurance carrier, listed pursuant to subsection D of this section, stating that the licensee's insurance has been canceled, revoked, voided or otherwise rendered invalid. 
7.  The city manager is advised that the licensee has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to operating in violation of any federal, state or local law. 
8.  A positive test for controlled substances and/or alcohol as set forth in subsection S of this section. 
Q.  Cancellation of License Due to Discontinuance of Service. If the operator who is issued the operating license discontinues taxicab service for a period of forty-five (45) days, the license shall be canceled automatically, and shall be reissued only upon application in accordance with this chapter. 
R.  Regulatory Measure. The license fee established pursuant to this chapter is for processing the operating license applications. Persons required to pay an operating license fee for operating taxicabs under this chapter shall not be relieved from the payment of fees under other provisions of this code, including but not limited to the business license fee, and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of all other city ordinances. 
S.  Controlled Substance and Alcohol Testing Certification Program. All taxicab operators, as well as each individual identified pursuant to Section 5.28.020(B)(1)(a), (e) and (m) of this chapter, prior to submitting an application to the city, shall undergo testing for controlled substances and alcohol. The procedures for such testing and the controlled substances to be tested for shall be as referenced and required in Section 53075.5 of the California Government Code. 
1.  The test results shall be reported directly to the city manager. 
2.  All test results are confidential and shall not be released without the consent of the taxicab operator, except as authorized or required by law. 
3.  Upon the request of a taxicab operator applying for a taxicab operator's license, the city shall provide the taxicab operator with a list of consortia certified pursuant to Part 382 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations that offer testing in or near the city. 
4.  No evidence derived from a positive test result pursuant to this program shall be admissible in a criminal prosecution concerning unlawful possession, sale or distribution of controlled substances. 
T.  Compliance with Other Laws. The payment of an operating license fee and the issuance of an operating license shall not entitle the licensee to operate taxicabs unless the licensee has complied with all requirements of this chapter and any other applicable federal, state or local regulations. 
U.  Indemnification. As a condition of the operating license, the operator agrees to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, its agents, officers and employees from and against any and all liability or expenses arising from or connected with the operator's activities or any services performed by or on behalf of the operator by any person pursuant to this license. Such liability or expenses shall include defense costs and legal fees and claims for any damages of any nature, including but not limited to bodily injury, death, personal injury or property damage. 
(Ord. 859 Att. A (part), 2006: Ord. 777 § 1 (part), 2000: Ord. 763 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.28.030 - Operating permit—Display. 
A.  Issuance of Operating Permit. Upon the issuance of an operating license, the city manager shall also issue to the operator a permit for each taxicab which the operator is authorized to operate under the operating license. 
B.  Contents of Operating Permit. Each permit shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name, address and social security number of the operator; 
2.  The license plate number of the taxicab for which the operating permit is being issued; 
3.  The vehicle identification number of the taxicab for which the operating permit is being issued; 
4.  The expiration date of the operating permit, which shall be the same as the expiration date of the licensee's taxicab operating license. 
C.  Display of Permit. Each permit shall be displayed prominently on the rear trunk lid of the taxicab for which it is issued. 
D.  Transfer of Permit. Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be transferable. 
E.  Duplicate Permit. A duplicate permit may be issued by the city manager to replace any permit previously issued which has been lost or destroyed, upon filing a statement that the permit has been lost or destroyed and paying a fee to the finance director. The fee shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
F.  Revocation of Permit. The city manager may revoke any permit issued under this chapter for any of the following reasons: 
1.  The city manager determines that the permit holder has obtained the license by misrepresentation or has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
2.  The city manager receives a negative recommendation from the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department, or any other jurisdiction or entity as designated by the city manager, regarding any of the individuals listed under subsection (B)(1)(a) or (e) of this section based upon data that reveals any of the following: 
a.  Conviction or guilty plea to one or more crimes against persons. Crimes against persons shall include, but shall not be limited to, murder, manslaughter, robbery, rape or other sexual crimes, extortion, assault, or battery; or 
b.  Conviction or guilty plea to two or more crimes against property during the preceding seven years. Crimes against property shall include, but shall not be limited to, burglary, grand theft, forgery and fraud; or 
c.  Conviction or guilty plea to two or more drug-related crimes during the preceding seven years. Drug-related crimes shall include, but shall not be limited to, possession, sale or possession for sale of any Schedule I or Schedule II narcotic; or 
d.  Conviction or guilty plea to one or more crimes chargeable as a felony in the preceding twenty-four (24) months; or 
e.  A positive test for controlled substances and/or alcohol as set forth in Section 5.28.040(S) of this chapter; or 
f.  Conviction or guilty plea to such other crimes as the city manager deems a threat to public safety. 
3.  The permit holder or any individual listed under subsection (B)(1)(a) or (e) of this section tests positive for controlled substances and/or alcohol as set forth in Section 5.28.020(S) of this chapter. 
4.  The permit holder continues to employ or to maintain an independent contracting relationship with a taxicab driver for more than twenty-four (24) hours following the permit holder's actual knowledge of any of the following regarding such taxicab driver: 
a.  Conviction or guilty plea to one or more crimes against persons. Crimes against persons shall include, but shall not be limited to, murder, manslaughter, robbery, rape or other sexual crimes, extortion, assault, or battery; or 
b.  Conviction or guilty plea to two or more crimes against property during the preceding seven years. Crimes against property shall include, but shall not be limited to, burglary, grand theft, forgery and fraud; or 
c.  Conviction or guilty plea to two or more drug-related crimes during the preceding seven years. Drug-related crimes shall include, but shall not be limited to, possession, sale or possession for sale of any Schedule I or Schedule II narcotic; or 
d.  Conviction or guilty plea to one or more crimes chargeable as a felony in the preceding twenty-four (24) months; or 
e.  A positive test for controlled substances and/or alcohol as set forth in Section 5.28.020 (S) of this chapter; or 
f.  Conviction or guilty plea to such other crimes as the city manager deems a threat to public safety. 
5.  The permit holder permits an individual not licensed pursuant to this chapter to operate a taxicab. 
6.  The city manager receives notice from the permit holder's insurance carrier, listed pursuant to Section 5.28.020(D) of this chapter, stating that the permit holder's insurance has been canceled, revoked, voided or otherwise rendered invalid. 
7.  The city manager is advised that the permit holder is operating in violation of any federal, state or local law. 
(Ord. 859 Att. A (part), 2006: Ord. 777 § 1 (part), 2000: Ord. 763 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.28.040 - Operating requirements. 
A.  Designated Equipment. Every taxicab licensed under this chapter shall have the following equipment: 
1.  A taximeter of such type and design as has been accepted by the California Department of Agriculture. Taximeters shall be maintained at all times in accordance with standards of accuracy established by such department. Every taximeter shall be placed so that the reading dial showing the amount to be charged shall be well-lighted and readily discernible at all times to passengers. The department of weights and measures of the County of Los Angeles shall test all taximeters for accuracy in accordance with the procedure of such department, and the results shall be reported in writing to the city manager by the operator within thirty (30) days after the test; 
2.  A radio transmitter and receiver capable of two-way communication with a dispatcher which shall be in operation at all times when the taxicab is in service; 
3.  A permanent fixture to display the taxicab driver's license in prominent view of the passengers; 
4.  A permanent fixture to display the rates charged for travel in the taxicab in prominent view of the passengers. 
B.  Service Records. 
1.  Taxicab operators shall maintain the following records for each call or request for service: 
a.  Location of pickup; 
b.  Number of passengers; 
c.  Location of destination; 
d.  Identification of person taking the request; 
e.  Date and time of request; 
f.  Time delay quoted; 
g.  Identification of dispatcher; 
h.  Identification of taxicab and name of driver dispatched to fulfill request; 
i.  Time of dispatch; 
j.  Time of drop-off at destination; and 
k.  Amount of fare collected. 
2.  Such records shall be available for inspection by the city manager for a period of at least six months following the date of service rendered. 
C.  Safety and Cleanliness. Each taxicab operated in the city shall be maintained in a safe, clean and sanitary manner. No person shall operate a taxicab that is unsafe, unsuitable for service, or that contains defective equipment. The following conditions shall, without limitation, presumptively render a taxicab unsafe for operation: 
1.  Excessive leakage of oil, gasoline, coolant, transmission fluid or any other substance from any part of the taxicab; 
2.  Any defects in the frame or chassis of the taxicab; 
3.  Failure of any taxicab fixture, such as door handles, doors, windows, interior lights, hood, trunk, etc., to function properly; 
4.  Failure to maintain the headlights, turn signal indicators, tires or brakes in good operating condition; 
5.  Failure to maintain the engine, transmission or other mechanical parts of the vehicle in good operating condition; 
6.  Failure to have an exhaust system which is in compliance with state law or is in good working condition; 
7.  Excess dents or scratches in the body of the taxicab; 
8.  Improper maintenance of the exterior color scheme; 
9.  Excessive wear on the floor mats, upholstery or other portions of the taxicab's interior; 
10.  Such other conditions as the city manager shall deem appropriate. 
D.  Inspection of Taxicabs. Any taxicab shall be subject to reasonable and periodic inspection by the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department, the city manager, any code enforcement officer, or any other peace officer for the purpose of determining whether such taxicab is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter or otherwise safe for operation. 
E.  Impoundment. Any taxicab which fails to meet the requirements of the California Vehicle Code or this chapter after inspection or otherwise, or which is operated by a taxicab driver or operator not properly licensed pursuant to this chapter, may be ordered out of service and/or impounded by the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department, the city manager, or any code enforcement officer. In addition, any taxicab which fails to meet the requirements of the California Vehicle Code may be impounded by the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department. 
1.  If a taxicab is ordered out of service, its operating permit must be immediately removed from display. 
2.  Before a taxicab may be placed in service again, the violation must be corrected and the taxicab must be inspected by the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department, the city manager, or a code enforcement officer and approved for placement in service, and pay an application fee as prescribed by city resolution. 
3.  If an unlicensed taxicab is impounded, it may be conditionally released for a period of thirty (30) days during which period its owner must obtain a status of taximeter registration form pursuant to Section 5.28.020(B)(1)(o) of this chapter and vehicle inspection report pursuant to Section 5.28.020 (B)(1)(p) of this chapter for the vehicle. If such certifications are not obtained within the thirty (30) day period, the vehicle will be impounded. 
(Ord. 859 Att. A (part), 2006: Ord. 777 § 1 (part), 2000: Ord. 763 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.28.050 - Taxicab driver's license requirement. 
A.  Unlawful to Drive a Taxicab Without a License. It is unlawful for any person to drive a taxicab in the city without first obtaining a taxicab driver's license authorizing such operation pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Any such unlawful operation shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
B.  Application for Taxicab Driver's License. It shall be the sole responsibility of every person required to obtain a taxicab driver's license to apply on a form provided by the city manager. Any person who makes a false statement on the application shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
1.  Contents of Application. Applications for a taxicab driver's license shall contain the following information, as applicable: 
a.  The name, residence address and telephone number of the applicant; 
b.  The address and telephone number of the applicant's current place of employment; 
c.  The age of the applicant; 
d.  The two previous residence addresses of the applicant; 
e.  A statement of the applicant's employment for the three years immediately preceding the application, including the name, address and telephone number of each separate employer during that period; 
f.  The applicant's height, weight, eye color and hair color; 
g.  Two copies of recent passport-size photographs; 
h.  The number and expiration date of the applicant's California driver's license and a legible copy of such driver's license; 
i.  A written statement made under penalty of perjury as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any misdemeanor, felony or any violation of federal, state or municipal law, a description of any offenses or violation(s) committed, and the punishment or penalties assessed; and 
j.  Evidence of employment of an offer of employment by an operator licensed by the city pursuant to this chapter. 
k.  One of the following: 
i.  A receipt from the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department evidencing that the applicant has (i) submitted fingerprint a card Form FD258 or such other fingerprint card as is accepted by the Department of Justice and the Federal Bureau of Investigation; and (ii) paid any and all fees required to conduct a background check on the applicant, or 
ii.  A receipt evidencing that the applicant has (i) obtained electronic fingerprint scans, also known as Livescan, to the extent such technology is available, for the applicant; and (ii) paid any and all fees required to conduct background checks on the applicant, or 
iii.  A letter authorizing the city to utilize data retrieved pursuant to a background check completed within forty-five (45) days of the applicant's submission of his/her application to the city. Such authorization letter shall state the name and include the signature of the applicant and shall state the name of the jurisdiction or entity that conducted the previous background check. Data retrieved pursuant to a background check conducted by the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department shall be presumed valid. Data retrieved pursuant to a background check conducted by any other jurisdiction or entity shall be accepted upon approval by the city manager; 
j.  One of the following: 
i.  A receipt evidencing that the applicant has tested negative for each of the controlled substances identified in Part 40 (commencing with Section 40.1) of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations pursuant to a controlled substances test administered pursuant to the requirements of such regulations; or 
ii.  A letter authorizing the city to use data retrieved pursuant to a controlled substances test completed within forty-five (45) days of the applicant's submission of the application to the city. Such authorization letter shall include the name and the signature of the applicant and shall state the name of the jurisdiction or entity that conducted the previous controlled substances test. Data retrieved pursuant to a controlled substances test conducted by the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department shall be presumed valid. Data retrieved pursuant to a controlled substances test conducted by any other jurisdiction or entity shall be accepted upon approval by the city manager; 
k.  Such additional information as the city manager deems necessary. 
C.  Term of Taxicab Driver's License. Taxicab driver's licenses shall be valid for a term of twelve (12) months commencing on the first day of the month when the license application and fee are received by the city manager. 
D.  License Fee. Each applicant shall pay an annual taxicab driver's license fee when application is made for the license. The city's issuance of a receipt to the applicant for payment of the fee shall not constitute the receipt of a taxicab driver's license. The fee shall be nonrefundable. The amount of the license fee shall cover the costs of processing the application and shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
1.  Error in Calculating Fee. In no case shall any error in calculating or in stating the amount of a taxicab driver's license fee prevent the collection of the correct amount due from any person driving or intending to drive a taxicab in the city. 
2.  License Fee a Debt. The amount of any taxicab driver's license fee or penalty imposed by this chapter shall constitute a debt to the city. 
3.  Refunds. Upon approval of the city manager, the finance director may refund any license fee or penalty erroneously collected. However, no license fee shall be refunded if the applicant engaged in driving a taxicab in the city prior to application for the license. 
E.  Due Date for License Fee. The license fee for a taxicab driver's license is due when the application is submitted to the city manager. The fee for renewal of all taxicab driver's licenses is due the first day of the month following the expiration date stated on the license. 
F.  Penalties. 
1.  Failure to Pay Fee. In the event of failure to pay a taxicab driver's license fee when due, the finance director shall add a penalty of twenty (20) percent of the license fee on the first day of the month following the due date, and ten (10) percent each month thereafter while the fee remains unpaid. In no event shall the amount of the penalty exceed fifty (50) percent of the amount of the license fee due. 
2.  Failure to Obtain Taxicab Driver's License. If a person fails to obtain a taxicab driver's license, the license fee due shall be the amount due and payable from the first date when the person engaged in taxicab operation in the city, together with the penalty described in subsection (F)(1) of this section. 
G.  Issuance of Taxicab Driver's License. Upon the approval of an application for a taxicab driver's license and payment of the required fee, the city manager shall issue a taxicab driver's license to the applicant. 
H.  Contents of License. Each taxicab driver's license issued shall contain: 
1.  The name and business address of the person to whom the license is issued; 
2.  The name of the current employer of the person to whom the license is issued; 
3.  The expiration date of the taxicab driver's license; 
4.  A photograph of the person to whom the taxicab driver's license is issued; 
5.  Such other information as deemed necessary and established by the city manager. 
I.  Investigation of Applicant. The city manager may require a criminal background investigation of any applicant by the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department as part of determining whether or not to issue a taxicab driver's license to the applicant. 
J.  Grounds for Denial of Taxicab Driver's License. The city manager may deny a taxicab driver's license if: 
1.  The applicant is under the age of eighteen (18) years or is not competent to operate a taxicab safely on the city streets; 
2.  The applicant does not possess a valid Class 3 driver's license issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles; 
3.  The applicant has been convicted of reckless driving or driving under the influence of alcohol or narcotics. If the applicant has a single conviction for reckless driving or driving under the influence, which conviction predates the application by more than ten (10) years, the applicant may seek special review of the applicant's application. The city manager may approve such an application upon a showing of rehabilitation and non-recidivism. The city manager shall not approve any application in which the applicant has been convicted more than once for reckless driving and/or driving under the influence and/or in which the conviction is dated within ten (10) years of the submission of the application. 
4.  The applicant has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to more than one moving violation under the California Vehicle Code within the preceding twelve (12) months; 
5.  Any of the following: 
a.  The applicant has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more crimes against persons. Crimes against persons shall include, but shall not be limited to, murder, manslaughter, robbery, rape or other sexual crimes, extortion, assault, or battery; or 
b.  The applicant has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more crimes against property during the preceding seven years. Crimes against property shall include, but shall not be limited to, burglary, grand theft, forgery and fraud; or 
c.  The applicant has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more drug-related crimes during the preceding seven years. Drug-related crimes shall include, but shall not be limited to, possession, sale or possession for sale of any Schedule I or Schedule II narcotic; or 
d.  Conviction or guilty plea to one or more crimes chargeable as a felony in the preceding twenty-four (24) months; or 
e.  The applicant has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to such other crimes as the city manager deems a threat to public safety. 
6.  The applicant tests positive for controlled substances and/or alcohol as set forth in Section 5.28.040(S) of this chapter. 
K.  Appeal. If an applicant for a taxicab driver's license is aggrieved by any decision of the city manager regarding the issuance, denial or revocation of a license, the applicant may appeal the decision by submitting a notice of appeal in accordance with the uniform appeal procedure set forth in Chapter 2.44 of this code. 
L.  Transfer of Licenses. Taxicab driver's licenses issued pursuant to this chapter are not transferable. 
M.  Duplicate License. A duplicate taxicab driver's license may be issued by the city manager to replace any taxicab driver's license previously issued which has been lost or destroyed, upon filing a statement that the license has been lost or destroyed and paying a fee to the finance director. The fee shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
N.  Revocation of License. The city manager may revoke any taxicab driver's license issued under this chapter for any of the following reasons: 
1.  The city manager determines that the licensee has obtained the license by misrepresentation or has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
2.  The city manager receives a negative recommendation from the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department, or any other jurisdiction or entity as designated by the city manager, regarding the licensee based upon data that reveals any of the following: 
a.  Conviction or guilty plea to one or more crimes against persons. Crimes against persons shall include, but shall not be limited to, murder, manslaughter, robbery, rape or other sexual crimes, extortion, assault, or battery; or 
b.  Conviction or guilty plea to two or more crimes against property during the preceding seven years. Crimes against property shall include, but shall not be limited to, burglary, grand theft, forgery and fraud; or 
c.  Conviction or guilty plea to two or more drug-related crimes during the preceding seven years. Drug-related crimes shall include, but shall not be limited to, possession, sale or possession for sale of any Schedule I or Schedule II narcotic; 
d.  Conviction or guilty plea to one or more crimes chargeable as a felony in the preceding twenty-four (24) months; 
e.  Conviction or guilty plea to one or more crimes chargeable as a felony in the preceding twenty-four (24) months; 
f.  A positive test for controlled substances and/or alcohol as set forth in Section 5.28.040(s) of this chapter; 
g.  Conviction or guilty plea to such other crimes as the city manager deems a threat to public safety. 
3.  The applicant tests positive for controlled substances and/or alcohol as set forth in Section 5.28.040(S) of this chapter. 
O.  Termination of Employment. A taxicab driver's license shall be rendered void upon termination of the taxicab driver's employment. 
1.  The taxicab operator which employed the terminated taxicab driver shall notify the city within three working days of such termination. 
2.  Upon termination of employment, the taxicab driver shall immediately return the taxicab driver's license to the city. 
P.  Regulatory Measure. The fee established pursuant to this chapter is for processing the applications required by this chapter. Persons required to pay a taxicab driver's license fee shall not be relieved from the payment of fees under other provisions of this code and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of all other ordinances. 
Q.  Compliance with Other Laws. The payment of a taxicab driver's license fee and the issuance of a taxicab driver's license shall not entitle the licensee to operate taxicabs unless the licensee has complied with all requirements of this chapter and all other applicable federal, state or local regulations. 
(Ord. 859 Att. A (part), 2006: Ord. 777 § 1 (part), 2000: Ord. 763 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Chapter 5.32 - TOWING 
 
5.32.010 - Definitions. 
A.  For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined in this section: 
"City" means the city of Lancaster. 
"City council" means the city council of the city of Lancaster. 
"City manager" means the city manager of the city of Lancaster or his or her designee. 
"Finance director" means the finance director of the city of Lancaster or his or her designee. 
"Operating license" means a license to conduct a towing operation issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
"Operator" means any individual, partnership, corporation, association or limited liability company that is the registered owner or engaged in the business of towing operation. 
"Permit" means an operating permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
"Towing operation" means the activity of towing vehicles for compensation within the city of Lancaster. Towing operation includes the storing of vehicles and all other services incident to towing. 
"Towing unit" means every vehicle the proper purpose of which is to tow vehicles under the provisions of this chapter. 
"Towing unit driver" means any individual who drives or is in actual physical control of a towing unit. 
(Ord. 860 Att. B (part), 2006: Ord. 763 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.32.020 - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any towing operation: 
A.  That provides towing service exclusively to members of an association, automobile club or similar organization, and receives remuneration only from the sponsoring association, automobile club or similar organization; 
B.  That provides towing service without charge or fee for other vehicles owned or operated by the individual or organization furnishing the towing service; 
C.  That provides towing service without charge or fee for other vehicles owned or operated by the individual or organization furnishing the towing service, but which are being operated under terms of a rent or lease agreement or contract, and such towing is performed on a nonprofit basis or any fee is part of the rent or lease agreement or contract; 
D.  That, being located in another city, enters the city on a non-emergency towing assignment for the purpose of towing a disabled vehicle back to such city for repair; 
E.  That is operated by an auto-dismantler licensed by the Department of Motor Vehicles, pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 11505; or 
F.  That is operated by a repossessing agency licensed under Chapter 11 of the Business and Professions Code. 
1.  A non-emergency towing assignment includes: 
a.  Towing of vehicles that have been involved in a collision, but have been removed from the scene; 
b.  Towing of vehicles that have experienced mechanical failure, but have been removed from the roadway and no longer constitute a hazard; or 
c.  Towing of vehicles that are mechanically operative but are being towed for convenience. 
2.  All non-emergency towing assignments require authorization by: 
a.  The registered owner; 
b.  The legal owner; 
c.  The insurance carrier of either the registered owner or the legal owner; or 
d.  The duly authorized agent of subsection (F)(2)(a), (b) or (c) of this section. 
3.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, persons soliciting for non-emergency towing assignments within the city shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and shall be required to have an operating license as specified herein. 
(Ord. 860 Att. B (part), 2006: Ord. 763 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.32.030 - Operating license requirement. 
A.  Unlawful to Conduct Towing Operations Without a License. It is unlawful for any person to conduct any towing operation in the city without first obtaining a license authorizing such operation pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Any such unlawful operation shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
B.  Application for License. It shall be the sole responsibility of every person required to obtain a operating license to apply on a form provided by the city manager. Any person who makes a false statement on the application shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
1.  Contents of Application. Applications for an operating license shall contain the following information, as applicable: 
a.  The name of the applicant; 
b.  The residence address and telephone number of the applicant; 
c.  The business address and telephone number of the applicant; 
d.  The fictitious business name, if any, under which the applicant does business or proposes to do business and a copy of the applicant's fictitious business name statement filed with the county of Los Angeles; 
e.  The name, address and telephone number of all directors, officers, shareholders, partners, employees or other individuals who are financially interested in the proposed operation of the towing operation or who are involved or proposed to be involved, directly or indirectly, with the management of the business; 
f.  The number of towing units for which a permit is desired. A description of each vehicle, giving the license number, vehicle identification number, model, make and year of manufacture; 
g.  The color scheme, name and other distinguishing insignia proposed to be used on each vehicle; 
h.  The proposed schedule of towing rates to be charged; 
i.  A current financial statement of the applicant; 
j.  A statement outlining the past experience of the applicant in the business of towing operation; 
k.  Evidence of insurance coverage as required pursuant to subsection C of this section; 
l.  Such additional information as the city manager deems necessary; and 
m.  Completed towing unit driver's license applications for each of the towing unit drivers the applicant employs or intends to employ, or with whom the applicant contracts or intends to contract for towing unit driving purposes; 
n.  One of the following: 
i.  A receipt from the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department evidencing that the applicant has (i) submitted fingerprint cards for each of the individuals listed pursuant to subsections (B)(1)(a), (e) and (m) of this section on Form FD258 or such other fingerprint card as is accepted by the Department of Justice and the Federal Bureau of Investigation; and (ii) paid any and all fees required to conduct background checks on such individuals, or 
ii.  A receipt evidencing that the applicant has (i) obtained electronic fingerprint scans, also known as Livescan, to the extent such technology is available, for each of the individuals listed pursuant to subsections (B)(1)(a), (e) and (m) of this section; and (ii) paid any and all fees required to conduct background checks on such individuals, or 
iii.  A letter authorizing the city to utilize data retrieved pursuant to a background check completed within forty-five (45) days of the applicant's submission of its application to the city. Such authorization letter shall state the names and include the signatures of each of the individuals listed pursuant to subsections (B)(1)(a), (e) and (m) of this section and shall state the name of the jurisdiction or entity that conducted the previous background check. Data retrieved pursuant to a background check conducted by the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department shall be presumed valid. Data retrieved pursuant to a background check conducted by any other jurisdiction or entity shall be accepted upon approval by the city manager; 
o.  One of the following: 
i.  A receipt evidencing that the applicant and each of the individuals identified pursuant to subsections (B)(1)(a), (e) and (m) of this section have tested negative for each of the controlled substances identified in Part 40 (commencing with Section 40.1) of Title 4901 of the Code of Federal Regulations pursuant to a controlled substances test administered pursuant to the requirements of such regulations; or 
ii.  A letter authorizing the city to use data retrieved pursuant to a controlled substances test completed within forty-five (45) days of the applicant's submission of the application to the city. Such authorization letter shall include the names and the signatures of each of the individuals listed pursuant to subsections (B)(1)(a), (e) and (m) of this section and shall state the name of the jurisdiction or entity that conducted the previous controlled substances test. Data retrieved pursuant to a controlled substances test conducted by the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department shall be presumed valid. Data retrieved pursuant to a controlled substances test conducted by any other jurisdiction or entity shall be accepted upon approval by the city manager. 
2.  Extension of Time. The city manager may extend the time required for filing an operating license application for good cause, for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, and may waive any penalty that would otherwise accrue thereon. 
C.  Insurance. Every applicant for an operating license shall obtain and maintain commercial comprehensive general liability insurance and comprehensive automobile liability insurance in full force and effect. 
1.  The amount of the commercial comprehensive general liability insurance shall be determined by the city manager. However, in no event shall such insurance be written with a combined single limit of less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence. Such insurance shall be endorsed for premises/operations and contractual liability, and shall name the city as an additional insured and shall be primary to and not contributing with any other insurance covering or maintained by the city. 
2.  The amount of comprehensive automobile liability insurance shall be determined by the city manager. However, in no event shall such insurance be written with a combined single limit of less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per occurrence, or limits of less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per person/three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per accident/fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) property damage, or any combination of commercial insurance which provides less than the equivalent limits. Such insurance may include a property damage deductible or self insured retention less than or equal to two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per occurrence. 
3.  Such insurance shall be provided by insurer(s) satisfactory to the city manager. Evidence of such insurance shall be attached to the operating license application. 
4.  The limits of such insurance shall be subject to review and alteration by the city manager. 
5.  Failure to maintain insurance in full force and effect as required by this Section 5.32.030(C) shall constitute a basis for immediate revocation of any license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
D.  Term of Operating License. Operating licenses shall be valid for a term of not more than twelve (12) months commencing on the first day of the month when the license application and fee are received by the city manager. 
E.  License Fee. Each applicant shall pay an annual operating license fee when application is made for the license. The city's issuance of a receipt to the operating license applicant for payment of the fee shall not constitute the receipt of an operating license. The fee is non-refundable. The amount of the license fee shall cover the costs of processing the application and shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
1.  Error in Calculating Fee. In no case shall any error in calculating or in stating the amount of a license fee prevent the collection of the correct amount due from any person operating or intending to operate a towing unit in the city. 
2.  License Fee a Debt. The amount of any license fee or penalty imposed by this chapter shall constitute a debt to the city. 
3.  Refunds. Upon approval of the city manager, the finance director may refund any license fee or penalty erroneously collected. However, no license fee shall be refunded if the applicant engaged in the towing operation business prior to application for the license. License fees shall not be refunded for any fraction of a year that business is not conducted. 
F.  Due Date for License Fee. The license fee for an operating license is due when the application is submitted to the city manager. The fee for renewal of all operating licenses is due the first day of the month following the expiration date stated on the license. 
G.  Penalties. 
1.  Failure to Pay Fee. In the event of failure to pay an operating license fee when due, the finance director shall add a penalty of twenty (20) percent of the license fee on the first day of the month following the due date, and ten (10) percent each month thereafter while the fee remains unpaid. In no event shall the amount of the penalty exceed fifty (50) percent of the amount of the license fee due. 
2.  Failure to Obtain License. If a person fails to obtain an operating license, the license fee due shall be the amount due and payable from the first date when the person engaged in towing unit operation in the city, together with the penalty described in subsection (G)(1) of this section. 
H.  Issuance of License. Upon the approval of an application for an operating license and payment of the required fee, the city manager shall issue an operating license to the applicant. 
I.  Contents of License. Each operating license issued shall contain the following: 
1.  The name of the operator; 
2.  The business address of the operator; 
3.  The business telephone number of the operator; 
4.  The expiration date of the operating license; 
5.  Such other information as deemed necessary and required by the city manager. 
J.  Grounds for Denial of License. The city manager or his or her designee may deny issuance of an operating license required by this chapter for any of the following reasons: 
1.  Failure to comply with this chapter, an ordinance of the city, federal or state law; or 
2.  Receipt of a negative recommendation by the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department, or any other jurisdiction or entity as designated by the city manager, upon completion of background checks or upon review of data retrieved pursuant to previously conducted background checks as set forth in subsection (B)(1)(n) of this section, which data reveals any of the following: 
a.  Conviction or guilty plea to one or more crimes against persons. Crimes against persons shall include, but shall not be limited to, murder, manslaughter, robbery, rape or other sexual crimes, extortion, assault, or battery; or 
b.  Conviction or guilty plea to two or more crimes against property during the seven years preceding submission of the application. Crimes against property shall include, but shall not be limited to, burglary, grand theft, forgery and fraud; or 
c.  Conviction or guilty plea to two or more drug-related crimes during the seven years preceding submission of the application. Drug-related crimes shall include, but shall not be limited to, possession, sale or possession for sale of any Schedule I or Schedule II narcotic; or 
d.  Conviction or guilty plea to one or more crimes chargeable as a felony in the preceding twenty-four (24) months; or 
e.  Conviction or guilty plea to such other crimes as the city manager deems a threat to public safety. 
3.  A positive test for controlled substances and/or alcohol as set forth in subsection R of this section. 
K.  Appeal. If an applicant for an operating license is aggrieved by any decision of the city manager regarding the issuance, denial or revocation of a license, the applicant may appeal the decision by submitting a notice of appeal in accordance with the Uniform Appeal Procedure set forth in Chapter 2.44 of Title 2 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
L.  Amendment of License. An operating license may be amended to reflect a change in business name and/or mailing address upon filing a statement of such fact and payment of a fee to the finance director. The fee shall be established by resolution of the city council. The unexpired operating license previously issued shall be returned to the finance director prior to the issuance of the amended license. An operating license may not be amended to reflect a change in the person(s) conducting the towing operation; a new license must be obtained as provided herein. 
M.  Transfer of Licenses. Operating licenses issued pursuant to this chapter are not transferable. 
N.  Duplicate License. A duplicate operating license may be issued by the city manager to replace any operating license previously issued which has been lost or destroyed, upon filing a statement that the license has been lost or destroyed and paying a fee to the finance director. The fee shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
O.  Revocation of License. The city manager may revoke any operating license issued under this chapter for any of the following reasons: 
1.  The city manager determines that the licensee has obtained the license by misrepresentation or has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
2.  The city manager receives a negative recommendation from the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department, or any other jurisdiction or entity as designated by the city manager, regarding any of the individuals listed under subsection (B)(1)(a), (e) and (m) of this section based upon data that reveals any of the following: 
a.  Conviction or guilty plea to one or more crimes against persons. Crimes against persons shall include, but shall not be limited to, murder, manslaughter, robbery, rape or other sexual crimes, extortion, assault, or battery; or 
b.  Conviction or guilty plea to two or more crimes against property during the preceding seven years. Crimes against property shall include, but shall not be limited to, burglary, grand theft, forgery and fraud; or 
c.  Conviction or guilty plea to two or more drug-related crimes during the preceding seven years. Drug-related crimes shall include, but shall not be limited to, possession, sale or possession for sale of any Schedule I or Schedule II narcotic; or 
d.  Conviction or guilty plea to one or more crimes chargeable as a felony in the preceding twenty-four (24) months; or 
e.  Conviction or guilty plea to such other crimes as the city manager deems a threat to public safety. 
3.  The licensee or any individual listed under subsection (B)(1)(a), (e) or (m) of this section tests positive for controlled substances and/or alcohol as set forth in subsection R of this section. 
4.  The licensee continues to employ or to maintain an independent contracting relationship with a towing unit driver for more than twenty-four (24) hours following the licensee's actual knowledge of any of the following regarding such towing unit driver: 
a.  Conviction or guilty plea to one or more crimes against persons. Crimes against persons shall include, but shall not be limited to, murder, manslaughter, robbery, rape or other sexual crimes, extortion, assault, or battery; or 
b.  Conviction or guilty plea to two or more crimes against property during the preceding seven years. Crimes against property shall include, but shall not be limited to, burglary, grand theft, forgery and fraud; or 
c.  Conviction or guilty plea to two or more drug-related crimes during the preceding seven years. Drug-related crimes shall include, but shall not be limited to, possession, sale or possession for sale of any Schedule I or Schedule II narcotic; or 
d.  Conviction or guilty plea to one or more crimes chargeable as a felony in the preceding twenty-four (24) months; or 
e.  A positive test for controlled substances and/or alcohol as set forth in subsection R of this section; or 
f.  Conviction or guilty plea to such other crimes as the city manager deems a threat to public safety. 
5.  The licensee permits an individual not licensed pursuant to this chapter to operate a towing unit. 
6.  The city manager receives notice from the licensee's insurance carrier, listed pursuant to subsection C of this section, stating that the licensee's insurance has been canceled, revoked, voided or otherwise rendered invalid. 
7.  The city manager is advised that the licensee has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to operating in violation of any federal, state or local law. 
P.  Cancellation of License Due to Discontinuance of Service. If the operator who is issued the operating license discontinues towing operations for a period of forty-five (45) days, the license shall be canceled automatically, and shall be reissued only upon application in accordance with this chapter. 
Q.  Regulatory Measure. The fee established pursuant to this chapter is for processing the applications required by this chapter. Persons required to pay an operating license fee for conducting towing operations under this chapter shall not be relieved from the payment of fees under other provisions of the Lancaster Municipal Code, including but not limited to a business license fee, and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of all other city ordinances. 
R.  Controlled Substance and Alcohol Testing Certification Program. All towing operators as well as towing unit drivers, prior to submitting an application to the city, shall undergo testing for controlled substances and alcohol. The procedures for such testing and the controlled substances to be tested for shall be as referenced and required in Section 53075.5 of the California Government Code. 
1.  The test results shall be reported directly to the city manager. 
2.  All test results are confidential and shall not be released without the consent of the taxicab operator, except as authorized or required by law. 
3.  Upon the request of a towing operator applying for a towing operator's license, the city shall provide the towing operator with a list of consortia certified pursuant to Part 382 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations that offer testing in or near the city. 
4.  No evidence derived from a positive test result pursuant to this program shall be admissible in a criminal prosecution concerning unlawful possession, sale or distribution of controlled substances. 
S.  Compliance With Other Laws. The payment of an operating license fee and the issuance of an operating license shall not entitle the licensee to conduct towing operations unless the licensee has complied with all requirements of this chapter and any other applicable federal, state or local regulations. 
T.  Indemnification. As a condition of the operating license, the operator agrees to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, its agents, officers and employees from and against any and all liability or expenses arising from or connected with the operator's activities or any services performed by or on behalf of the operator by any person pursuant to this license. Such liability or expenses shall include defense costs and legal fees and claims for any damages of any nature, including but not limited to bodily injury, death, personal injury or property damage. 
(Ord. 860 Att. B (part), 2006: Ord. 763 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.32.040 - Operating permit. 
A.  Issuance of Operating Permit. Upon the issuance of an operating license, the city manager shall also issue to the operator a permit for each towing unit which the operator is authorized to operate under the operating license. 
B.  Contents of Operating Permit. Each permit shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name and address of the operator; 
2.  The license plate number of the towing unit for which the operating permit is being issued; 
3.  The vehicle identification number of the towing unit for which the operating permit is being issued; 
4.  The expiration date of the operating permit, which shall be the same as the expiration date of the licensee's operating license. 
C.  Display of Permit. Each permit shall be displayed prominently on the driver's side rear window of the towing unit for which it is issued. 
D.  Transfer of Permit. Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be transferable. 
E.  Duplicate Permit. A duplicate permit may be issued by the city manager to replace any permit previously issued which has been lost or destroyed, upon filing a statement that the permit has been lost or destroyed and paying a fee to the finance director. The fee shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
F.  Revocation of Permit. The city manager may revoke any permit issued under this chapter for any of the following reasons: 
1.  The city manager determines that the permit holder has obtained the license by misrepresentation or has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
2.  The city manager receives a negative recommendation from the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department, or any other jurisdiction or entity as designated by the city manager, regarding any of the individuals listed under Section 5.32.030(B)(1)(a), (e) and/or (m) based upon data that reveals any of the following: 
a.  Conviction or guilty plea to one or more crimes against persons. Crimes against persons shall include, but shall not be limited to, murder, manslaughter, robbery, rape or other sexual crimes, extortion, assault, or battery; or 
b.  Conviction or guilty plea to two or more crimes against property during the preceding seven years. Crimes against property shall include, but shall not be limited to, burglary, grand theft, forgery and fraud; or 
c.  Conviction or guilty plea to two or more drug-related crimes during the preceding seven years. Drug-related crimes shall include, but shall not be limited to, possession, sale or possession for sale of any Schedule I or Schedule II narcotic; 
d.  Conviction or guilty plea to one or more crimes chargeable as a felony in the preceding twenty-four (24) months; 
e.  Conviction or guilty plea to such other crimes as the city manager deems a threat to public safety. 
3.  The permit holder or any individual listed under Section 5.32.030(B)(1)(a), (e) and/or (m) tests positive for controlled substances and/or alcohol as set forth in Section 5.32.030(R) of this chapter. 
4.  The permit holder continues to employ or to maintain an independent contracting relationship with a towing unit operator for more than twenty-four (24) hours following the permit holder's actual knowledge of any of the following regarding such taxicab driver: 
a.  Conviction or guilty plea to one or more crimes against persons. Crimes against persons shall include, but shall not be limited to, murder, manslaughter, robbery, rape or other sexual crimes, extortion, assault, or battery; or 
b.  Conviction or guilty plea to two or more crimes against property during the preceding seven years. Crimes against property shall include, but shall not be limited to, burglary, grand theft, forgery and fraud; or 
c.  Conviction or guilty plea to two or more drug-related crimes during the preceding seven years. Drug-related crimes shall include, but shall not be limited to, possession, sale or possession for sale of any Schedule I or Schedule II narcotic; or 
d.  Conviction or guilty plea to one or more crimes chargeable as a felony in the preceding twenty-four (24) months; or 
e.  A positive test for controlled substances and/or alcohol as set forth in Section 5.32.030(R) of this chapter; or 
f.  Conviction or guilty plea to such other crimes as the city manager deems a threat to public safety. 
5.  The permit holder permits an individual not licensed pursuant to this chapter to operate a towing unit. 
6.  The city manager receives notice from the permit holder's insurance carrier, listed pursuant to Section 5.32.030(C) of this chapter, stating that the permit holder's insurance has been canceled, revoked, voided or otherwise rendered invalid. 
7.  The city manager is advised that the permit holder is operating in violation of any federal, state or local law. 
(Ord. 860 Att. B (part), 2006: Ord. 777 § 1 (part), 2000: Ord. 763 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.32.050 - Operating requirements. 
A.  Business Location. Any person conducting a towing operation business shall maintain a physical location from which the business is conducted. Such physical location shall provide an office with an adjacent yard for vehicle storage. Such location shall conform with all zoning ordinances for city and shall be approved by the department of community development prior to issuance of the operating permit. 
B.  Towing Authorization. A towing unit driver shall not attach a vehicle to a towing unit without first receiving written authorization to do so by the registered owner, legal owner, driver, law enforcement personnel or other person in control of such vehicle. The authorization shall list the services offered and the rates and charges for that service. A copy of the authorization shall be furnished to the person authorizing the towing service. The copy shall state the name, address and telephone number of the operator and the days and hours the business is open for release of vehicles. The copy shall also be signed by the towing unit driver performing the authorized service. 
C.  Itemized Statement. A towing unit driver shall furnish an itemized statement to the person authorizing the towing service, or their agent. This statement shall set forth the precise nature of services performed and labor and special equipment used in towing the vehicle and any charges incurred for those services. This statement shall be furnished to any person authorized to receive it without a demand for payment as a condition precedent. 
D.  Vehicle Repair or Alteration. An operator or towing unit driver shall refrain from making any repairs or alterations to a vehicle without the prior authorization of one of the persons listed in Section 5.32.020(F)(2)(a) — (F)(2)(d). Parts or accessories shall not be removed from vehicles without authorization except as necessary for security purposes. Under such circumstances, the parts or accessories removed shall be listed on the itemized statement described in subsection C of this section and stored in the business office. This subsection D shall not be construed to prohibit towing unit drivers from making emergency alterations necessary to allow a vehicle to be towed. 
E.  Release of Vehicle. Operators shall provide for release of vehicles Monday through Friday from nine a.m. to four p.m., excluding officially recognized holidays. Operators may also release vehicles on other days and hours. 
F.  Rates and Charges. 
1.  Operators shall maintain a sign listing the rates and charges of all services offered. Such sign shall be conspicuously located in the office or other place where customer financial transactions take place. The lettering on such sign shall be a minimum of one inch high with one-quarter inch wide stroke. The letters shall consist of a color that contrasts with the background. 
2.  No charge other than the rates and charges filed by the operator with the application for operating license shall be made except as otherwise provided herein. 
3.  Changes in rates and charges shall be made by written notice to the city manager containing the new schedule of rates and charges at least ten (10) days prior to effectiveness. A duplicate copy of such notice shall be posted for a period of ten (10) days prior to effectiveness next to the posted schedule of existing rates and charges. 
G.  Identification of Towing Unit Driver. A towing unit driver shall wear the insignia of the operator which employs him attached to a conspicuous place on his or her clothing. 
H.  Prohibited Behavior. An operator and his or her agents and employees are prohibited from the following acts under this chapter: 
1.  Obtaining a towing contract by use of fraud, trickery, dishonesty or forgery; 
2.  Stopping on any street, highway or other public thoroughfare to render assistance to a person or disabled vehicle without being first requested to do so; 
3.  Towing a vehicle to a location other than the location listed as the business address of the operator without first receiving authorization by the person authorizing the towing service; 
4.  After towing a vehicle to the operator's business address, subsequently towing such vehicle to another location for storage without prior authorization by the person authorizing the towing service; 
5.  Conspiring with any person to defraud any owner of any vehicle, any insurance company or any person financially interested in the cost of the towing service or storage of such vehicle, by making false or deceptive statements relating to the towing or storage of such vehicle; 
6.  Removing a vehicle involved in an accident from the accident scene prior to arrival by police officers or sheriff's deputies, where a person suffered injury or death as a result of the accident; or 
7.  Charging for services not performed or equipment not used or otherwise materially misstating the nature of any service performed or equipment used. 
(Ord. 860 Att. B (part), 2006: Ord. 763 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.32.060 - Towing unit driver's license requirement. 
A.  Unlawful to Drive a Towing Unit Without a License. It is unlawful for any person to drive a towing unit in the city without first obtaining a towing unit driver's license authorizing such operation pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Any such unlawful operation shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
B.  Application for Towing Unit Driver's License. It shall be the sole responsibility of every person required to obtain a towing unit driver's license to apply on a form provided by the city manager. Any person who makes a false statement on the application shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
1.  Contents of Application. Applications for a towing unit driver's license shall contain the following information, as applicable: 
a.  The name, residence address, social security number and telephone number of the applicant; 
b.  The address and telephone number of the applicant's current place of employment; 
c.  The age of the applicant; 
d.  The two previous residence addresses of the applicant; 
e.  A statement of the applicant's employment for the three years immediately preceding the application, including the name, address and telephone number of each separate employer during that period; 
f.  The applicant's height, weight, eye color and hair color; 
g.  Two copies of a recent passport-size photograph; 
h.  The number and expiration date of the applicant's California driver's license and a legible copy of such driver's license; 
i.  A written statement under penalty of perjury as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any misdemeanor, felony or any violation of federal, state or municipal law, a description of any offenses or violation(s) committed, and the punishment or penalties assessed; and 
j.  One of the following: 
i.  A receipt from the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department evidencing that the applicant has (i) submitted fingerprint cards on Form FD258 or such other fingerprint card as is accepted by the Department of Justice and the Federal Bureau of Investigation; and (ii) paid any and all fees required to conduct a background check on the applicant, or 
ii.  A receipt evidencing that the applicant has (i) obtained electronic fingerprint scans, also known as Livescan, to the extent such technology is available, for the applicant; and (ii) paid any and all fees required to conduct a background check on the applicant, or 
iii.  A letter authorizing the city to utilize data retrieved pursuant to a background check completed within forty-five (45) days of the applicant's submission of the application to the city. Such authorization letter shall state the name and include the signature of the applicant and shall state the name of the jurisdiction or entity that conducted the previous background check. Data retrieved pursuant to a background check conducted by the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department shall be presumed valid. Data retrieved pursuant to a background check conducted by any other jurisdiction or entity shall be accepted upon approval by the city manager; 
k.  One of the following: 
i.  A receipt evidencing that the applicant has tested negative for each of the controlled substances identified in Part 40 (commencing with Section 40.1) of Title 4901 of the Code of Federal Regulations pursuant to a controlled substances test administered pursuant to the requirements of such regulations; or 
ii.  A letter authorizing the city to use data retrieved pursuant to a controlled substances test completed within forty-five (45) days of the applicant's submission of the application to the city. Such authorization letter shall include the name and the signature of the applicant and shall state the name of the jurisdiction or entity that conducted the previous controlled substances test. Data retrieved pursuant to a controlled substances test conducted by the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department shall be presumed valid. Data retrieved pursuant to a controlled substances test conducted by any other jurisdiction or entity shall be accepted upon approval by the city manager. 
l.  Such additional information as the city manager deems necessary. 
C.  Term of Towing Unit Driver's License. Towing unit driver's licenses shall be valid for a term of twelve (12) months commencing on the first day of the month when the license application and fee are received by the city manager. 
D.  License Fee. Each applicant shall pay an annual towing unit driver's license fee when application is made for the license. The city's issuance of a receipt to the applicant for payment of the fee shall not constitute the receipt of a towing unit driver's license. The fee shall be nonrefundable. The amount of the license fee shall cover the costs of processing the application and shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
1.  Error in Calculating Fee. In no case shall any error in calculating or in stating the amount of a towing unit driver's license fee prevent the collection of the correct amount due from any person driving or intending to drive a towing unit in the city. 
2.  License Fee a Debt. The amount of any towing unit driver's license fee or penalty imposed by this chapter shall constitute a debt to the city. 
3.  Refunds. Upon approval of the city manager, the finance director may refund any license fee or penalty erroneously collected. However, no license fee shall be refunded if the applicant engaged in driving a towing unit in the city prior to application for the license. 
E.  Due Date for License Fee. The license fee for a towing unit driver's license is due when the application is submitted to the city manager. The fee for renewal of all towing unit driver's licenses is due the first day of the month following the expiration date stated on the license. 
F.  Penalties. 
1.  Failure to Pay Fee. In the event of failure to pay a towing unit driver's license fee when due, the finance director shall add a penalty of twenty (20) percent of the license fee on the first day of the month following the due date, and ten (10) percent each month thereafter while the fee remains unpaid. In no event shall the amount of the penalty exceed fifty (50) percent of the amount of the license fee due. 
2.  Failure to Obtain Towing Unit Driver's License. If a person fails to obtain a towing unit driver's license, the license fee due shall be the amount due and payable from the first date when the person engaged in towing unit operation in the city, together with the penalty described in subsection (F)(1) of this section. 
G.  Issuance of Towing Unit Driver's License. Upon the approval of an application for a towing unit driver's license and payment of the required fee, the city manager shall issue a towing unit driver's license to the applicant. 
H.  Contents of License. Each towing unit driver's license issued shall contain: 
1.  The name and business address of the person to whom the license is issued; 
2.  The name of the current employer of the person to whom the license is issued; 
3.  The expiration date of the towing unit driver's license; 
4.  A photograph of the person to whom the towing unit driver's license is issued; 
5.  Such other information as deemed necessary and established by the city manager. 
I.  Investigation of Applicant. The city manager may require a criminal background investigation of any applicant by the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department as part of determining whether or not to issue a towing unit driver's license to the applicant. 
J.  Grounds for Denial of Towing Unit Driver's License. The city manager may deny a towing unit driver's license if: 
1.  The applicant is under the age of eighteen (18) years or is not competent to operate a towing unit safely on the city streets; 
2.  The applicant does not possess a heavy equipment operator's class A license issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles; 
3.  The applicant has been convicted of reckless driving or driving under the influence of alcohol or narcotics. If the applicant has a single conviction for reckless driving or driving under the influence, which conviction predates the application by more than ten (10) years, the applicant may seek special review of the applicant's application. The city manager may approve such an application upon a showing of rehabilitation and non-recidivism. The city manager shall not approve any application in which the applicant has been convicted more than once for reckless driving and/or driving under the influence and/or in which the conviction is dated within ten (10) years of the submission of the application. 
4.  The applicant has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to more than one moving violation under the California Vehicle Code within the preceding twelve (12) months; 
5.  Any of the following: 
a.  The applicant has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more crimes against persons. Crimes against persons shall include, but shall not be limited to, murder, manslaughter, robbery, rape or other sexual crimes, extortion, assault, or battery; or 
b.  The applicant has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more crimes against property during the preceding seven years. Crimes against property shall include, but shall not be limited to, burglary, grand theft, forgery and fraud; or 
c.  The applicant has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more drug-related crimes during the preceding seven years. Drug-related crimes shall include, but shall not be limited to, possession, sale or possession for sale of any Schedule I or Schedule II narcotic; or 
d.  Conviction or guilty plea to one or more crimes chargeable as a felony in the preceding twenty-four (24) months; or 
e.  The applicant has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to such other crimes as the city manager deems a threat to public safety. 
6.  The applicant tests positive for controlled substances and/or alcohol as set forth in Section 5.32.030(R) of this chapter. 
K.  Appeal. If an applicant for a towing unit driver's license is aggrieved by any decision of the city manager regarding the issuance, denial or revocation of a license, the applicant may appeal the decision by submitting a notice of appeal in accordance with the Uniform Appeal Procedure set forth in Chapter 2.44 of Title 2 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
L.  Transfer of Licenses. Towing unit driver's licenses issued pursuant to this chapter are not transferable. 
M.  Duplicate License. A duplicate towing unit driver's license may be issued by the city manager to replace any towing unit driver's license previously issued which has been lost or destroyed, upon filing a statement that the license has been lost or destroyed and paying a fee to the finance director. The fee shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
N.  Revocation of License. The city manager may revoke any towing unit driver's license issued under this chapter, for any of the following reasons: 
1.  The city manager determines that the licensee has obtained the license by misrepresentation or has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
2.  The city manager receives a negative recommendation from the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department, or any other jurisdiction or entity as designated by the city manager, regarding the licensee based upon data that reveals any of the following: 
a.  Conviction or guilty plea to one or more crimes against persons. Crimes against persons shall include, but shall not be limited to, murder, manslaughter, robbery, rape or other sexual crimes, extortion, assault, or battery; or 
b.  Conviction or guilty plea to two or more crimes against property during the preceding seven years. Crimes against property shall include, but shall not be limited to, burglary, grand theft, forgery and fraud; or 
c.  Conviction or guilty plea to two or more drug-related crimes during the preceding seven years. Drug-related crimes shall include, but shall not be limited to, possession, sale or possession for sale of any Schedule I or Schedule II narcotic; or 
d.  Conviction or guilty plea to one or more crimes chargeable as a felony in the preceding twenty-four (24) months; or 
e.  Conviction or guilty plea to such other crimes as the city manager deems a threat to public safety. 
3.  The applicant tests positive for controlled substances and/or alcohol as set forth in Section 5.32.030(R) of this chapter. 
O.  Termination of Employment. A towing unit driver's license shall be rendered void upon termination of the driver's employment. 
1.  The towing unit operator which employed the terminated towing unit driver shall notify the city within three working days of such termination. 
2.  Upon termination of employment, the towing unit driver shall return the towing unit driver's license to the city. 
P.  Regulatory Measure. The fee established pursuant to this chapter is for processing the applications required by this chapter. Persons required to pay a towing unit driver's license fee shall not be relieved from the payment of such fee under other provisions of the Lancaster Municipal Code and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of all other ordinances. 
Q.  Compliance With Other Laws. The payment of a towing unit driver's license fee and the issuance of a towing unit driver's license shall not entitle the licensee to operate towing units unless the licensee has complied with all requirements of this chapter and any other applicable federal, state or local regulations. 
(Ord. 860 Att. B (part), 2006: Ord. 763 § I (part), 1999)  
Chapter 5.34 - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
5.34.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the city of Lancaster's massage establishments regulations. 
(Ord. 868 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2007)  
5.34.020 - Findings and purpose. 
The city council finds and declares as follows: 
A.  Massage is a viable professional field offering the public valuable health and therapeutic services. 
B.  Properly trained massage therapists are a professional group providing a service to the community while contributing financially to the city and enhancing the local business environment. 
C.  The city is authorized, by virtue of the State Constitution, and Sections 51030 et seq. of the California Government Code, to regulate massage establishments by imposing reasonable standards relative to the skill and experience of massage operators, massage therapists and massage therapist trainees and reasonable conditions on the operation of a massage establishment. 
D.  It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to provide for the orderly regulation of massage establishments and massage therapists in the city by establishing certain minimum standards for the education and conduct of this type of business which will protect the public health and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
E.  The restrictions and requirements contained in this chapter reduce the burdens on the sheriff's personnel and permit the deployment of the sheriff's personnel such that more serious crimes may be prevented and more important laws be enforced. 
(Ord. 868 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2007)  
5.34.030 - Definitions. 
Unless the particular provision requires, the definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning, and application of words and phrases used in this chapter. 
"Acupressure" means the stimulation or sedation of specific meridian points and trigger points near the surface of the body by the use or pressure applied by the acupressurist in order to prevent or modify the perception of pain or to normalize physiological functions, including pain control. 
"Acupressurist" means a person who administers acupressure. 
"Certificate" means a certificate, issued by a recognized school of massage, certifying completion of the required curriculum in massage training. 
"City" means the city of Lancaster. 
"City council" means the city council of the city of Lancaster. 
"City manager" means the city manager of the city of Lancaster, or his/her designated representative. 
"Conviction" or "convicted" means a plea or verdict of guilty or a conviction following a plea of nolo contendere. 
"Customer area" means any area open to customers of the establishment. 
"Director" means the director of the housing and neighborhood revitalization or his or her designee. 
"Direct supervision" means supervision by a person such as a licensed professional who is present on the premises at all times the person being supervised is working. "Direct supervision" does not necessarily mean that the supervisor must be present in the same room as the employee being supervised, but must be on the premises and able to make a determination whether or not the employee being supervised is complying with the supervisor's instructions, required procedures and applicable standards. 
"Disqualifying conduct" means conduct by any person who: 
1.  Within ten (10) years immediately preceding the date of filing of the application in question or, in the case of revocation or suspension proceedings, within ten (10) years of the date of notice of a proceeding pursuant to Section 5.34.160, has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of: 
a.  Any misdemeanor or felony offense not described in subsection 3 of this definition which related directly to the operation of a massage establishment, whether as a massage establishment owner or operator, or as a massage therapist, or as a massage therapist trainee, or 
b.  Any misdemeanor felony the commission of which occurred on the premises of a massage establishment; or 
2.  Within ten (10) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application in question or, in the case of revocation or suspension proceedings, within ten (10) years of the date of notice of revocation or suspension hearing, whichever is applicable, has had any massage establishment, operator, therapist or trainee license or permit, which was issued by the state of California, or by any county or municipality, revoked; or 
3.  Has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of: 
a.  Any violation of Sections 220, 243.4, 261, 264.1, 266e, 266h, 266i, 315, 316, 318, or subdivision (b) of Section 647 of the California Penal Code, or 
b.  Conspiracy or attempt to commit any such offense, or 
c.  Any offense in a jurisdiction outside the state of California which is the equivalent of any of the offenses stated in this subsection, or 
d.  Any felony offense involving the sale of a controlled substance specified in Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058 of the California Health and Safety Code; or 
4.  Is required to register under the provisions of Section 290 of the California Penal Code; or 
5.  Has been subjected to a permanent injunction against the conducting or maintaining of a nuisance pursuant to Sections 11225 through 11235 of the California Penal Code, or any similar provisions of law in a jurisdiction outside the state of California; or 
6.  Has engaged in conduct which would constitute an offense as described in subsection 1 or 3 of this definition, within ten (10) years immediately prior to the filing of any application, or within ten (10) years of the date of notice of revocation or suspension, whichever is applicable. 
"Employee" means any person, including a manager, massage therapist or massage therapist trainee, who may render any service to or for the massage establishment permit holder or receives compensation from the massage establishment permit holder or his or her agent. 
"Health department" means the Los Angeles County Department of Health Services. 
"Manager" means the person(s) designated by the operator of the massage establishment to act as the representative and agent of the operator in managing day-to-day operations with the same liabilities and responsibilities. Evidence of management includes, but is not limited to, evidence that the individual has power to direct or hire and dismiss employees, control hours of operation, create policy or rules or purchase supplies. A manager may also be an owner. A manager must meet the standards and qualifications for a massage therapist license to qualify as a manager and obtain a massage therapist license. 
"Massage" means any method of treating the external parts of the body for remedial, hygienic, relaxation or medical purposes, whether by means of pressure on, friction against or stroking, kneading, tapping, pounding, vibrating, rubbing, or other manner of touching external parts of the body with the hands, or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance with or without supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniment, antiseptic, oil, powder, cream, ointment, or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice. Such services shall include, but are not limited to, any bath, electric or magnetic treatment, acupressure, shiatsu, alcohol rubs, facial massage, fomentations massage, and Russian, Swedish or Turkish baths and other similar actions. 
"Massage establishment" means any establishment having a fixed place of business where any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, joint venture or combination of individuals engages in, conducts, carries on or permits to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, for consideration, massages, as regular functions, including any establishment involving the provision of off-premises massage services, whether or not massage is performed on the premises. For purposes of this chapter, the term "massage establishment" may be applied to include establishments which offer or advertise themselves as providing "relaxation" or "tanning" where the essential nature of the interaction between the operator or employee and the customer involves "massage" as defined herein. The terms, names or phrases listed on business license or fictitious name application forms are not necessarily conclusive as to the nature of the business. 
"Massage therapist" or "massage therapist trainee" means any person who administers to another person a massage in exchange for anything of value whatsoever. For purposes of this chapter, an acupressurist shall be deemed a massage therapist. 
"Massage therapist license" means the permit required pursuant to this chapter to act as a massage therapist. 
"Operator" means all persons who have an ownership interest, in any manner whatsoever, in the massage establishment and shall include, without limitation, corporations, and each of its officers, directors and stockholders holding more than ten (10) percent of the stock of said corporation; partnerships and each of its partners; limited liability companies and each of its officers, directors and members as well as any other entity by which a massage establishment is operated. 
"Operator's permit" means the permit required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to operate or manage a massage establishment. 
"Owner" means the individual(s) whose name appears on the city business permit. 
"Person" means any individual, or corporation, partnership, association or other group or combination of individuals acting as an entity. 
"Professional massage/somatic association" means an association meeting each of the following requirements: 
1.  Has tax-exempt status pursuant to Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code; 
2.  Requires that its members meet minimum education requirements, including participation in at least five hundred (500) classroom hours in the study of anatomy, physiology, hygiene, sanitation, massage theory and practice and ethics of massage practices; 
3.  Offers and encourages participation in continuing education programs; 
4.  Has an established Code of Ethics and has enforcement procedures for the suspension and revocation of membership of persons violating the Code of Ethics; and 
5.  Is open to members of the general public meeting the requirements for membership on a national basis and, in fact, maintains a membership which reflects substantial national participation by persons engaged in the practice of therapeutic massage and is devoted to serving the interests of its members, the public, and the profession. 
"Public safety officer" means any sheriff deputy, community service officer or code enforcement officer. 
"Recognized school of massage" means any school or institution of learning which teaches the theory, ethics, practice, profession and work of massage, which school or institution of learning has one hundred (100) hours of nonrepetitive instruction and at least seventy-five (75) hours of demonstration and practice of massage techniques before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation from such school or institution of learning following the successful completion of such course has been approved pursuant to California Education Code Section 94915 and has obtained certification under any similar state certification program of another state, if such exists. Any school or institution of learning offering or allowing correspondence course credit not requiring actual attendance at class, or courses of a massage therapist not approved by the California Department of Education shall not be deemed a "recognized school of massage." The city has a right to confirm that the applicant has actually attended class in a recognized school. 
"Sheriff" means the sheriff of the county of Los Angeles, or designee thereof. 
"Sheriff's department" means the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department. 
(Ord. 868 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2007)  
5.34.040 - Operator's permit. 
A.  Permit Required. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to own or operate a massage establishment within the city without first obtaining an operator's permit pursuant to this chapter. A separate operator's permit shall be required for each separate massage establishment operated by such person. 
B.  Massage Establishment Regulations. 
1.  Massage establishments shall be located in a zoning district which permits such use. 
2.  All massage establishments required to obtain a permit under this chapter shall have a manager on the premises at all times the massage establishment is open. The operator of each massage establishment shall file a statement with the sheriff designating the person or persons with power to act as a manager. The operator and/or manager, shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with this chapter. All operators and/or managers must be able to communicate effectively with city regulatory officials. 
3.  Each operator shall post and maintain, in compliance with existing state and city laws, a readable sign identifying the premises as a massage establishment. The sign and the front of the business shall not be illuminated by strobe or flashing lights. Each operator and/or on-duty manager shall display the operator's permit or a copy thereof in a conspicuous public place in the lobby of the massage establishment. In addition, each operator and/or on-duty manager shall ensure the massage therapist license for each massage therapist employed or otherwise engaged in administrating and manages at the establishment (whether on duty or not) is conspicuously displayed in a public place in the lobby, and that each massage therapist is wearing or has in their possession the identification required by this chapter at all times when in the massage establishment. There must also be posted, on a daily basis in a conspicuous public place in the lobby, the name of the operator and/or on-duty manager, as well as all on-duty massage therapists. Finally, the hours of operation (which may provide that services are provided by appointment only) between the hours of five a.m. and ten (10) p.m. must be posted at the front entrance and must be clearly visible from the outside. 
4.  The operator and/or manager shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees while the employees are on the permitted premise. Any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator for purposes of determining whether the massage establishment permit shall be revoked, suspended, denied, or renewed. 
5.  No operator or manager shall employ any person as a massage therapist or allow any person to administer a massage in the establishment who does not have a valid massage therapist license issued pursuant to this chapter. Every operator and/or manager shall report to the sheriff any change of employees, whether by new or renewed employment, discharge or termination, on the form and in the manner required by the sheriff. The report shall contain the name of the employee and the date of hire or termination. The operator and/or manager shall deliver the permit and photo identification card of any massage technician no longer employed by the operator to the sheriff within five days of the end of said employment. 
6.  All persons employed in the massage establishment shall be professionally clothed with fully opaque, nontransparent material and shall provide complete covering from mid-thigh to three inches below the collar bone. 
7.  The operator and/or manager shall maintain a register of all employees, showing the name, nicknames, and aliases used by the employee, home address, age, birth date, sex, height, weight, color of hair and eyes, phone numbers, social security number, date of employment and termination, if any, and duties of each employee. The above information on each employee shall be maintained in the register on the premises for a period of two years following termination of employment. The operator and/or manager shall make the register of employees available immediately for inspection by any public safety officer, upon demand, during business hours. 
8.  Each operator shall post and maintain a list of services available and the cost of such services in a conspicuous public place within the premises. No operator or responsible managing employee shall permit, and no massage therapist shall offer to perform, any service other than those posted. 
9.  Each operator shall provide in each room where massage is given sufficient lighting and ventilation that complies with the Uniform Building Code. The lighting in each massage room shall have at least one twenty-five (25) watt light activated at all times while the patron is in such room or enclosure. 
10.  All facilities for the massage establishment must be in good repair and shall be thoroughly cleaned and sanitized each day the business is in operation. Each operator and/or on-duty manager shall provide and maintain on the premises adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments used in massage. 
11.  Common use of towels or linen shall not be permitted. Towels and linen shall be laundered or changed promptly after each use. Clean and soiled linen shall be stored separately. 
12.  No electrical, mechanical or artificial device shall be used by the operator or any employee of the massage establishment for audio and/or video recording or for monitoring the performance of a massage, or the conversation or other sounds in the massage rooms without the knowledge and consent of the patron. 
13.  The owner must advise the city, in writing, at the time of application of a permit of the business hours and any changes in hours. No person shall operate a massage establishment or administer a massage in any massage establishment between the hours of ten (10) p.m. and five a.m. A massage begun before ten (10) p.m. must nevertheless terminate at ten (10) p.m. All customers, patrons shall be excluded from the massage establishment during these hours and be advised of these hours. The hours of operation must be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the lobby within the massage establishment and at the front entrance clearly visible from the outside. 
14.  No massage establishment granted a permit under this chapter shall place, publish or distribute, or cause to be placed, published or distributed, any advertising matter that depicts any portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective patrons that any service is available other than those services described in this chapter. Nor shall any massage establishment employ language in the text of such advertising that would reasonably suggest to a prospective patron that any service is available other than those services authorized by this chapter. 
15.  No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on the business of a massage establishment unless there is on file with the director, in full force and effect at all times, documents issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state of California evidencing that the massage establishment is insured under a liability insurance policy providing minimum coverage of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for injury or death to one person arising out of the operation of any massage establish and the administration of a massage. 
16.  Proof of compliance with all applicable provisions of the Lancaster Municipal Code shall be provided. 
17.  A massage establishment must comply with all state and federal laws and regulations for handicapped customers. 
18.  The operator and/or on-duty manager consents to the inspection of the massage establishment by the city's building and safety, fire department and sheriff's department and the county health department for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this chapter or other applicable laws or regulations are met. 
19.  The sheriff may require that the following notice be posted in the event that any employee of the massage establishment or any person who has aided and abetted an employee of the massage establishment has been found, after full hearing by administrative proceeding or state court, to have been convicted of the offenses included in the definition of disqualifying offenses: 
NOTICE TO ALL PATRONS 
THE MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT AND THE MASSAGE ROOMS DO NOT PROVIDE COMPLETE PRIVACY AND ARE SUBJECT TO INSPECTION BY THE LOS ANGELES COUNTY SHERIFF'S DEPARTMENT WITHOUT PRIOR NOTICE. 
a.  The notice set forth above shall be prepared and issued by the director. 
b.  The notices shall be conspicuously posted in a location within the massage establishment that are easily visible to any person entering the premises and in each massage room. The notice shall be so posted for twelve (12) months following the violation of any of the offenses set forth above. 
c.  The requirements for posting the notice described in this section is cumulative and in addition to all other remedies, violations and penalties set forth in this chapter, or in the ordinances, rules, or regulations of the city of Lancaster, County of Los Angeles and the state of California. 
(Ord. 868 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2007)  
5.34.050 - Massage therapist permit. 
A.  Permit Required. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to perform or administer a massage for compensation of any kind, or advertise to provide massage services in the city of Lancaster, unless such person possesses a valid massage therapist license issued pursuant to this chapter. The permit holder shall possess a photo identification and shall ensure that his or her massage therapist license is displayed in a conspicuous place in the lobby. Each permit holder shall immediately surrender to the sheriff or director any identification badge and massage therapist license issued by the city upon the suspension, revocation or expiration of such permit. 
B.  Qualifications. No massage therapist license will be issued unless the applicant meets one of the following two criteria: 
1.  Holds and maintains a current national certification of the type which require that the massage therapist pass an independently prepared and administered national certification exam which has been recognized by objective standards to fairly evaluate professional levels of skill, safety and competence, as determined by the National Commission for Certifying Agencies (NCCA) or a similar certifying body. 
2.  Satisfies one of the following conditions: 
a.  Has completed five hundred (500) hours of instruction in the massage specialty and health enhancement approach from a recognized school of massage as defined in Section 5.34.030 or classes in massage therapy and related topics offered through state approved colleges and universities and has a certificate of graduation; 
b.  Has a business license issued pursuant to Chapter 5.04 prior to the effective date of this chapter and has completed a minimum of two hundred fifty (250) hours of such training from an approved school and proof of two hundred fifty (250) hours of additional training in: 
i.  Continuing educational classes in the massage field and related classes offered by a recognized school of massage as defined in Section 5.34.030, 
ii.  Classes and workshops as in subsection (B)(1) of this section approved by the Board of Registered Nurses for nursing CE credit or approved in Category A by the National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork (NCBTMB), 
iii.  Programs as in subsection (B)(1) of this section approved and certified by a qualifying professional massage/somatic association as defined by Section 5.34.030, or 
iv.  Adult education classes in massage and related topics offered through state approved colleges and universities; or 
c.  Has a business license issued pursuant to Chapter 5.04 prior to the effective date of this chapter and has completed a minimum of one hundred (100) hours of such training from an approved school, and proof of one hundred fifty (150) hours additional training as provided in subsection (B)(2)(b) of this section, and in addition, two hundred fifty (250) hours of practical experience. Proof of practical experience may include, but is not limited to, 1040 tax returns or W-2 tax forms provided to the applicant and certified by the employing professional and documentation of hours; 
d.  Has a business license issued pursuant to Chapter 5.04 prior to the effective date of this chapter and has completed a minimum of one hundred (100) hours of such training from an approved school, five hundred (500) hours of practical experience, and proof of enrollment in additional training described in subsection (B)(2)(b) of this section for not less than thirty (30) hours per year until such time as the person has completed not less than four hundred (400) hours of such additional training. Proof of practical experience may include, but is not limited to, 1040 tax returns or W-2 tax forms provided to the applicant and certified by the employing professional and documentation of hours. Any permit issued pursuant to this subsection shall be conditional until the requirements have been met and may be revoked at anytime the applicant fails to complete at least thirty (30) hours in each annual period. 
C.  Massage Therapist Regulations. All massage therapists shall comply with the following conditions and regulations: 
1.  Massage therapists shall comply with all applicable ordinances, laws, rules and regulations; 
2.  Except as provided in Section 5.34.100, no massage therapist permitted pursuant to this chapter may conduct any massage or massage services in any locations other than the location specified on the permit; 
3.  No massage services shall be performed within any cubicle, room, booth or other area in a massage establishment with a locked door. Nothing herein shall prevent the massage therapist, for security purposes, from locking an exterior door while performing massage services; 
4.  No massage services shall be performed other than those posted in compliance with Section 5.34.040(B)(3) of this chapter; 
5.  All arrangements for services to be performed shall be made in a room in the massage establishment which is not used for administration of massage services, baths or health treatments, such as a reception area; 
6.  Arrangements shall be made for all massage services prior to the performance of any service; 
7.  All persons acting as a massage therapist shall be professionally clothed with fully opaque, nontransparent material and shall provide complete covering from mid-thigh to three inches below the collar bone; 
8.  No massage therapist shall, in the course of administering any massage service, expose his or her genitals, pubic region, private parts or female breasts below a point immediately above the areolas. No massage therapist shall, in the course of administering any massage service, bath or health treatment, make physical contact with the genitals, pubic region, or female breasts below a point immediately above the areolas of any other person. No massage therapist shall allow any person in the course of receiving any massage, bath or health treatment, to expose to the view of other persons his or her genitals, pubic region, or female breasts below a point immediately above the areolas. 
(Ord. 868 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2007)  
5.34.060 - Reserved.  
5.34.070 - Application for operator's license. 
A.  Any person desiring an operator's permit for a massage establishment shall file a written application on the required form with the director who shall refer the application to sheriff's department for investigation. The applicant shall provide any and all information requested by the sheriff's department to complete their investigation. The application shall be accompanied by the appropriate filing fee established by resolution of the city council. An application for an operator's permit shall be completed and signed by the operator of the proposed massage establishment in connection with an initial application, or the massage establishment in connection with a renewal application, if a sole proprietor; one general partner, if the operator is a partnership; one officer or one director, if the operator is a corporation; and one participant, if the operator is a joint venture. The application for permit does not authorize operation of a massage establishment unless and until such permit has been properly granted. 
B.  The application shall contain or be accompanied by the following information: 
1.  The following information concerning the applicant: 
a.  Full complete name and all aliases used by the applicant, 
b.  Current address and all previous residential addresses for ten (10) years immediately preceding the present address of the applicant, 
c.  Acceptable proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age, 
d.  Height, weight, color of hair, eyes and gender, 
e.  Two front faced photographs at least two inches by two inches in size, 
f.  The applicant's complete business, occupation and employment history for ten (10) years preceding the date of application, including, without limitation, the massage or similar business history and experience of the applicant, 
g.  The complete massage permit history of the applicant; whether such person has ever had any permit issued by any agency, board, city, county, territory, or state; the date of issuance of such a permit, whether the permit was denied, revoked or suspended; and the reason therefor, 
h.  All criminal convictions, including pleas of nolo contendere, within the last ten (10) years including those dismissed or expunged pursuant to Section 1203.4 of the California Penal Code, but excluding minor traffic violations, and the date and place of each such conviction and reason therefor; 
2.  One of the following: 
a.  A receipt evidencing that the applicant has: (i) obtained an electronic fingerprint scan, also known as Livescan, and (ii) paid any and all fees required to conduct a criminal history check, 
b.  Authorization for the city of Lancaster to utilize data retrieved pursuant to a criminal history check completed by the sheriff's department within forty-five (45) days of the applicant's submission of its application to the city of Lancaster. Data received pursuant to a background check conducted by the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department shall be presumed valid; 
3.  Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek verification of the information contained in the application; 
4.  A statement in writing and dated by the applicant that he or she certifies under penalty of perjury that all information contained in the application is true and correct; 
5.  Statements in writing and dated by the applicant certifying under penalty of perjury that he or she: (a) has received a copy of this chapter; (b) understands its contents; and (c) understands the duties of an operator or massage therapist, as the case may be, as provided in this chapter; 
6.  If, during the term of a permit, a permit holder has any change in information submitted on the original or renewal application, the permit holder shall notify the director of such changes within ten (10) business days thereafter, in writing. 
C.  In addition to the requirements of Section 5.34.050(B), each application for an operator's permit shall contain the following information: 
1.  The type of ownership of the business, i.e., whether by individual, partnership, corporation or otherwise. If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter together with the state and date of incorporation and the names and residence addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and of each shareholder. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the name and residence addresses of each of the partners, including limited partners. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated person shall complete and sign all application forms required for an individual applicant under this chapter, but only one application fee shall be charged; 
2.  If the applicant is a partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or other business entity, the applicant must furnish one copy of the document establishing or creating the entity, e.g., a corporation must furnish a copy of its articles of incorporation, a limited partnership must furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership, and a limited liability company must furnish a copy of its articles of organization; 
3.  The precise name under which the massage establishment is to be conducted; 
4.  The complete address and all telephone numbers of the massage establishment; 
5.  A complete and current list of the names and residence addresses of all proposed massage therapists and employees in the massage establishment and the name and residence address of the manager(s) or managing employee(s) proposed to be principally in charge of the operation of the massage establishment; 
6.  A description of any other business operated on the same premise, or within the city of Lancaster or the state of California which is owned or operated by the applicant; 
7.  The name and address of each person having an ownership interest in the real property upon or in which the business is to be conducted. In the event the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, the application must be accompanied by a copy of the lease and a notarized acknowledgment from the owner(s) of the property or the owner's authorized representative that a massage establishment will be located on the property; 
8.  Statements in writing and dated by the applicant's manager(s) certifying under penalty of perjury that they: (a) have received a copy of this chapter; (b) understand its contents; and (c) understand the duties of a manager, as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 868 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2007)  
5.34.080 - Application for massage therapist's permit. 
A.  Any person desiring a massage therapist's permit shall file a written application on the required form with the director who shall refer the application to sheriff's department for investigation. The applicant shall provide any and all information requested by the sheriff's department to complete their investigation. The application shall be accompanied by the appropriate filing fee established by resolution of the city council. An application for a massage therapist's permit shall be completed and signed by the individual applicant. The application for permit does not authorize the practice of massage therapy unless and until such permit has been properly granted. 
In addition to the requirements of Section 5.34.050(B), each application for a massage therapist license shall contain the following information: 
1.  Name, residence address and telephone number; the previous addresses of applicant, if any, for a period of ten (10) years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each; 
2.  Social security number and driver's license number, if any; 
3.  Applicant's weight, height, color of hair and eyes; 
4.  Two prints of a recent passport-size photograph of applicant; 
5.  Written evidence that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
6.  Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. This information shall include, but not limited to, a statement as to whether or not the applicant, in working as a massage or bodywork technician or similar occupation under a permit or license, has had such permit or license revoked or suspended, and the reasons therefor; 
7.  The name and address of the recognized school attended, the dates attended, and a copy of the diploma or certificate of completion awarded the applicant. All applicants may be required to furnish additional evidence of enrollment and attendance of the required class hours or if such evidence is not available are subject to an oral interview by the permit administrator or his or her appointee to establish the bona fide completion of educational requirements; 
8.  The complete massage permit history of the applicant; whether such person has ever had any permit issued by any agency, board, city, county, territory, or state; the date of issuance of such a permit, whether the permit was denied, revoked or suspended; and the reason therefor; 
9.  All criminal convictions, including pleas of nolo contendere, within the last ten (10) years including those dismissed or expunged pursuant to Section 1203.4 of the California Penal Code, but excluding minor traffic violations, and the date and place of each such conviction and reason therefor; 
10.  A statement of the location or locations at which the applicant will be working as a massage therapist, including the full street address and all telephone numbers associated with each location, and the full name of every person having an ownership interest in the establishment or business; 
11.  Such other identification and information as the city may require in order to discover the truth of the matters required to be set forth in the application. 
(Ord. 868 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2007)  
5.34.090 - Permit issuance and denial—Conditions of approval. 
A.  Upon receipt of a written application for a permit, the director shall conduct an investigation to ascertain whether such permit should be issued as requested. The director shall, within sixty (60) days of receipt of the application, approve, conditionally approve or deny the application. The sixty (60) day period may be extended for up to thirty (30) additional days, if necessary, to complete the investigation. The director shall issue such permit as requested, unless he or she makes any of the following findings: 
1.  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the officers or directors of the corporation, if the applicant is a corporation; or a partner, if the applicant is a partnership, or any person directly engaged or employed in the massage establishment, has within eight years preceding the date of the application has been convicted for any violation described in the definition of disqualifying conduct in Section 5.34.030; 
2.  The applicant has made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement or omission of fact to the city in the permit application process; 
3.  The application does not contain all of the information required by Section 5.34.050; 
4.  In the case of an applicant for an operator's permit, the massage establishment, as proposed by the applicant, does not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, health, zoning, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
5.  The applicant has not satisfied the requirements of this chapter in the time specified; 
6.  The applicant has not paid the required fee; 
7.  If the application is denied for failure to comply with subsection (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section, the applicant may not reapply for a period of six months from the date the application was denied. 
B.  All operators and managers shall comply with the provisions of Section 5.34.040 and any other applicable provision of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
C.  All massage therapists shall comply with all provisions of Section 5.34.050(C) and any other applicable provision of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 868 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2007)  
5.34.100 - Off-premises massage. 
A.  No person shall conduct, participate or engage in any massage in any public place, with or without consideration, unless such person is licensed as a massage therapist pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  Any massage therapist proposing to engage in the practice of off-premises massage, in addition to identifying the massage establishment where the applicant is to be employed and related information, shall provide a brief description of the practice to be engaged in, including, but not necessarily limited to, information as to the types of locations at which such off-premises massage normally would be provided and whether such services are typically to be provided upon referral by medical professionals, through general advertisement or other means. 
C.  Massage therapist engaging in the business of off-premises massage shall comply with the provisions of Sections 5.34.050 and 5.34.070, in addition to complying with the following requirements: 
1.  The practice of off-premises massage shall not be conducted between the hours of ten (10) p.m. and five a.m.; and 
2.  Any persons performing off-premises massage services as authorized by this chapter shall maintain written record, at the massage therapist's principal place of business, of all off-premises massage services performed. These records shall be retained for at least two years beyond the date services were provided. Record shall be made of each appointment at which massage services were provided and shall include; 
a.  Date and time, 
b.  Patron's full name and address, 
c.  Address where services were provided, 
d.  Name of the massage therapist providing services; 
3.  These records shall be open to inspection upon request only by officials charged with enforcement of this chapter or emergency medical personnel. Information within these records shall only be used to ensure compliance with this chapter, or any other applicable state or federal laws, or as necessary in providing emergency medical treatment, and shall remain confidential; 
4.  Any massage therapist engaged in performing off-premises massage shall, upon demand, produce satisfactory evidence to any public safety officer that his or her license is current; 
5.  Off-premises massage services shall not be provided at any location owned, leased, rented or under the control of the massage therapist, including residential dwellings and business offices, unless that location is licensed as a massage establishment or is otherwise exempted as provided in this chapter; 
6.  Off-premises massage, for purposes of this chapter, shall be construed to include massages performed in or at malls, in private offices or other places of business for the employees of that business, or in a private residence for the occupants of said residence. 
(Ord. 868 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2007)  
5.34.110 - Change of business. 
A.  Every massage establishment operator shall report immediately to the director any and all changes of ownership or management of the massage establishment or business, including, but not limited to, changes of manager or other person principally in charge, shareholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation, officers, directors and partners in any and all changes of name, style or designation under which the business is to be conducted, and all changes of address or telephone numbers of the massage establishment. A change of location of any of the premises may be approved by the director provided there is compliance with all applicable regulations of the city of Lancaster. 
B.  No massage therapist license or establishment permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by a permit, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the permit is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such permit, and in such case, the permit, upon notification to the director, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partners. A massage establishment permit issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of the permit, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a permit is thereafter issued or sold, transferred or assigned. No massage therapist license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a permit, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. 
(Ord. 868 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2007)  
5.34.120 - Fees. 
The city council shall establish by resolution, and from time to time may amend, the fees for the administration of this chapter. Fees required by this chapter shall be in addition to any required under any other chapter of this code. 
(Ord. 868 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2007)  
5.34.130 - Exemptions. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following classes of individuals while engaged in the performance of the duties of their respective professions: 
1.  State licensed physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, acupuncturists, physical therapists or osteopaths; 
2.  Barbers who are duly permitted under the laws of the state of California while engaging in the practices within the scope of their permits, except that this exemption shall apply solely to the massage of the neck, face, scalp, and hair of a fully clothed customer or client; 
3.  Hospitals, nursing homes, or sanatoriums duly permitted by the state; 
4.  Coaches and trainers of amateur, semi-professional or professional athletes or athletic teams acting within the scope of their employment; 
5.  Coaches and trainers acting within the scope of their employment by accredited high schools, junior colleges, and colleges and universities; 
6.  Manicurists, pedicurists, cosmetologists acting within the scope of their employment, except that this exemption shall apply solely to the massaging of the hands or feet of a fully clothed customer or client; 
7.  Teachers and students performing massage as part of the official curriculum of a recognized school of massage, while present at such school, and provided the director has verified its status as a recognized school of massage. This exemption applies only to massage for which no direct or indirect fee or cost is charged or incurred, and/or for which no donation is required or accepted. 
B.  A massage therapist licensed pursuant to Sections 5.34.050(A) and also operating a massage establishment is exempt from the requirements of Section 5.34.040(A), subject to the following conditions and restrictions: 
1.  The massage therapist must currently hold a valid massage therapist license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
2.  The massage therapist must be the only person with any ownership interest in the massage establishment, i.e., the massage therapist is a sole proprietor or is the sole shareholder of the corporation operating the massage establishment. 
3.  The massage therapist has filed a written notice on the required form with the director indicating that the massage therapist claims to be exempt pursuant to this subsection. The notice shall be completed and signed under penalty or perjury by the massage therapist who will be acting as the sole operator of the proposed massage establishment. Upon receipt of the notice, the director may conduct an investigation to ensure the requirements and conditions of the exemption have been satisfied. 
C.  A bona fide health club, athletic club, gym, hotel with fifty (50) or more rooms, beauty salon, barber shop or other similar establishment, may offer massage services as an accessory use and is exempt from the requirements of Section 5.34.030(A), subject to the following conditions and restrictions: 
1.  The massage service shall be clearly incidental to the operation of the business and shall not occupy more than twenty (20) percent of the gross floor area. In no case shall massage services occupy more than one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
2.  The massage services shall constitute no more than twenty (20) percent of the gross business income of the establishment. 
3.  The establishment must have any required zoning approval and must identify massage services as a part of the business. 
4.  Any massage therapist who provides massage services must register his or her name and massage therapist license number with the owner or manager of the establishment. 
5.  All massage therapists must hold a valid massage therapist license issued pursuant to Section 5.34.050(A). 
(Ord. 868 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2007)  
5.34.140 - Transfer and duration of permits. 
A.  No permit issued hereunder shall be transferable to any other person or establishment; provided, however, an additional location or change of location of a massage therapist license will be allowed upon prior written notice to the director and payment of the appropriate transfer fee. 
B.  Permits for massage operators, managers and therapists shall be renewed on a year-to-year basis provided that the permit continues to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
C.  Applications for the next ensuing permit shall be filed with the director before the expiration of the existing permit. Temporary permits will not be issued and renewal applications must be filed no later than sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the permit to prevent a lapse of the permit. 
D.  Renewal applications shall require such information as may be required by the director to update the information contained in the original permit application. The applicant shall accompany the application for renewal with the appropriate filing fee. 
(Ord. 868 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2007)  
5.34.150 - Application to existing businesses. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and businesses described herein whether the herein described activities were established before or after the effective date of this chapter, except that massage establishments legally in business prior to the effective date of the ordinance first enacting this chapter for which a business license has been issued shall have to comply with the regulations for massage establishments and massage therapists set forth herein upon expiration of the existing business license. 
(Ord. 868 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2007)  
5.34.160 - Suspension, revocation, denial and appeal. 
A.  Violation and Noncompliance. The director may refuse to renew a permit or may revoke or suspend an existing permit on the grounds that the applicant or permit has failed to comply with the permit conditions or other requirements of this chapter. If a suspended permit lapses during the suspension period, a new application must be made at the end of the suspension period. In any such case, the applicant or permit shall have the right to appeal to the city council in the time and manner set forth in this section. 
B.  Revocation and Suspension of Operator's Permit. 
1.  The director may revoke or refuse to renew an operator's permit if he or she makes any of the findings for denial of a permit under Section 5.34.080 or upon any subsequent violation of any provision within one year following prior suspension under subsection (B)(2) of this section, or upon demonstrated inability to operate or manage the massage establishment in a law abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
2.  The director may suspend an operator's permit for a period of thirty (30) days for each violation of Section 5.34.040(B) or (C). 
C.  Revocation and Suspension of Massage Therapist License. 
1.  The director may revoke or refuse to renew a massage therapist license if he or she makes any of the findings for denial of a permit under Section 5.34.080, or upon any subsequent violation of any provision within one year following prior suspension under subsection (C)(2) of this section. 
2.  The director may suspend a massage therapist license for a period of thirty (30) days for each violation of Section 5.34.050(C). 
D.  Notice. When the director concludes that grounds for denial, suspension, revocation or refusal to renew a permit exist, the director shall serve the applicant or permit, either personally or by certified mail addressed to the business or residence address of the applicant or permit, with a notice of denial or notice of intent to suspend, revoke or refuse to renew permit. This notice shall state the reasons for the proposed action, the effective date of the decision, the right of the applicant or permit to appeal the decision to the city council and the decision will be final if no appeal is filed within the time permitted. 
E.  Appeal. 
1.  Any appeal shall be filed in accordance with the uniform appeals procedure set forth in Chapter 2.44 of the code. 
2.  In the event an appeal is timely filed, a revocation is stayed and shall not be effective until a final decision has been rendered by the city council. A suspension, however, is not stayed by the filing of a notice to appeal. If no appeal is filed, the suspension or revocation shall become effective upon expiration of the period for filing appeals. 
3.  No permit granted herein shall confer any vested right to any person or business for more than the permit period. All massage operators, managers and therapists subject to this chapter shall comply with the provisions of this chapter as they may be amended hereafter. 
(Ord. 868 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2007)  
5.34.170 - Burden of proof at hearings. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided by law, the burden is on the applicant or permit in any hearing under this chapter to prove that the determination of the director, which he or she is appealing, is contrary to the provisions of this chapter or clearly abusive of discretion. 
(Ord. 868 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2007)  
5.34.180 - Violation and penalty. 
A.  Violations of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable in the manner provided in Section 1.12.020(A). 
B.  Any massage establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be, and the same is hereby declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance. The city attorney or the district attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecution in a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law, and shall take such other steps, and shall apply to such courts or court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such massage establishments and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a massage establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 868 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2007)  
5.34.190 - Severability. 
This chapter and the various parts, sections and clauses thereof are declared severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby. The city council declares that it would have passed this chapter and each part thereof, regardless of the fact that one or more parts thereof be declared unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. 868 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2007)  
Chapter 5.36 - OFF-SITE AUTOMOBILE SALES 
 
5.36.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Automobile" shall mean cars, light trucks, motorcycles, mopeds, and other similar forms of motorized vehicular transport. 
"Director" shall mean the director of community development. 
"Off-site sales" shall mean any sale of 3 or more automobiles at a location not open for automobile sales business during regular business hours on a year-round basis. 
"Temporary use" shall mean any use for 3 or fewer consecutive days. 
(Ord. 799 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.020 - Decision-maker. 
Decisions as to the approval or denial of temporary use permits for off-site automobile sales shall be made by the director or by such individual as is designated by the director. 
(Ord. 799 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.030 - Limitation on number. 
Issuance of temporary use permits for off-site automobile sales by the director shall be limited to 4 permits total per calendar year in the city as a whole. 
(Ord. 799 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.040 - Findings. 
The following findings must be made prior to approval of a temporary use permit for off-site automobile sales by the director: 
A.  The proposed temporary automobile sale will be located, operated, and maintained in a manner consistent with each of the applicable provisions of the code, including the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The proposed site shall be fully improved and shall be located within a commercial or industrial zone. 
C.  The proposed temporary automobile sale will not be detrimental to property or improvements in the surrounding area or to the public health, safety, or welfare. 
D.  The proposed temporary automobile sale will have no significant adverse environmental effects. 
E.  The proposed site is adequately served by streets or highways having sufficient width and improvements to accommodate the kind and quantity of traffic that the temporary use will or reasonably might generate. 
F.  Adequate temporary parking to accommodate vehicular traffic to be generated by the use will be available either on-site or at alternate locations acceptable to the director. 
G.  The permit's applicant has paid all required fees and deposits owed to the city, both related to the applied-for permit and to any other matter, in a timely manner, including any past-due payments for other permits if applicable. 
(Ord. 799 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.050 - Conditions. 
In approving an application for a temporary use permit for off-site automobile sales, the director may impose conditions that are deemed necessary to ensure that the permit will be in accordance with the findings required by Section 5.36.040. These conditions may include, but are not limited to: 
A.  Provision of temporary parking facilities, including vehicular ingress and egress; 
B.  Regulation of nuisance factors such as prevention of glare or direct illumination of adjacent properties, noise, vibration, smoke, dust, dirt, odors, gases, and heat; 
C.  Regulation of temporary structures and facilities, including placement, height, size, and location of equipment, tents, or open spaces, including buffer areas and other yards; 
D.  Provision of sanitary facilities, solid waste collection, and disposal; 
E.  Provision of security or safety measures, including adequate lighting; 
F.  Regulation of size and location of signs; 
G.  Regulation of operating hours and days, including limitation of the duration of the temporary use to a shorter time period than that requested; 
H.  Submission of a performance bond or other security to assure that any temporary facilities or structures used for the proposed temporary use will be removed from the site following the event and that the property will be restored to its former condition; 
I.  Any other conditions which will ensure the operation of the proposed temporary use in an orderly and efficient manner and in accordance with the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(Ord. 799 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.060 - Effective date and duration. 
A temporary use permit for off-site automobile sales shall be effective for the dates specified by the director, not to exceed 3 days plus such time as the director approves for setting up and dismantling the site, unless otherwise specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 799 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.070 - Decision. 
For all temporary use permits for off-site automobile sales, the director shall prepare a written decision within ten (10) calendar days of the date a completed application is filed. The decision shall contain the findings of fact upon which the decision is made. 
(Ord. 799 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.080 - Revocation. 
A temporary use permit for off-site automobile sales may be revoked by the director effective immediately upon verbal or written notice for violation of the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. 799 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.090 - Modification. 
The director may require changes in the terms or conditions of an approved temporary use permit for off-site automobile sales at any time while it is in effect, if needed, to ensure that the use may continue to operate consistent with the required findings. 
(Ord. 799 § 1 (part), 2001)  
5.36.100 - Appeal. 
The director's decision to approve or deny an application for a temporary use permit for off-site vehicle sales, or to revoke or modify an approved temporary use permit for off-site automobile sales, may be appealed to the city council in accordance with the uniform appeal procedure set forth in Chapter 2.44. 
(Ord. 799 § 1 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 5.38 - BURGLAR ALARMS 
 
5.38.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the words hereinafter defined are used as so defined unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
A.  "Alarm owner" means the person who owns, leases, rents, uses or makes available for use by his agents, employees, representatives or family, any alarm system. 
B.  "Alarm system" means any device whether known as a burglary, robbery or intrusion alarm, direct-dial telephone device, audible or silent alarm, or by any building, structure or facility, or to signal the commission of an unlawful act. It shall include those devices which emit a signal within the protected premises only, are supervised by the proprietor of the premises where located, and are otherwise known as "proprietary alarm systems." Auxiliary devices installed by a telephone company to protect telephone company systems are not included in this definition. C. "Audible alarm" means a device designed to notify persons in the immediate vicinity of the protected premises, by emission of an audible sound, of an unauthorized entry on the premises or of the commission of an unlawful act. 
D.  "Direct dial service" means a device which is connected to a telephone line, upon activation of an alarm system automatically dials a predetermined telephone number and transmits a message of signal indicating a need for emergency response. 
E.  "False alarm" means an alarm signal activated by causes other than the commission or attempted commission of an unlawful act which the alarm system is designed to detect and/or report; and which results in a requested and/or actual response by the sheriff department. False alarms include, but are not limited to, the activation of an alarm system because of mechanical failure, preventable accident, improper operation, misuse, malfunction, improper negligence of carelessness of the alarm user. An alarm signal activated by violent conditions of nature other than extraordinary circumstances not subject to the control of the alarm owner shall not constitute a false alarm. 
(Ord. 805 § 1 (part), 2002)  
5.38.020 - Audible alarm requirements. 
The alarm owner of every audible alarm within the city shall post in a conspicuous place near the front entrance of the protected premises the names and telephone numbers of the persons to be notified during any hour of the day or night during which the audible alarm is operated. An audible alarm shall terminate its operation or the audible alarm shall automatically reset within thirty (30) minutes of its being activated. 
(Ord. 805 § 1 (part), 2002)  
5.38.030 - Direct-dial telephone device. 
The use of an alarm system which is equipped with a direct-dial device and which, when activated, automatically dials any telephone number in any office of the sheriff department, is hereby prohibited. 
(Ord. 805 § 1 (part), 2002)  
5.38.040 - False alarm. 
The knowing commission of a false alarm is hereby prohibited. This section does not prohibit any test of an alarm system as permitted in advance by the sheriff department. 
(Ord. 805 § 1 (part), 2002)  
5.38.050 - Report and repair. 
After any false alarm, the alarm owner shall, upon request by the sheriff department, submit a written report to the sheriff department describing actions to be taken to eliminate the cause of the false alarm. This shall be submitted within ten (10) days of the date of request by the sheriff department. 
(Ord. 805 § 1 (part), 2002)  
5.38.060 - Public nuisance alarm. 
An alarm system that generates more than two false alarms in any twelve (12) month period, beginning January 1, is declared to be a public nuisance and operation of this system is prohibited. 
(Ord. 805 § 1 (part), 2002)  
5.38.070 - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter are not applicable to audible alarms affixed to motor vehicles or to a public telephone utility whose only duty is to furnish telephone service pursuant to tariffs on file with the California Public Utilities Commission. 
(Ord. 805 § 1 (part), 2002)  
5.38.080 - Violations. 
A.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter other than Section 5.38.040 is guilty of an infraction, which is punishable as provided in Section 1.12.020. 
B.  Violation of Section 5.38.040 is a misdemeanor, which is punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
C.  Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, upon the first and second violation of Section 5.38.060 in a calendar year beginning January 1, the sheriff department shall serve a written notice (in triplicate) to the alarm owner, to the city, and to the sheriff department indicating that property location, date of false alarm and other information necessary to track false alarms. The city will retain copies and track all subsequent false alarms for that alarm user. The notice will describe the violation and specify that the causes of the violation shall be corrected within ten (10) days of the date of service of the written notice. 
(Ord. 805 § 1 (part), 2002)  
5.38.090 - Appeal process. 
Any person receiving monetary charges for false alarm responses may appeal. A written appeal must be submitted to the city manager or his designee. Decisions of the city manager or his designee are final. 
(Ord. 805 § 1 (part), 2002)  
5.38.100 - Fees. 
A service charge in an amount established by the city council by resolution shall be levied for each sheriff department response to an alarm determined to be false, after the first two false alarms. The city's finance department shall invoice and collect these service charges in the same manner as other debts owed to the city. 
(Ord. 805 § 1 (part), 2002)  
5.38.110 - Compliance required. 
Any alarm installed prior to the effective date of this chapter shall comply with all provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 805 § 1 (part), 2002)  
Chapter 5.39 - FIRE ALARMS 
 
5.39.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the words hereinafter defined are used as so defined unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
A.  "Alarm system" for purposes of this chapter means an assembly of equipment and devices arranged to signal the presence of any condition upon premises within the city of Lancaster to which the firefighters are expected to respond. The term "alarm system" shall include any equipment which is designed to detect an emergency or which is designed to be activated by a person to report an emergency. 
B.  "Alarm user" means any person who owns or is entitled to possession of any premises in the city of Lancaster on which an alarm system has been installed and operates. 
C.  "False alarm" means any improper activation of an alarm system, including, but not limited to, the activation of an alarm system due to mechanical failure, preventable accident, improper operation, misuse, malfunction, improper negligence or carelessness of the alarm user. False alarms also include improper activation of an alarm system resulting from work on or testing of a system where the fire department communication center has not been notified in advance as to when the false signal will be sounded. Improper activation of an alarm system caused by an event out of the control of the alarm user or alarm installer, including, but not limited to, earthquake, storm, or other violent, uncontrollable acts of nature, shall not constitute a false alarm. 
(Ord. 865 § 1 (part), 2006)  
5.39.020 - False alarm. 
The knowing commission of a false alarm is hereby prohibited. This section does not prohibit any test of an alarm system as permitted in advance by the fire department. 
(Ord. 865 § 1 (part), 2006)  
5.39.030 - Report and repair. 
After any false alarm, the alarm owner shall, upon request by the fire department, submit a written report to the fire department describing actions to be taken to eliminate the cause of the false alarm. This shall be submitted within ten (10) days of the date of request by the fire department. 
(Ord. 865 § 1 (part), 2006)  
5.39.040 - Public nuisance alarm. 
Any alarm system that generates more than two false alarms in any twelve (12) month period, beginning January 1, is declared to be a public nuisance and operation of this system is prohibited. 
(Ord. 865 § 1 (part), 2006)  
5.39.050 - Exemptions. 
A.  No provisions of this chapter shall be deemed, whether directly or indirectly, to authorize or require or permit any act which is otherwise prohibited by law of the State of California nor shall any provision of this chapter be deemed, whether directly or indirectly, to prohibit any act which is otherwise permitted by any law of the State of California. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter are not applicable to alarms affixed to vehicles subject to the California Vehicle Code, ships or boats, or railroad cars. 
(Ord. 865 § 1 (part), 2006)  
5.39.060 - Violations. 
A.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter other than Section 5.39.020 is guilty of an infraction, which is punishable as provided in Section 1.12.020. 
B.  Violation of Section 5.39.020 is a misdemeanor, which is punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
C.  Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, upon the first and second violation of Section 5.39.040 in a calendar year beginning January 1, the fire department shall serve a written notice (in triplicate) to the alarm owner, to the city, and to the fire department indicating that property location, date of false alarm and other information necessary to track false alarms. The city will retain copies and track all subsequent false alarms for that alarm user. The notice will describe the violation and specify that the causes of the violation shall be corrected within ten (10) days of the date of service of the written notice. 
(Ord. 865 § 1 (part), 2006)  
5.39.070 - Appeal process. 
Any person receiving monetary charges for false alarm responses may appeal. A written appeal must be submitted to the city manager or his or her designee. Decisions of the city manager or his or her designee are final. 
(Ord. 865 § 1 (part), 2006)  
5.39.080 - Fees. 
A service charge in an amount established by the city council by resolution shall be levied for each fire department response to an alarm determined to be false, after the first two false alarms. The city's finance department shall invoice and collect these service charges in the same manner as other debts owed to the city. 
(Ord. 865 § 1 (part), 2006)  
5.39.090 - Compliance required. 
Any alarm installed prior to the effective date of this chapter shall comply with all provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 865 § 1 (part), 2006)  
Chapter 5.40 - RENTAL HOUSING BUSINESS LICENSE AND PRESERVATION INSPECTION PROGRAM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
* Prior ordinance history: Ord. 822. 
 
5.40.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the rental housing business license and preservation inspection program of the city of Lancaster, may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as "this chapter." 
(Ord. 869 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.40.020 - Purpose. 
The existence of substandard and unsanitary residential rental properties and residential rental units, the physical conditions and characteristics of which violate applicable state housing, county and local codes and render them unfit or unsafe for human occupancy and habitation, threatens the physical, social, and economic stability of sound residential buildings and areas, and their supporting neighborhood facilities and institutions; necessitates disproportionate expenditures of public funds for remedial action; impairs the efficient and economical exercise of governmental power and functions; and destroys the amenity of residential areas and neighborhoods and the community as a whole. It has been statistically demonstrated that areas with rental housing facilities are responsible for a disproportionate share of police calls for service. 
The disproportionate demand upon police services necessitates a disproportionate expenditure of public funds for such properties and impairs the property value of these properties and the surrounding neighborhoods as well as community as a whole. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to implement a crime free rental housing program ("LANCAP") to provide a stable, more satisfied tenant base; increase demand for rental units with a reputation for active management; lower maintenance and repair costs; increase property values, and improve the personal safety for tenants, landlords, and managers. 
It is also the purpose of this chapter to identify the existence of substandard and unsanitary residential rental properties and rental units and to cause the owner thereof to cure such defects. 
For these reasons, it is in the public interest for the protection of the health and safety of the people of Lancaster to protect and promote the existence of sound and wholesome residential rental properties and residential rental units by the adoption of regulations for participants in LANCAP training and the periodic inspection of such structures. 
(Ord. 869 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.40.030 - Scope. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all residential rental properties in the city of Lancaster and all accessory uses thereon, including parking lots, driveways, landscaping, accessory structures, fences, walls, interior and exterior common areas, swimming pools, hot tubs, and spas. This chapter shall not apply to: 
1.  Housing accommodations in hotels, motels, inns, or tourist homes. This exception does not apply to single room occupancy hotels. 
2.  Housing accommodations in any hospital; state licensed group homes; convent, monastery, or other facility occupied exclusively by members of a religious order; extended medical care facility; asylum; on-campus fraternity or sorority houses; or on-campus housing accommodations owned, operated or managed by an institution of higher education, a high school, or an elementary school of occupancy by its students. 
3.  Mobilehomes, or mobilehome parks, or recreational vehicles as defined in Section 799.24 of the California Civil Code, or recreational vehicle parks. 
4.  Housing accommodations in any group home defined in Chapter 5.44 of this title, except to the extent provided in Chapter 5.44. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter are supplementary and complementary to the Applicable Codes. Nothing in this chapter may be construed to: (i) excuse or modify any requirement or obligation in the Applicable Codes or in any other laws or regulations, (ii) waive, limit or modify any prohibition thereof, or, (iii) limit any existing right of the city to abate nuisances or to enforce any provisions of applicable law, statute, or this code, in any manner allowed by law. 
(Ord. 869 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.40.035 - Fair housing. 
Rental housing operators shall comply with federal fair housing laws and grant persons with disabilities the ability to make reasonable accommodation requests for equal opportunity use and enjoyment of a dwelling. The rental housing operator shall not refuse residency to persons with disabilities, or place conditions on their residency, on the basis of those persons requiring reasonable accommodation. 
(Ord. No. 971, § 1, 10-25-2011)  
5.40.040 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases have the following meanings: 
"Annual LANCAP recertification" shall have the meaning attributed to such term in Section 5.40.070 of this chapter. 
"Applicable Codes" means and includes all state statutes and regulations, county codes of the Lancaster Municipal Code (hereafter the "code") that pertain to the condition, habitability and safety of residential rental units, as defined in this chapter. Applicable Codes include, without limitation, the State Housing Law (CA Health and Safety Code, Sections 17910 et seq.); the Los Angeles County Public Health Ordinance No. 7583 as adopted pursuant to Section 8.08.010 of this code; Chapters 8.28 (Property Maintenance) and 8.30 (Residential Landscaping Installation and Maintenance) of this code, as well as pertinent chapters of Title 15 (Buildings and Construction) of this code. 
"Building inspector" means an inspector who shall possess all statutorily mandated certifications to enforce state building and construction codes. 
"Building official" who shall possess all statutorily mandated certifications to enforce state building and construction codes. 
"Business" means and includes all activities engaged in with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage, directly or indirectly, from the operation of rental housing. 
"Certificate of rental inspection compliance" means a certificate issued by the director for residential rental properties, certifying compliance with this chapter and Applicable Codes. 
"City manager" means the city manager of the city of Lancaster, or his or her designated representatives. 
"Code enforcement officer" who is designated by the city manager to enforce Applicable Codes. 
"Complaint" means a complaint described in Section 5.40.110 of this chapter. 
"Director" means the director of housing and neighborhood revitalization, or his or her designee. 
"Dwelling unit" means a structure or a separate and distinct part of a structure that is used as a home, residence, or sleeping place by one person who maintains a household or by two or more persons who maintain a common household. 
"Housing and property maintenance standards" means and includes those that are established by, or set forth in, the Applicable Codes. 
"Inspection frequency" means the length of time between required inspections as provided in Section 5.40.100 of this code. 
"LANCAP" means the Lancaster community appreciation program. 
"LANCAP certification" means the licensee's successful completion of all three phases of the LANCAP crime free rental housing program. 
"LANCAP certified property" means a residential rental property certified to meet the requirements of the city's LANCAP program. 
"License year" means the twelve (12) month period commencing on the first day of the calendar month next following the issuance of the rental housing business license. 
"Major violation" means any one or more of the following violations: 
1.  Heating, air condition, mechanical or plumbing systems not fully operational at any time. 
2.  Hazardous code violations, including any one or more of the following: 
a.  Exposed electrical wiring; 
b.  Collapsed ceiling or walls caused by water leakage; 
c.  Water, gas or sewage leakage into walls, floors or onto the ground; 
d.  Structural damage resulting in the building being determined by the building inspector to be unsafe; 
e.  Fire alarm system not fully operational; 
f.  Firewalls damaged or not maintained. 
"Noncompliance with notice and order" means that the owner, his authorized agent, or other responsible party does not make required repairs as provided in notice and order from the city manager in a timely manner with all required city approvals, permits and inspections. 
"Notice and order" means the notice and order to repair violations issued pursuant to Section 5.04.080(B) of this chapter. 
"Operator" means a person who operates or manages a residential rental property. 
"Other violations" means any violation of law other than those defined as a major violation in this chapter. 
"Owner" means and includes any person having legal title to, or who leases, rents, occupies or has charge, control or possession of, any real property in the city, including all persons shown as owners on the last equalized assessment roll of the Los Angeles County Assessor's office. Owners include persons with powers of attorney, executors of estates, trustees, or who are court appointed administrators, conservators, guardians or receivers. 
"Person," as used in this chapter, means and includes any individual, partnership of any kind, corporation, limited liability company, association, joint venture or other organization or entity, however formed, as well as trustees, heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns, or any combination of such persons. "Person" also includes any public entity or agency that acts as an owner in the city. 
"Phase 1" means the Phase 1 LANCAP crime free rental housing training session. 
"Phase 1 certificate" means the certificate issued upon licensee's attendance and successful completion of a Phase 1 LANCAP crime free rental housing training session. 
"Phase 2" means compliance with the LANCAP crime prevention through environmental design (C.P.T.E.D.) recommendations. 
"Phase 2 certificate" means the certificate issued upon licensee's compliance with LANCAP crime prevention through environmental design (C.P.T.E.D.) recommendations. 
"Phase 3" means the hosting of a rental community crime prevention training session at licensee's property (or such other place designated by the city manager or his designee). 
"Phase 3 certificate" means the certificate issued upon hosting a rental community crime prevention training session at the licensee's property (or such other place designated by the city manager). 
"Repair request form" means a two-part city-approved form that the owner of a property must provide to all tenants. The form shall indicate the address the form is to be delivered to for repair requests and an area for the manager or owner to sign the receipt of the repair request. The owner shall provide a copy of the request to the tenant. 
"Residential rental property" means a parcel of real property upon which a residential rental unit is located. 
"Residential rental unit" means a rented or leased residential dwelling unit within a single-family or multi-residential building. A "residential rental unit" includes a single-family dwelling, or a unit in a multifamily or multipurpose dwelling, or a unit in a condominium or cooperative housing project, or any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single unit with facilities that are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating and which is hired, rented or leased by a person within the meaning of California Civil Code Section 1940. The definition of residential rental unit applies to single room occupancy hotels but does not apply to any other hotels, motels, or bed and breakfast facilities. For purposes of this definition, a state licensed group home and an unlicensed group home occupying a single-family home shall be treated as a single residential rental unit. 
"Violation" means either a major violation or other violation. 
(Ord. 869 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.40.050 - Rental housing business license required. 
A.  No person shall operate a residential rental property in the city without securing and maintaining a current rental housing business license as required by this chapter. 
B.  Each owner or operator, on behalf of the owner, shall submit an application for rental housing business license on a form provided by the director. Applications shall be subject to verification by the director. Any person who makes a false statement in the application shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
1.  Contents of Application. The application shall contain or be accompanied by the following information: 
a.  The type of ownership of the proposed residential rental property, i.e., whether by individual, partnership, corporation, or otherwise; 
b.  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation and the names and residence addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock of that corporation. If one or more of the officers, directors, or stockholders is a corporation, the provisions of this section pertaining to a corporate applicant shall apply; 
c.  If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the name and residence of each of the partners, including limited partners. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this section pertaining to a corporate applicant shall apply; 
d.  If the applicant is a limited liability company, the application shall set forth the name of the company exactly as shown in its articles of organization or operating agreement, together with the names and residence addresses of each of its officers, directors, and each member along with a description of the relative interests of each member. If one or more of the officers, directors, or members is a corporation, the provisions of this section pertaining to a corporate applicant shall apply; 
e.  If the applicant is the operator, then the application shall set forth or attach the information required by subsections (B)(1)(b) through (B)(1)(d) of this section with respect to the owner and shall be accompanied by evidence satisfactory to the director that the operator is authorized by the owner to submit the application; 
f.  The address of the residential rental property; 
g.  The name, address and telephone number for the operator or designated responsible person for the premises and any other person designated to be contacted in the event of emergency at the premises; 
h.  A description of any other business operated or to be operated at the same premises; 
i.  Authorization for the city, its employees and agents to seek information and conduct an investigation, including, but not limited to, a criminal background check, to verify the information contained within the application; 
j.  Authorization for the city, its employees and agents to inspect the property in accordance with this chapter; 
k.  After the initial inspection provided for in Section 5.40.080 of this chapter, the application shall be accompanied by a copy of the current certificate of rental inspection compliance; 
l.  With respect to any residential rental property with sixteen (16) or more residential rental units, on or after January 1, 2008, the application shall be accompanied by copy of the current LANCAP certification; 
m.  Such other identification and information as the director may require in order to discover the truth of the matters herein specified and as required to be set forth in the application. 
2.  Processing of Application. The director shall determine whether the applicant has submitted a complete application for a rental housing business license within twenty (20) days of its submission. An application is complete if it has been fully and properly completed in accordance with this section and the nonrefundable fee required pursuant to Section 5.40.060 of this chapter has been tendered. If the director determines that the applicant has not submitted a complete application, the director shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact. The applicant may request to withdraw the application in order to provide additional time to complete the required information. However, if the applicant withdraws the application, the review period ends, and the completed application will be processed as a new submittal. Upon determination by the director that a complete application has been submitted, the director shall issue or deny the issuance of the rental housing business license within twenty (20) days of such determination. 
3.  Extension of Time. The director may extend the time for filing an application required pursuant to this chapter for good cause, for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, and may waive any penalty that would otherwise accrue thereon. 
C.  Annually, on or about July 1st of each year the director shall forward to the Los Angeles County Community Development Commission, a list of property addresses and name of the owners with respect to all properties for which a rental housing business license has been issued in accordance herewith. The director shall also notify to the Los Angeles County Community Development Commission of the revocation of any rental housing business license. 
(Ord. 869 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.40.060 - Rental housing business license fee. 
A.  The application for a rental housing business license including any renewal thereof shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in an amount established by a resolution of the city council. The rental housing business license fee shall be used to defray the costs of processing, training and enforcement. 
B.  The rental housing business license fee shall be for the license year and each applicant must pay the full fee for the license year upon submission of the application for the rental housing business license. 
C.  A separate residential rental inspection fee in the amount established by resolution of the city council shall be paid initially within six months of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or upon receipt of a request to inspect pursuant to Section 5.040.080 of this chapter, whichever comes first and thereafter upon receipt of the request to inspect pursuant to Section 5.40.080. The residential rental inspection fee shall be used to defray the costs of investigation, inspection, reporting, processing and enforcement. 
D.  The rental housing business license and the fee required by this chapter is in lieu of, and not in addition to, the general business license fee required by Chapter 5.04 of this title for the operation of rental housing. Any rental housing operator who holds a valid business license on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to the extent it is applicable to the operation of rental housing shall be entitled to a credit for the full amount of the business license fee paid pursuant to Chapter 5.04. This credit shall not apply to any person who operates a business separate from the operation of rental housing. 
E.  Penalty. 
1.  Failure to Pay Fee. For failure to apply a license fee when due, the finance director shall add a penalty of twenty (20) percent of the license fee on the first date of the month following the due date and ten (10) percent of each month thereafter while the fee remains unpaid, provided that the amount of the penalty shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the amount of the license fee due. 
2.  Failure to Obtain License. If a person fails to obtain a license, the license fee due shall be that amount due and payable from the first date when the person engaged in business in the city, together with the penalty described in subsection (E)(1) of this section. 
(Ord. 869 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.40.070 - LANCAP crime free rental housing program. 
A.  There is established the LANCAP crime free rental housing program which shall consist of a three-phase certification process to address crime in rental housing areas. The city manager or his designee may establish guidelines for implementation of the LANCAP crime free rental housing program which shall include, but not be limited to, criteria for determining the satisfactory completion of each phase of the LANCAP program. 
B.  The owner or the operator, on behalf of the owner, of any residential rental property with sixteen (16) or more residential rental units shall obtain the LANCAP certification not later than December 31, 2007 and shall thereafter maintain an annual LANCAP recertification. 
C.  After completion of all three phases of the LANCAP crime free rental housing program and receipt of the LANCAP certification, in order to maintain LANCAP certification, on or about the anniversary of issuance of the LANCAP certification and annually thereafter, the licensee shall have its property inspected by a LANCAP official for continued compliance with the crime free rental housing program in accordance with the guidelines established pursuant to this section (the "annual LANCAP recertification"). Such inspection is in addition to and not in lieu of the inspection required by Section 5.40.080 of this chapter. In the event that any management staff are replaced, the new manager(s) must schedule a Phase 1 training session within thirty (30) days of commencement of duties in order to maintain the LANCAP certification and submit proof of completion to the director. 
D.  The owners or operators of residential rental property with fewer than sixteen (16) residential rental units are encouraged but are not required to complete Phase 1 of the LANCAP program. 
(Ord. 869 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.40.080 - Inspections. 
A.  Owners shall allow the city to conduct an inspection of their residential rental properties for compliance with all applicable codes and the city's housing and property maintenance standards. Owners shall provide access to all requested areas of a residential rental property for inspection within ten (10) calendar days of the director's request. The director, in his or her discretion, may include inspections by other city departments and/or Los Angeles County enforcement agencies, including, but not limited to, the county health department and fire department. 
B.  Upon completion of the inspection, if no violations are identified, the director shall proceed with the issuance of a certificate of rental inspection compliance in accordance with and upon satisfaction of the requirements of Section 5.40.090 of this chapter. If one or more violations are identified, then the director shall issue a notice and order to the owner describing the violation and setting forth a time within which such violations shall be corrected. The owner shall pay a re-inspection fee in an account established by resolution of the city council for each re-inspection following the issuance of notice of violation. All violations shall be corrected within thirty (30) days with all city required permits, approvals and inspections. 
C.  Residential rental properties shall be inspected initially not later than March 23, 2010. Thereafter, residential rental properties shall be inspected in accordance with the frequency schedule set forth in Section 5.40.100 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 869 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.40.090 - Certificate of rental inspection compliance. 
A.  After the initial inspection, owners of all residential rental units shall obtain and maintain a valid and current certificate of rental inspection compliance at all times. From and after the date of the initial inspection, all residential rental units that do not have a certificate of rental inspection compliance, and their owners, shall be in violation of this chapter. 
B.  A certificate of rental inspection compliance shall be issued for all residential rental units only upon completion of the following: 
(1)  The residential rental unit has been fully inspected and approved by the director. 
(2)  Any existing violations have been corrected and/or repaired with all required permits, approvals and inspections. 
(3)  Residential rental properties with sixteen (16) or more residential rental units shall have a sign showing owner or management company name, address, and phone number posted in the on-site manager unit or management office, if any, which shall be identified by a notice at the front entrance to the property and shall be posted in a manner approved by the director. 
C.  Issuance of a certificate of rental inspection compliance shall not constitute a guarantee or warranty of the habitability or complete compliance with the city's housing and property maintenance standards or with the applicable codes, and the occupant of any residential rental unit shall not rely on the certificate of rental inspection compliance as such a guarantee or warranty. The certificate of rental inspection compliance shall contain a notice to this effect. The city shall not assume any liability to any person by reason of the inspections required by this chapter or the issuance of a certificate of rental inspection compliance. Certificates of rental inspection compliance shall expire on the expiration date shown on the certificate and shall be renewed prior to such date. The director shall determine the expiration date of certificates of rental inspection compliance and an inspection frequency schedule based on the schedule set forth in Section 5.04.100 of this chapter. 
D.  The director shall maintain a current listing of all residential rental properties for which a certificate of residential inspection compliance has been issued. The director shall provide a copy of the list, not less often than quarterly, to the community development commission of Los Angeles County or any other entity responsible for administering the Section 8, Housing program. 
(Ord. 869 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.40.100 - Re-inspection process to renew a certificate of rental inspection compliance. 
A.  The owner shall make available all residential rental units for inspection within ten (10) calendar days of the director's request in accordance with the schedule set forth in this section. The director, in his or her discretion, may require inspections by other city departments and/or Los Angeles County enforcement agencies, including, but not limited to, the county health department and fire department. 
B.  Residential rental properties shall be inspected in accordance with the following schedule: 
1.  Major violation found: one year from the date of issuance of the certificate of rental inspection compliance. 
2.  Other violations found but all violation corrections fully completed within thirty (30) days after notice by code enforcement officer: three years from the date of issuance of the certificate of rental inspection compliance. 
3.  Other violations found but all violation corrections not fully completed within thirty (30) days after notice and order: two years from the date of issuance of the certificate of rental inspection compliance. 
4.  Within the time determined by the director upon receipt of a complaint described in Section 5.40.110 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 869 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.40.110 - Complaints and violations. 
Upon receipt of a complaint of violations of the housing and property maintenance standards, the code enforcement officer shall inspect the pertinent unit(s) and/or area(s) of the residential rental property. All violations shall be fully corrected with all city required permits, approvals and inspections and re-inspected within the time specified on the notice and order of the code enforcement officer in order to maintain a current certificate of rental inspection compliance for a residential rental property. Noncompliance with a notice and order of the code enforcement officer shall automatically terminate the certificate of rental inspection compliance and render it null and void. 
(Ord. 869 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.40.120 - Certificate of rental inspection compliance—Effect on remedies. 
A.  This chapter is not intended to, and shall not be construed to limit, in any way, the remedies available to the city to prosecute persons for violations of law or to abate public nuisances. The city may, notwithstanding the existence or nonexistence of a certificate of rental inspection compliance, proceed at any time with any remedy permitted by law or equity to address violations of law or of this chapter. 
B.  Upon termination or expiration of a certificate of rental inspection compliance, the director shall not re-issue a new certificate of rental inspection compliance until all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  All violations have been fully abated with all required city permits, approvals and inspections; 
2.  All civil fines, as well as all investigative and inspection costs and fees incurred by the city in connection with a violation on premises or within structures that are regulated by this chapter, have been paid to the city; 
3.  Re-inspection shall be completed by a code enforcement officer for all residential rental units on the residential rental property. 
(Ord. 869 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.40.130 - Change of ownership. 
When ownership of a residential rental property changes, either the new owner or the prior owner shall notify the director of this event on a city approved form on or prior to the consummation of the sale or recordation of an instrument of conveyance with the Los Angeles County Recorder's office, whichever is earlier. If the director is not so notified, the existing certificate of rental inspection compliance shall automatically terminate and be null and void. The new owner shall apply for and obtain a rental housing business license as required by Section 5.40.050 of this chapter on or prior to the change of ownership. All property sign postings, that are required by this chapter, shall be updated within fifteen (15) calendar days following the change of ownership. 
(Ord. 869 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.40.140 - Enforcement and penalties. 
If, after a notice and order to correct, a property owner fails to correct a violation of the applicable codes within the time allowed, the city may seek code compliance by any remedy allowed under this code or any other remedy allowed by law. 
(Ord. 869 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.40.150 - Refusal to undergo an inspection. 
A.  If the premises are occupied, the director shall, before entering a residential rental unit, first present proper credentials to the occupant and request entry explaining his reasons; 
B.  If the premises are unoccupied, the director shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the premises and request entry, explaining the reasons; 
C.  If entry is refused or cannot be obtained, the director shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure lawful entry and inspect the premises, including but not limited to securing an inspection warrant pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1822.50 through 1822.57. The director shall provide notice that a warrant has been issued to both the owner and the occupant at least twenty-four (24) hours before the warrant is executed, unless the judge finds that immediate execution is reasonably necessary in the circumstances shown; 
D.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the director has reasonable cause to believe that the residential rental property or residential rental unit is so hazardous, unsafe or dangerous as to require immediate inspection to safeguard the public health or safety, the director shall have the right to immediately enter and inspect the premises and may use any reasonable means required to effect the entry and make an inspection. 
(Ord. 869 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.40.160 - Retaliatory eviction. 
It is unlawful for a property owner to recover possession of a residential rental unit in retaliation against a tenant for exercising his or her right to file a complaint with the city that a code violation may exist. In any action by or against a tenant, evidence of the exercise by the tenant of his or her right under Section 1942.5 of the California Civil Code occurring within six months of the alleged retaliation shall create a presumption that the property owner's conduct was in retaliation for the tenant's exercise of rights under this code. 
(Ord. 869 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.40.170 - Revocation. 
The director shall revoke a rental housing business license, in addition to any other basis provided by this code, upon determination that any of the following conditions exist: 
A.  Failure to operate in a manner consistent with the application; 
B.  Violation of any rule, regulation or section of this chapter by the owner or operator of the residential rental property; 
C.  The owner or operator has been made a material false, misleading, or fraudulent statement or omission of fact to the city, or engaged in fraud, in the application for permit or while operating the residential rental property; 
D.  A certificate of rental inspection compliance has not been issued or renewed in accordance with this chapter with respect to the residential rental property; 
E.  The occurrence of a public nuisance at the or emanating from the residential rental property; 
F.  Conviction of any crime related to the use of the residential rental property by the operator or the illegal use, sale or distribution by the operator of drugs, controlled substances or alcohol; 
G.  Violation of any provisions of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 869 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.40.180 - Re-application after denial or revocation. 
A.  An applicant for a rental housing business license regulated by the provisions of this chapter whose application for such rental housing business license has been denied may not reapply for such rental housing business license for a period of one year from the date such notice of denial was issued. 
B.  A holder of a rental housing business license regulated by the provisions of this chapter whose rental housing business license has been canceled, revoked, or invalidated may not reapply for such rental housing business license for a period of one year from the date such revocation, cancellation, or invalidation became final. 
(Ord. 869 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.40.190 - Public nuisance. 
Any residential rental property operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions, requirements, and regulations of the code shall be, and the same is declared to be harmful to the public health and safety, unlawful and a public nuisance, and the city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal, and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law, and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such residential rental property establishments and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting, or maintaining a residential rental property establishment contrary to the provisions, requirements, or regulations of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 869 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.40.200 - Recovery of attorney's fees. 
A.  A prevailing party in any judicial action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding, to abate or to cause the abatement of a public nuisance as defined in Section 5.40.190 of this chapter, or in any appeal or other judicial action arising therefrom, may recover reasonable attorney's fees in accordance with the following subsections: 
1.  Attorney's fees are not recoverable by any person as a prevailing party unless the city manager, or a designee thereof, or an attorney for, and on behalf of, the city, elects in writing to seek recovery of the city's attorney's fees at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding. Failure to make such an election precludes any entitlement to, or award of, attorney's fees in favor of any person or the city. 
2.  The city is the prevailing party when an administrative or judicial determination is made or affirmed by which a person is found to be responsible for one or more conditions or activities that constitute a public nuisance as defined by Section 5.40.190 of this chapter. A person is the prevailing party only when a final administrative or judicial determination completely absolves that person of responsibility for all conditions or activities that were alleged, in that action or proceeding, to constitute a public nuisance. An administrative or judicial determination that results in findings of responsibility and nonresponsibility on the part of a person for conditions or activities that were alleged in that action or proceeding to constitute a public nuisance, shall nevertheless result in the city being the prevailing party. 
B.  Provided the city has made an election to seek attorney's fees, an award of attorney's fees to a person shall not exceed the amount of reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the city in that action or proceeding. 
(Ord. 869 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.40.210 - Regulations nonexclusive. 
The provisions of this chapter regulating residential rental property are not intended to be exclusive and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other applicable provision, requirement, or regulation of the code or other laws. 
(Ord. 869 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.40.220 - Appeals. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Title 2 of this code, any appeal of a decision of the city manager or the director must be filed within ten (10) calendar days from the date of the decision. Failure of the city clerk to receive a timely notice of appeal constitutes a waiver of the right to contest any decision hereunder. In this event, the decision is final and binding. Appeals under this chapter shall be heard as follows: 
A.  The hearing shall be conducted by the city manager or his duly authorized designee who shall act as hearing officer; and who shall herein be referred to as the "hearing officer" who shall consider all relevant evidence including, but not limited to, applicable staff reports, objections or protests relative to the decision. Such hearing may be continued from time to time. 
B.  Upon the conclusion of said public hearing, the hearing officer shall, on the basis of the evidence presented at such hearing, determine whether the decision should be upheld, modified or reversed. The determination of the hearing officer shall be final and conclusive. 
C.  A copy of the hearing officer's decision shall be served upon the owner of the property by United States mail or by personal delivery. In addition, a copy of the order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the property. 
(Ord. 869 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.40.230 - Conflicts. 
If the provisions, requirements, or regulations of this chapter conflict with or contravene any other provision, requirement, or regulation of the code, the provisions, requirements, or regulations of this chapter shall prevail as to all matters and questions arising out of the subject matter of this chapter. 
(Ord. 869 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
Chapter 5.42 - TOBACCO RETAILER REGULATIONS 
 
5.42.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the city of Lancaster's Tobacco Retailer Regulations. 
(Ord. 855 § 1 (part), 2006)  
5.42.020 - Findings and purpose. 
The city council finds and declares as follows: 
More than 440,000 people die in the United States from tobacco-related diseases every year, making it the nation's leading cause of preventable death; and 
The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that by 2030, tobacco will account for 10 million deaths per year, making it the greatest cause of death worldwide; and 
The California Legislature has recognized the danger of tobacco use and has made reducing youth access to tobacco products a high priority, as evidenced by the fact that: 
• The Legislature has declared that smoking is the single most important source of preventable disease and premature death in California (Cal. Health & Safety Code § 118950); and 
• State law prohibits the sale or furnishing of cigarettes, tobacco products, and smoking paraphernalia to minors, as well as the purchase, receipt, or possession of tobacco products by minors (Cal. Pen. Code § 308); and 
• State law requires that tobacco retailers check the identification of tobacco purchasers who reasonably appear to be under eighteen (18) years of age (Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 22956) and provides procedures for using persons under 18 years of age to conduct onsite compliance checks of tobacco retailers (Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 22952); and 
• State law prohibits the sale of tobacco products and paraphernalia through self-services displays except in adult-only establishments (Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 22962); and 
• State law prohibits the sale of "bidis" (hand-rolled filter-less cigarettes imported primarily from India and Southeast Asian countries) except in adult-only establishments (Cal. Pen. Code § 308.1); and 
• State law prohibits the manufacture, distribution, or sale of cigarettes in packages of less than twenty (20) and prohibits the manufacture, distribution, or sale of "roll-your-own" tobacco in packages containing less than 0.60 ounces of tobacco (Cal. Pen. Code § 308.3); and 
State law requires all tobacco retailers to be licensed by the Board of Equalization in order to curb the illegal sale and distribution of cigarettes which deprive the state yearly of hundreds of millions of tax dollars that fund local and state programs such as health services, antismoking campaigns, cancer research, and education programs (Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code §§ 22970.1, 22972); and 
State law explicitly permits cities and counties to enact local tobacco retail licensing ordinances, and allows for the suspension or revocation of a local license for a violation of any state tobacco control law (Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 22971.3); and 
California courts in such cases as Cohen v. Board of Supervisors, 40 Cal. 3d 277 (1985), and Bravo Vending v. City of Rancho Mirage, 16 Cal. App. 4th 383 (1993), have affirmed the power of the City of Lancaster to regulate business activity in order to discourage violations of law; and 
Despite the state's efforts to limit youth access to tobacco, minors are still able to access cigarettes, as evidenced by the fact that: 
• Nearly half of all youth smokers nationwide buy the cigarettes they smoke, either directly from retailers or vending machines, or by giving money to others to purchase the cigarettes for them; and 
• Minors consume nine hundred twenty-four million (924,000,000) packs of cigarettes each year nationwide, yielding the tobacco industry $480 million in profits from underage smokers; and 
• Most adults who have ever tried smoking have tried their first cigarette under the age of eighteen (18), and are on average under the age of sixteen (16); 
Research demonstrates that local tobacco retail ordinances dramatically reduce youth access to cigarettes, as evidenced by the following: 
• A study of several states found that youth sales of tobacco moved from a baseline of 70% of retailers selling to minors before the adoption of the ordinance to less than 5% in the year and a half after enactment; and 
• A study of the effect of licensing and enforcement methods used in the Philadelphia area revealed a decrease in sales to minors from 85% in 1994 to 43% in 1998; and 
• A study of several Minnesota cities found that an increased licensing fee in conjunction with strict enforcement of youth access laws led to a decrease from 39.8% to 4.9% in the number of youth able to purchase tobacco; and 
The implementation of tobacco-licensing requirements is supported by most Californians, as evidenced by the following: 
• 73% of California adults think tobacco retailers should be licensed; 
• 65% of California's key opinion leaders surveyed support implementation of tobacco-licensing requirements; and 
• Over 90% of enforcement agencies surveyed in 2000 rated license suspension or revocation after repeated violations as an effective strategy to reduce youth access to tobacco; 
Forty-two (42) cities and counties in California have passed tobacco retailer licensing ordinances in an effort to stop minors from smoking, and 
Six hundred fifteen (615) communities in the United States require a license to sell tobacco products and provide penalties such as suspension or revocation of the license for illegal conduct (e.g., selling tobacco to minors); and 
California retailers continue to sell tobacco to underage consumers, evidenced by the following: 
• 14% of all tobacco retailers unlawfully sold to minors in 2004; 
• 31.5 % of non-traditional tobacco retailers such as deli, meat, and produce markets sold to minors in 2004; 
• Teens surveyed in 2002 say they bought their cigarettes at: gas stations (58%), liquor stores (45%), and supermarkets and small grocery stores (25%); 
A requirement for a tobacco retailer license will not unduly burden legitimate business activities of retailers who sell or distribute cigarettes or other tobacco products to adults. It will, however, allow the city of Lancaster to regulate the operation of lawful businesses to discourage violations of federal, state, and local tobacco-related laws; and 
The city of Lancaster has a substantial interest in promoting compliance with federal, state, and local laws intended to regulate tobacco sales and use; in discouraging the illegal purchase of tobacco products by minors; in promoting compliance with laws prohibiting sales of cigarettes and tobacco products to minors; and finally, and most importantly, in protecting children from being lured into illegal activity through the misconduct of adults; and 
It is the intent of the city council, in enacting this ordinance, to encourage responsible tobacco retailing and to discourage violations of tobacco-related laws, especially those which prohibit or discourage the sale or distribution of tobacco and nicotine products to minors, but not to expand or reduce the degree to which the acts regulated by federal or state law are criminally proscribed or to alter the penalties provided therein. 
(Ord. 855 § 1 (part), 2006)  
5.42.030 - Definitions. 
Unless the particular provision requires, the definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning, and application of words and phrases used in this chapter. 
"Arm's length transaction" means a sale in good faith and for valuable consideration that reflects the fair market value in the open market between two informed and willing parties, neither of which is under any compulsion to participate in the transaction. A sale between relatives, related companies or partners, or a sale for which a significant purpose is avoiding the effect of the violations of this chapter is not an arm's length transaction. 
"City" means the city of Lancaster. 
"City council" means the city council of the city of Lancaster. 
"City manager" means the city manager of the city of Lancaster, or his/her designated representative. 
"Person" means any individual, or corporation, partnership, association or other group or combination of individuals acting as an entity. 
"Proprietor" means a Person with an ownership or managerial interest in a business. An ownership interest shall be deemed to exist when a Person has a ten (10) percent or greater interest in the stock, assets, or income of a business other than the sole interest of security for debt. A managerial interest shall be deemed to exist when a person can or does have or share ultimate control over the day-to-day operations of a business. 
"Self-service display" means the open display of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia in a manner that is accessible to the general public without the assistance of the retailer or employee of the retailer. A vending machine is a form of self-service display. 
"Smoking" means possessing a lighted tobacco product, lighted tobacco paraphernalia, or any other lighted weed or plant (including a lighted pipe, cigar, hookah pipe, or cigarette of any kind), the lighting of a tobacco product, tobacco paraphernalia, or any other weed or plant (including a pipe, cigar, hookah pipe, or cigarette of any kind). 
"Tobacco paraphernalia" means cigarette papers or wrappers, pipe holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and any other item designed for the smoking or ingestion of tobacco products. 
"Tobacco product" means: (1) any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, hookah tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, bidis, or any other preparation of tobacco; and (2) any product or formulation of matter containing biologically active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human body, but does not include any product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco product dependence. 
"Tobacco retailer" means any person who sells, offers for sale, or does or offers to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia; or any person who distributes free or nominal cost tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia for a business purpose; or any person who distributes a proxy for tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco paraphernalia, such as, for example, a coupon, coupon offer, rebate offer, check, credit, token, code, or password, at any event or location open to the public and associated with or sponsored in part by a tobacco brand or a tobacco company; "tobacco retailing" shall mean engaging in any of these things. 
"Vending machine" means a machine, appliance, or other mechanical device operated by currency, token, debit card, credit card, or any other form of payment that is designed or used for vending purposes, including, but not limited to, machines or devices that use remote control locking mechanisms. 
(Ord. 855 § 1 (part), 2006)  
5.42.040 - Tobacco retailer license required. 
A.  It shall be a misdemeanor for any person, within the city of Lancaster, to act as a tobacco retailer without first obtaining and maintaining a valid tobacco retailer's license, pursuant to this chapter, for each location at which that activity is to occur. No license will be issued to authorize tobacco retailing at any place other than a fixed location; peripatetic tobacco retailing and tobacco retailing from vehicles is prohibited. 
B.  It shall be a violation of a tobacco retailer's license for a licensee or his or her agents or employees to violate any local, state, or federal tobacco-related law. 
C.  A tobacco retailer or proprietor without a valid tobacco retailer license, including, for example, a person whose license has been revoked: 
1.  Shall keep all tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia out of public view. The public display of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia in violation of this provision shall constitute tobacco retailing without a license under Section 5-31-12. 
2.  Shall not display any advertisement relating to tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia that promotes the sale or distribution of such products from the tobacco retailer's location or that could lead a reasonable consumer to believe that such products can be obtained at that location. 
D.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to grant any Person obtaining and maintaining a tobacco retailer's license any status or right other than the right to act as a tobacco retailer at the location in the city identified on the face of the license. For example, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to render inapplicable, supercede, or apply in lieu of, any other provision of applicable law, including but not limited to, any provision of this code including without limitation the zoning regulations, building codes, and business license tax provisions of Title 3, or any condition or limitation on smoking in an enclosed place of employment pursuant to California Labor Code Section 6404.5. For example, obtaining a tobacco retailer license does not make the retailer a "retail or wholesale tobacco shop" for the purposes of California Labor Code Section 6404.5. 
(Ord. 855 § 1 (part), 2006)  
5.42.050 - Application for tobacco retailer license. 
Application for a tobacco retailer's license shall be submitted to the city manager in the name of each Proprietor proposing to conduct retail tobacco sales and shall be signed by each proprietor or an authorized agent thereof under penalty of perjury. It is the responsibility of each proprietor to be informed regarding all laws applicable to tobacco retailing, including those laws affecting the issuance of a tobacco retailer's license. No proprietor may rely on the issuance of a license as a determination by the city that the proprietor has complied with all laws applicable to tobacco retailing. A license issued contrary to this chapter, or contrary to any other law, or on the basis of false or misleading information supplied by a proprietor, or due to omission of a material fact, shall be revoked pursuant to Section 5.42.110 of this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to vest in any person obtaining and maintaining a tobacco retailer's license any status or right to act as a tobacco retailer in contravention of any provision of law. 
All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the city manager and such other information as the city manager deems necessary for the administration or enforcement of this chapter. 
(a)  The application shall accompanied by proof that the location for which a tobacco retailer's license is sought has been is-sued a valid state tobacco retailer's license by the California Board of Equalization. 
(b)  The application shall contain a statement as to whether or not any proprietor has admitted violating, or has been found to have violated, this chapter or whose proprietorship has admitted violating, or has been found to have violated, this chapter and, if so, the dates and locations of all such violations within the previous six years. 
(c)  All information required to be submitted in order to apply for a tobacco retailer's license shall be updated with the city manager whenever the information changes. A tobacco retailer shall provide the city manager in writing with any updates within ten (10) business days of a change. 
(Ord. 855 § 1 (part), 2006)  
5.42.060 - Tobacco retailer license issuance and denial. 
A.  Upon receipt of an application for a tobacco retailer's license and the license fee, the city manager shall issue a license unless substantial record evidence demonstrates one of the following bases for denial: 
1.  The application is incomplete or inaccurate; or 
2.  The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing by a person or at a location for which a suspension is in effect pursuant to this chapter; or by a person which or who has had a license revoked pursuant to this chapter; or 
3.  The application seeks authorization for Tobacco Retailing that is unlawful pursuant to any section of this chapter; or 
4.  The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing that is unlawful pursuant to any state or federal law. 
B.  The license issued pursuant to this chapter shall state on its face such information as shall be determined by the city manager. 
C.  It shall be the responsibility of the city attorney or his or her designee to enforce all provisions set forth in this chapter, which includes but is not limited to the following: 
1.  Investigate and prosecute tobacco retailers who fail to obtain and/or maintain a permit. 
2.  Conduct any and all audits that may be necessary in the investigation of tobacco retailers. 
D.  It shall be the responsibility of the city manager to administer and process the tobacco retailer license application; mail renewal notices to licensees by November 1st of each year; and deposit funds collected for duplicate licenses pursuant to this chapter in the general fund. 
(Ord. 855 § 1 (part), 2006)  
5.42.070 - Display of license. 
Each licensee shall promptly display the license issued pursuant to this chapter at each location where tobacco retailing occurs. 
(Ord. 855 § 1 (part), 2006)  
5.42.080 - Renewal of license. 
The tobacco retailer license shall be renewed annually concurrent with the renewal of the tobacco retailer's business license pursuant to Chapter 5.04. 
(Ord. 855 § 1 (part), 2006)  
5.42.090 - License not transferable. 
A.  Tobacco retailer's license is not transferable, except as provided in subsection (B) below. If a new person acquires a business engaged in tobacco retailing, that person must apply for a new permit on or before the 1st day of the month following the month in which the tobacco retailing business is acquired. The transferee of the license must apply for a license in the transferee's name before acting as a tobacco retailer. 
B.  A license shall be transferable, whether by sale or otherwise, if the person in which the real ultimate ownership of the business after the transfer is substantially similar to the real or ultimate ownership existing before the transfer. Any license reissued pursuant to this section shall expire on the date the previous permit for the business or person would have otherwise expired. 
(Ord. 855 § 1 (part), 2006)  
5.42.100 - Fees for license. 
The city council shall establish by resolution, and from time to time may amend, the fees for the administration of this chapter. Fees required by this chapter shall be in addition to any required under any other chapter of this code. 
(Ord. 855 § 1 (part), 2006)  
5.42.110 - Compliance monitoring. 
A.  Compliance with this chapter shall be monitored by the sheriff's department, the business license department, and code enforcement officials. Any peace officer or code enforcement officials may enforce the penal provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The sheriff's department or code enforcement officials should endeavor to check the compliance of each tobacco retailer at least two times per twelve (12) month period. The sheriff's department or code enforcement officials may check the compliance of tobacco retailers previously found to be in compliance a fewer number of times so that the enforcement agency may check the compliance of tobacco retailers previously found in violation of the licensing law a greater number of times. Nothing in this paragraph shall create a right of action in any licensee or other Person against the city or its agents by reason of such compliance checks. 
C.  Compliance checks shall determine, at a minimum, if the tobacco retailer is conducting business in a manner that complies with tobacco laws regulating youth access to tobacco. When appropriate, the compliance checks shall determine compliance with other laws applicable to tobacco retailing. 
D.  The city shall not enforce any law establishing a minimum age for tobacco purchases or possession against a person who otherwise might be in violation of such law because of the person's age (hereinafter "youth decoy") if the potential violation occurs when: 
1.  The youth decoy is participating in a compliance check supervised by a peace officer or a code enforcement official of the city; or 
2.  The youth decoy is participating in a compliance check funded in part, either directly or indirectly through subcontracting, by the Los Angeles County Health Department or the California Department of Health Services. 
(Ord. 855 § 1 (part), 2006)  
5.42.120 - Suspension, revocation, denial and appeal. 
A.  The city manager may refuse to renew a license or may revoke or suspend and existing license on the grounds that the applicant or licensee has failed to comply with the license conditions or other requirements of this chapter. If a suspended license lapses during the suspension period, a new application must be made at the end of the suspension period. Unpaid fees on a previously suspended license must be paid prior to acceptance of an application for a new license. In any such case, the applicant or licensee shall have the right to appeal to the city council in the time and manner set forth in this section. 
B.  In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, a tobacco retailer's license may be suspended or revoked if the city finds, after notice to the licensee and an opportunity to be heard, that the licensee or his or her agents or employees has violated the conditions of the license imposed pursuant to Section 5.42.040 of this chapter. 
1.  Upon a finding by the city of a first violation, the license may be suspended for up to thirty (30) days; 
2.  Upon a finding by the city of a second violation within a five-year period of the first violation, the license may be suspended for up to ninety (90) days; 
3.  Upon a finding by the city of a third violation within a five-year period of the first violation, the license may be revoked. 
C.  A tobacco retailer's license may be revoked if the city finds, after notice and an opportunity to be heard, that one of the following conditions exist. The revocation shall be without prejudice to the filing of a new application for a license. 
1.  The application is incomplete for failure to provide the information required by Section 5.42.050; 
2.  The information contained in the application, including supplemental information, if any, is found to be false in any material respect; or 
3.  The application seeks authorization for a license that is unlawful as specified in Section 5.42.060(A)(3) or (4). 
D.  When the city concludes that grounds for denial, suspension, revocation or refusal to renew a license exist, the city manager shall serve the applicant or licensee, either personally or by certified mail addressed to the business or residence address of the applicant or licensee, with a notice of denial or notice of intent to suspend, revoke or refuse to renew license. This notice shall state the reasons for the proposed action, the effective date of the decision, the right of the applicant or licensee to appeal the decision to the city council and the decision will be final if no appeal is filed within the time permitted. 
E.  Appeal. 
1.  Any appeal shall be filed in accordance with the uniform appeals procedure set forth in Chapter 2.44 of the code. 
2.  In the event an appeal is timely filed, a revocation is stayed and shall not be effective until a final decision has been rendered by the city council. A suspension, however, is not stayed by the filing of a notice to appeal. If no appeal is filed, the suspension or revocation shall become effective upon expiration of the period for filing appeals. 
(Ord. 855 § 1 (part), 2006)  
5.42.130 - Application to existing businesses. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and businesses described herein whether the herein described activities were established before or after the effective date of this chapter, except that tobacco retailers legally in business prior to the effective date of the ordinance first enacting this chapter shall have sixty (60) days to comply with the regulations for tobacco retailers set forth herein. Please note that the tobacco retailers license is required in addition to a city of Lancaster business license. 
(Ord. 855 § 1 (part), 2006)  
5.42.140 - Violation and penalty. 
A.  Violations of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable in the manner provided in Section 1.12.020(A). 
B.  Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a violation. 
C.  Violations of this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances. The city attorney or the district attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecution in a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law, and shall take such other steps, and shall apply to such courts or court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such tobacco retailers and restrain and enjoin any person from acting as a tobacco retailer contrary to the provisions of this chapter. The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity. 
(Ord. 855 § 1 (part), 2006)  
5.42.150 - Severability. 
This chapter and the various parts, sections and clauses thereof are declared severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby. The city council declares that it would have passed this chapter and each part thereof, regardless of the fact that one or more parts thereof be declared unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. 855 § 1 (part), 2006)  
Chapter 5.44 - GROUP HOME BUSINESS LICENSE 
 
5.44.010 - Intent. 
This chapter is intended to reasonably regulate the use of dwellings in residential zones for use as group homes for disabled persons. The city finds that the guests of the group homes and the community need to be assured that the group homes are placed and operated in a manner consistent with the goal of providing a family environment or the fundamental equivalent thereof while at the same time protecting the health, safety and welfare of the guests and the community and to assure the limitation of the negative impacts that such uses may have on traffic, congestion, noise, children and family values. 
(Ord. 874 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007: Ord. 870 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.44.015 - Fair housing. 
Group home operators shall comply with federal fair housing laws and grant persons with disabilities the ability to make reasonable accommodation requests for equal opportunity use and enjoyment of a dwelling. The group home operator shall not refuse residency to persons with disabilities, or place conditions on their residency, on the basis of those persons requiring reasonable accommodation. 
(Ord. No. 971, § 2, 10-25-2011)  
5.44.020 - Definitions. 
For purpose of this chapter the following definitions apply: 
"Code" means the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
"Director" means the director of housing and neighborhood revitalization for the city of Lancaster. 
"Disability" means, with respect to a person: 
1.  A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities; 
2.  A record of having such an impairment; or 
3.  Being regarded as having such an impairment, but such term does not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance. 
"Group home(s)" means state licensed group homes, unlicensed group home(s), unlicensed group facility(ies). 
"Operator" means the person, entity, or organization in direct control of the group home and responsible for its operation, management and maintenance. 
"State licensed group home(s)" means a licensed residential facility as defined in Section 1502(a)(1), a residential care facility for the elderly as defined in Section 1569.2(k), or a licensed alcoholism or drug abuse recovery or treatment facility as defined in Section 11834.02 of the Health and Safety Code, or any other state licensed group facility, which serve six or fewer persons, excluding the licensee, the members of the licensee's family and persons employed as facility staff and that provides the services and complies with the regulations promulgated under the above-referenced sections. 
"Unlicensed group facility" means a dwelling unit occupied by more than six persons, each of which has a disability, as defined herein, and who live together as a family or the functional equivalent thereof. However, unlicensed group facility shall not include an adult day care facility, day care center, family day care home, guest house, guest ranch, health retreat, long-term health care facility, rooming house or boarding house, motels, hotels or other transient occupancy. 
"Unlicensed group home(s)" means a dwelling unit occupied by six or fewer persons, each of which has a disability, as defined herein, who live together as a family or the functional equivalent, thereof. However, unlicensed group home shall not include an adult day care facility, day care center, family day care home, guest house, guest ranch, health retreat, long-term health care facility, rooming house or boarding house, motels, hotels or other transient occupancy. 
Except as provided herein, the definitions set forth in Section 17.04.240 and as set forth elsewhere in the municipal code shall apply to this chapter. 
(Ord. 874 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007: Ord. 870 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.44.030 - License required. 
No group home shall operate within the city without a valid group home business license in effect as provided in this chapter. A group home business license is in lieu of a general business license as required by Chapter 5.04 of this code. 
(Ord. 874 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007: Ord. 870 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.44.040 - Group home business license fee. 
Applications for a group home business license by a state licensed group home shall not be subject to the group home business license fee imposed by this chapter. Applications for an unlicensed group home or unlicensed group facility shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. The group home business license fee shall be used to defray the costs of the investigation, report, inspection, processing and enforcement, and is made in lieu of any other fees under the code, including, but not limited to, the fee charged under Chapters 5.04 and 5.40 of the code. 
(Ord. 874 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007: Ord. 870 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.44.050 - Application for group home business license. 
Applications for a group home business license shall be filed with the director on a form approved by and provided by the director. The application must be typewritten or legibly printed by hand. Illegible information will be treated as incomplete, and may therefore serve as grounds for denial of the application. The application shall be completed in its entirety and signed by the operator of the proposed group home if a sole proprietorship; all general partners if the operator is a partnership; all officers and directors if the operator is a corporation; and all participants if the operator is a joint venture. The application for a group home business license does not authorize the operation of a group home unless and until such group home business license has been issued. The application shall also contain or be accompanied by the following information: 
A.  The type of ownership of the proposed group home, i.e., whether by individual, partnership, corporation, or otherwise; 
B.  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation and the names and residence addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock of that corporation. If one or more of the officers, directors, or stockholders is a corporation, the provisions of this section pertaining to a corporate applicant shall apply; 
C.  If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the name and residence of each of the partners, including limited partners. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this section pertaining to a corporate applicant shall apply; 
D.  If the applicant is a limited liability company, the application shall set forth the name of the company exactly as shown in its articles of organization or operating agreement, together with the names and residence addresses of each of its officers, directors, and each member along with a description of the relative interests of each member. If one or more of the officers, directors, or members is a corporation, the provisions of this section pertaining to a corporate applicant shall apply; 
E.  The proposed location of the group home including the complete address and all telephone numbers of the premises; 
F.  The precise name under which the group home is to be operated; 
G.  A statement whether any medical or other support services will be provided to the guests and the type of such support; 
H.  The name, address and telephone number for the designated responsible person for the premises and any other person designated to be contacted in the event of emergency at the premises. The name and address of the owner and lessor of the real property upon or in which the group home is to be conducted; 
I.  In the event the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, the application must be accompanied by a copy of the lease and a notarized acknowledgement from the owner of the property or their representative that a group home establishment will be located on his/her property; 
J.  A description of any other business operated or to be operated at the same premises; 
K.  A certified copy of the applicable state license; 
L.  Any other information or documentation reasonably required by the director; 
M.  A written statement signed and dated by the applicant that he or she certifies under penalty of perjury of the laws of the state of California that all information contained in the application is true and correct. 
(Ord. 874 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007: Ord. 870 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.44.060 - Application for group home business license, except state licensed group homes. 
In addition to the requirements of Section 5.44.050, applications for group home business license by an unlicensed group home or unlicensed group facility shall also contain or be accompanied by the following information: 
A.  A description of the facilities, including the number and square footage of rooms, the layout of the building, interior walls, location of bedroom, bathrooms, kitchen, eating and sitting areas; 
B.  A statement that the proposed location for the unlicensed group home or unlicensed group facility is not within five hundred (500) feet or on the same block as another group home; 
C.  Proof of liability insurance; 
D.  A detailed description of the nature of the disabilities of the guests; 
E.  Authorization for the city, its employees and agents to seek information and conduct an investigation, including, but not limited to, a records check of prior convictions, to verify the information contained within the application; 
F.  Authorization and consent for the city, its employees and agents to inspect the group home as provided in Section 5.44.140; 
G.  A description of all policies, practices and procedures to be employed at the premises, including but not limited to manner in which guests are solicited or located, advertising methods, if any, procedures to determine whether guests are disabled, if the disability relates to alcohol, drug, substance abuse methods used to confirm that the residence are not actively engaged in their addiction; 
H.  Methods used to determine if any prospective guests pose a danger to themselves, the guests or the community; 
I.  Information related to the any prospective guest that poses a danger to himself, the other guests or the community at large; 
J.  Methods, practice and procedures used to determine if a person residing in a group home is no longer qualified as disabled. This includes, but is not limited to determining if those persons who are recovering from drug, substance or alcohol abuse or addiction are using or have used such substances while residing at the group home; 
K.  Description of the agreements between the operator and/or the guests with regard to the use and occupancy of the group home, including the term of occupancy required and including copies of guest agreements, e.g., leases, rental agreements; 
L.  A complete written list containing the following information regarding employees that will perform service where the group home will be located: name of employee, date of hire, driver's license or California Identification Card number, date of birth, job title and description. Each operator shall submit in writing to the director any modified information within ten (10) working days of the modification of employment status, job title, and/or job description. 
(Ord. 874 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007: Ord. 870 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.44.070 - Issuance of group home business license to state licensed group home. 
The director shall issue a permit to a state licensed group home upon submission of a properly completed application for a group home business license by a state licensed group home. 
(Ord. 874 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007: Ord. 870 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.44.080 - Issuance of group home business license to unlicensed group home. 
The director shall issue a permit to an unlicensed group home upon submission of a properly completed application for a group home business license and the fee required by Section 5.44.040 of this chapter and upon making the following findings: 
A.  The group home guests qualify as having a disability, as defined in this chapter; 
B.  The dwelling unit has sufficient kitchen facilities for the guests; 
C.  The home has sufficient restroom and bathing facilities for the guests; 
D.  The dwelling unit has sufficient sitting or congregation area; 
E.  That the group home complies with all applicable building and safety codes, rules and regulations, including, but limited to the Uniform Housing Code; 
F.  That the group home will provide the guests with a family environment or reasonable equivalent thereof; 
G.  That the property is not within five hundred (500) feet of or on the same block as another group home; 
H.  That the guests do not pose a danger to themselves, the other guests or the community; 
I.  That the operator has not been convicted of a crime, including the illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or drugs or has been on parole or probation for any crime within the five calendar years preceding the date of the application; 
J.  That there is sufficient information to conclude that the guests intend to occupy the premises for a reasonable period of time that no guest is on less than a month to month basis; 
K.  That no businesses shall be conducted at the premises, except those for which a home occupation permit has been duly issued and is in effect; 
L.  That the application form has been properly completed and all documentation provided as required by this chapter; 
M.  That the applicant has not had another group home business license revoked or denied within the past twelve (12) months; 
N.  That manager and emergency contact information has been provided; 
O.  That there are sufficient safeguards, procedures and rules in place to identify and remove guests who are a danger to themselves or others, or uses illegal substances or drugs and if they are a recovering alcoholic, used alcohol. 
(Ord. 874 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007: Ord. 870 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.44.090 - Issuance of group home business license to unlicensed group facility. 
The director shall issue group home business license to an unlicensed group facility upon the occurrence of all of the following: submission of a properly completed application for a group home business license and the fee required by Section 5.44.040, upon making the findings required by Section 5.44.080 and upon the issuance of a certification of the director of planning that the unlicensed group facility is located in a medium or high density residential zone as defined in Section 17.08.020(A)(3) of the code or, upon a finding that the unlicensed group facility has at least one bedroom for each two guests, the unlicensed group facility is located within an urban residential zone as defined in Section 17.08.020(A)(2) of the code. 
(Ord. 874 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007: Ord. 870 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.44.100 - Approval or denial of group home business license. 
The director shall determine whether the applicant has submitted a complete application for a group home business license within twenty (20) days of its submission. An application is complete if it has been fully and properly completed in accordance with this chapter and the nonrefundable fee required pursuant to Section 5.44.040 of this chapter has been tendered. If the director determines that the applicant has not submitted a complete application, the director shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact. The applicant may request to withdraw the application in order to provide additional time to complete the required information. However, if the applicant withdraws the application, the review period ends, and the completed application will be processed as a new submittal. Upon determination by the director that a complete application has been submitted, the director shall issue or deny the issuance of the group home business license within twenty (20) days of such determination. 
(Ord. 874 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007: Ord. 870 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.44.110 - Term of group home business license. 
A.  A group home business license shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance. 
B.  Renewal applications shall be submitted on a form approved by and provided by the director and shall contain all information required by this chapter for initial issuance of the group homes business license, and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as provided in Section 5.44.040 of this chapter. 
C.  Applications for the renewal of a group home business license shall be filed with the director no later than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the group business license to prevent a lapse of the permit. No temporary permits shall be issued as a result of an applicant's failure to timely file a renewal application. 
D.  The review, approval, and issuance or denial of a renewal application shall be made in the same manner as for an original application pursuant to this chapter. A renewal application may also be denied on the grounds that the applicant has failed to comply with any permit conditions or other requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 874 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007: Ord. 870 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.44.120 - Group home operational requirements. 
All group homes shall comply with the following facilities and operational requirements: 
A.  Each group home and the operator shall comply with all applicable ordinances, laws, rules, and regulations for single-family residences or, with respect to unlicensed group facilities, multifamily residences. 
B.  Each guest must be provided with their own bed, sleeping area and storage area. At no time may there be overcrowding, nor shall any guest be asked to or directed to sleep on the floor, whether or not a mattress is used. 
C.  Sufficient restroom and bathing facilities must be provided and operational for the number of guests and must be available at all time, except when repairs are being made. 
D.  Sufficient lighting, electricity and equipment shall be provided in the group home sufficient for the guests to conduct their daily living activities. 
E.  Each guest of a group home shall be free from violence, harassment, unconsented touching, verbal or physical abuse or compelled to be in the presence of anyone who is a danger to him/herself or others. 
F.  No illegal drugs, controlled substances or alcohol (if the guest's handicap status relates to alcohol) shall be kept in or about the premises at any time. 
G.  The director shall be informed immediately, in the event any person residing at the group home is convicted of a violent crime, crime of a sexual nature or of a crime of moral turpitude. 
H.  No guest who is a recovering illegal alcoholic or drug or substance abuser shall be permitted to use, keep, purchase, or sell any alcohol, drug or substance while residing at the premises. Any guest who is a recovering alcoholic, drug or substance abuser who violates this section, shall be lawfully removed from the premises in accordance with the policies and procedures filed with the city. 
I.  No unlicensed group home or unlicensed group facility shall be located within five hundred (500) of another group home. 
J.  Upon the vacating of a group home by any guest, the operator shall notify the director. Prior to a new guest moving into the group home the operator shall notify the director, on a form to be approved and provided by the director, of the name of the new guest and sufficient information to confirm the eligibility of the new guest to occupy the group home. 
K.  Procedures, rules and guidelines shall be established and enforced for the maintenance of the dwelling where the group home is located to assure that the guests have a safe and sanitary home. 
L.  Each group home operator shall maintain a current record of all guests. Copies of such records shall be provided to the director within seven calendar days of any request for such records by a city official. 
(Ord. 874 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007: Ord. 870 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.44.130 - Group home location or operator change. 
A.  No group home business license shall be transferable. Any proposed change of operator, ownership interest or location of the group home shall require a new application for a group home business license as provided in this chapter. 
B.  Any attempt by a holder of a group home business license to transfer any interest in the group home shall render the group home business license to be revocable. Any attempt to transfer a group home business license, either directly or indirectly, in violation of this chapter is declared voided, and the permit shall be revocable. 
(Ord. 874 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007: Ord. 870 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.44.140 - Inspections. 
The city shall have the right to inspect the location where the group home is operating, in the same manner as with any similar dwelling unit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 5.40. Notwithstanding anything in Chapter 5.40, each group home shall be inspected annually or upon receipt of a complaint as described in Section 5.40.110. 
(Ord. 874 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007: Ord. 870 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.44.150 - Conditions. 
The facilities and operational requirements of Section 5.44.120 of this chapter shall be deemed conditions of approval for the group home business license for an unlicensed group home. Failure to comply with each and every such requirement shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of a group home business license, or for a denial of a renewal application for a group home business license. 
(Ord. 874 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007: Ord. 870 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.44.160 - Revocation. 
The director shall revoke a group home business license, in addition to any other basis provided by this code, upon determination that any of the following conditions exist: 
A.  Failure to operate in a manner consistent with the application; 
B.  Violation of any rule, regulation or section of this chapter by the operator, any employee or related person of the group home; 
C.  The operator and/or the applicant has been made a material false, misleading, or fraudulent statement or omission of fact to the city, or engaged in fraud, in the application for permit or while operating the group home; 
D.  The group home for which the group home business license has been approved is not in compliance with the provisions, requirements, or regulations of this chapter; 
E.  The occurrence of a public nuisance at the or emanating from the group home; 
F.  Conviction of any crime related to the use of the group home by the operator or the illegal use, sale or distribution by the operator of drugs, controlled substances or alcohol; 
G.  Violation of any provisions of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 874 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007: Ord. 870 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.44.170 - Reapplication after denial or revocation. 
A.  An applicant for a group home business license regulated by the provisions of this chapter whose application for such group home business license has been denied may not reapply for such group home business license for a period of one year from the date such notice of denial was issued. 
B.  A holder of a group home business license regulated by the provisions of this chapter whose group home business license has been canceled, revoked, or invalidated may not reapply for such group home business license for a period of one year from the date such revocation, cancellation, or invalidation became final. 
(Ord. 874 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007: Ord. 870 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.44.180 - Appeals. 
Any decision of the director to deny, suspend, or revoke a group home pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be appealed to the city manager or his designee by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) days of the date of such decision. Failure of the city clerk to receive a timely notice of appeal constitutes a waiver of the right to contest any decision hereunder. In this event, the decision is final and binding. Appeals under this chapter shall be heard as follows: 
A.  The hearing shall be conducted by the city manager or his duly authorized designee who shall act as hearing officer; and who shall herein be referred to as the "hearing officer" who shall consider all relevant evidence including, but not limited to, applicable staff reports, objections or protests relative to the decision. Such hearing may be continued from time to time. 
B.  Upon the conclusion of said public hearing, the hearing officer shall, on the basis of the evidence presented at such hearing, determine whether the decision should be upheld, modified or reversed. The determination of the hearing officer shall be final and conclusive. 
C.  A copy of the hearing officer's decision shall be served upon the owner of the property by United States mail or by personal delivery. In addition, a copy of the order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the property. 
(Ord. 874 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007: Ord. 870 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.44.190 - Public nuisance. 
Any group home operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions, requirements, and regulations of the code shall be, and the same is declared to be, harmful to the public health and safety, unlawful and a public nuisance, and the city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal, and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law, and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such group home establishments and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting, or maintaining a group home establishment contrary to the provisions, requirements, or regulations of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 874 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007: Ord. 870 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.44.200 - Recovery of attorney's fees. 
A.  A prevailing party in any judicial action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding, to abate or to cause the abatement of a public nuisance as defined in Section 5.44.190 of this chapter, or in any appeal or other judicial action arising therefrom, may recover reasonable attorney's fees in accordance with the following subsections: 
1.  Attorney's fees are not recoverable by any person as a prevailing party unless the city manager, or a designee thereof, or an attorney for, and on behalf of, the city, elects in writing to seek recovery of the city's attorney's fees at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding. Failure to make such an election precludes any entitlement to, or award of, attorney's fees in favor of any person or the city. 
2.  The city is the prevailing party when an administrative or judicial determination is made or affirmed by which a person is found to be responsible for one or more conditions or activities that constitute a public nuisance as defined by Section 5.44.190 of this chapter. A person is the prevailing party only when a final administrative or judicial determination completely absolves that person of responsibility for all conditions or activities that were alleged, in that action or proceeding, to constitute a public nuisance. An administrative or judicial determination that results in findings of responsibility and nonresponsibility on the part of a person for conditions or activities that were alleged in that action or proceeding to constitute a public nuisance, shall nevertheless result in the city being the prevailing party. 
B.  Provided the city has made an election to seek attorney's fees, an award of attorney's fees to a person shall not exceed the amount of reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the city in that action or proceeding. 
(Ord. 874 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007: Ord. 870 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.44.210 - Regulations nonexclusive. 
The provisions of this chapter regulating group homes are not intended to be exclusive and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other applicable provision, requirement, or regulation of the code or other laws. 
(Ord. 874 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007: Ord. 870 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
5.44.220 - Conflicts. 
If the provisions, requirements, or regulations of this chapter conflict with or contravene any other provision, requirement, or regulation of the code, the provisions, requirements, or regulations of this chapter shall prevail as to all matters and questions arising out of the subject matter of this chapter. 
(Ord. 874 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007: Ord. 870 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
Chapter 5.46 - FILM PERMIT 
 
5.46.010 - Permits and exemptions. 
A.  Permit Required. No person shall use any public or private property, public right-of-way, facility or residence for the purpose of taking motion pictures or television pictures or still photography without a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Exemptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect: 
1.  News media; 
2.  City produced public access films; 
3.  Family Video. The filming or videotaping of motion pictures or taking of still photographs solely for private use; 
4.  Studio Filming. Filming activities (motion or still photography) conducted in a certified sound stage or studio. 
(Ord. 883 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.46.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Antelope Valley film liaison" means the person designated as such in writing by the city manager. 
"Charitable films" means motion picture, television, or still photography produced by a nonprofit organization, which qualifies under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code as a charitable organization. No person, directly or indirectly, shall receive a profit from the marketing and production of the film or from showing the films, tapes or photos. 
"City produced public access films" means motion picture, television, or still photography produced by or in association with the city. No person, directly or indirectly, shall receive a profit from the marketing and production of the film or from showing the films, tapes or photos. 
"Motion picture, television, still photography" means and include all activity attendant to staging or shooting commercial motion pictures, television shows or programs, and commercials and to the taking of single or multiple photographs for sale or commercial use where the photographer sets up stationary equipment in any one location for longer than five consecutive minutes. 
"News media" means the photographing, filming or videotaping for the purpose of spontaneous, unplanned television news broadcast or reporting for print media by reporter photographers or cameramen. 
"Student films" means motion picture, television, or still photography produced to satisfy a course or curriculum requirement at an educational institution. The student filmmaker must supply proof that he or she is currently enrolled. 
"Studio" means a legally established, commercial, motion picture/television/still photography, place of business where filming activities (motion or still photography) are regularly conducted inside a studio/stage upon the premises. 
(Ord. 883 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.46.030 - Rules and regulations. 
The city of Lancaster's Antelope Valley film liaison is authorized and directed to promulgate rules and regulations governing the form, time and location of any film activity set forth within the city. He or she shall also set forth the procedures for the issuance of permits. The rules, regulations, and procedures shall be based upon the following criteria: 
A.  The health and safety of all persons; 
B.  Avoidance of undue disruption of all persons within the affected area; 
C.  The safety of property within the city; and 
D.  Traffic congestion at particular locations within the city. 
(Ord. 883 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.46.040 - Applicants and issuance. 
Any person desiring a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall make application on the appropriate form provided by the Antelope Valley film liaison. The form must be signed and accompanied by all required fees, deposits, and insurance certificate required by this chapter before it will be processed. 
In addition to the application requirements of this section, the application shall be accompanied by the written consent of all property owners and persons in possession of property which are affected by the activity regulated by this article as designated in the rules and regulations promulgated by the Antelope Valley film liaison. 
A.  Issuing Authority. The person or body responsible for issuing permits under this chapter shall be designated by the city of Lancaster's Antelope Valley film liaison. 
B.  Issuance. The Antelope Valley film liaison shall issue, conditionally issue, or not issue a permit as provided for in this chapter after consideration of the application and from such other information as may be otherwise obtained. The decision of issuance will be final unless appealed in writing within five working days of the decision by requesting a hearing of the director of parks and recreation at his or her earliest convenience. 
C.  Revoke/Cancel. In the event that an authorized representative of the permit authority determines that the activities being or to be conducted under this permit unnecessarily endanger the health or safety of any person, that said activities are likely to or will cause immediate damage to real or personal property, or that such activities are not being conducted in accordance with the terms and conditions of this permit, said representative, at his or her sole discretion, may suspend, revoke, cancel or amend said permit; provided however, that whenever there is an imminent danger to the public health, safety or welfare from activities conducted by the permittee to the extent that immediate action is necessary to protect the public, as determined by the authority having jurisdiction, the film liaison shall have the authority to immediately suspend a permit pending a hearing. Furthermore, failure to comply with the terms and conditions of said permit could result in the denial of any future permit applications by permittee, the person failing to comply and their respective principals, agents and employees. The permit authority reserves the right to suspend, revoke, cancel or amend said permit at any time without incurring any liability to permittee or its representatives, successors or assigns. 
D.  Upon the request of the applicant, the film liaison shall have the authority, upon a showing of good cause, to change the date for which the permit has been issued, provided established limitations are complied with in respect to time and location. 
(Ord. 883 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.46.050 - Permit fees. 
Each application shall be accompanied by: 
A.  A processing fee in an amount to be established by resolution of the city council to reimburse the city for staff time required to evaluate the application and establish conditions of approval and to monitor the activity. The processing fee shall not apply to or affect: 
1.  Charitable films, 
2.  Student films; 
B.  A daily property use fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council to compensate the city for the use of public property and its unavailability for ordinary and usual purposes resulting from the filming activity. The property use fee shall not apply to or affect: 
1.  Charitable films, 
2.  Student films, 
3.  Productions conducted wholly on private, county, or state property where no vehicles or equipment are parked or stored on city property or rights-of-way, where no traffic control measures are required and where the production activity will not in any respect interfere with the use and enjoyment of city property, public streets and neighboring property. 
(Ord. 883 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.46.060 - Liability provisions. 
A.  Liability Insurance. Before a permit is issued, a certificate of insurance will be required in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) naming the city of Lancaster, as well as its officers, agent, servants and employees as an additional insured for protection against claims of third persons for personal injuries, wrongful deaths, and property damage and to indemnify the city for damage to city property arising out of the permittees' activities. The certificate shall not be subject to cancellation or modification until after thirty (30) days' written notice to the city. Such insurance shall be evidenced by the standard general liability special endorsement form. 
B.  Worker's Compensation Insurance. An applicant shall conform to all applicable federal and state requirements for worker's compensation insurance for all persons operating under a permit and must be evidenced on the certificate of insurance. 
C.  Performance Deposit. To ensure cleanup and restoration of the site, an applicant may be required to post a refundable deposit, or cash in lieu of bonds, (amount to be determined) at the time application is submitted. Upon completion of filming and inspection of the site by the city, the deposit may be returned to the applicant. 
(Ord. 883 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.46.070 - Violation. 
If an applicant violates any provisions of this chapter or a permit issued pursuant thereto, the city may cancel the permit. Violation of the terms and conditions of the film permit is considered a misdemeanor. And a penalty fee may be assessed. 
(Ord. 883 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 5.48 - AMBULANCES 
 
5.48.010 - Intent and purpose. 
It is the intent of this chapter to establish general operating procedures and standards for medical transportation services operating within the city in both emergency and other situations and to provide a fair and impartial means of allowing responsible private operators to provide such services in the public interest. 
(Ord. 901 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
5.48.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined: 
"Ambulance" means a motor vehicle specifically constructed, modified, equipped, or arranged for the purpose of transporting sick, injured, convalescent, infirm, or otherwise incapacitated persons, authorized by the state as an emergency vehicle, and used, or having the potential for being used, in emergency service to the public. For the purpose of this chapter, the term "ambulance" also includes an ambulette, but does not include a helicopter or air ambulance. 
"Ambulance service" means the activity, business or service, for hire, profit, or otherwise, of transporting one or more persons by ambulance; provided, however, ambulance service shall not include the transportation by ambulance by an employer of his or her own employees in an ambulance owned and operated by the employer solely for this purpose. 
"Ambulance service operator" means any person who operates or owns an ambulance service. 
"Ambulette" means a motor vehicle specifically constructed, modified, equipped, or arranged for the purpose of transporting sick, injured, invalid, convalescent, infirm, or otherwise incapacitated persons whose medical condition requires transportation services but does not require emergency services or equipment during transport. 
"Business license" means a business license issued by the city pursuant to Chapter 5.04 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
"Business license ordinance" means Chapter 5.04 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
"City" means the city of Lancaster, California. 
"City council" means the city council of the city of Lancaster, California. 
"City manager" means the city manager of the city of Lancaster, California, or his or her designated representative. 
"County" means the county of Los Angeles, state of California. 
"Emergency" means a sudden, unforeseen event giving rise to a need for ambulance service with basic or advanced life-support services and is a condition in which an individual has a need for immediate medical attention, or where the potential for such need is perceived by emergency medical personnel or a public safety agency. 
"Emergency service" means ambulance service performed in response to an emergency. 
"Fire chief" means the fire chief of the Los Angeles County Fire Authority. 
"Licensee" means an ambulance service operator which has been granted a license under this chapter to provide ambulance service. 
"Medical services" means services provided by health care professionals licensed pursuant to the California Business and Professions Code or as specified by regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
"Patient" means a wounded, injured, sick, invalid, or otherwise incapacitated person. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or other group or combination acting as a unit. 
"Public safety agency" means any public law enforcement agency, fire protection agency, or forest ranger operating in the county. 
(Ord. 901 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
5.48.030 - Business license required. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to be an ambulance service operator, or to act in such a capacity, either directly or indirectly, within the city without first having obtained a license issued pursuant to Chapter 7.16 or Chapter 7.17 of the Los Angeles County Code, as applicable, and a business license. 
B.  A business license shall not be required for, and the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to, any of the following: 
1.  A public agency acting as an ambulance service operator; 
2.  Ambulances operated at the request of a public safety agency during any "state of war emergency," "state of emergency," or "local emergency," as defined in the Government Code; 
3.  Ambulance service transporting a patient from a location outside of the city, regardless of destination; 
4.  Ambulance service transporting a patient by helicopter or a fixed-wing airplane. 
(Ord. 901 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
5.48.040 - Transfer and term of business license. 
No business license issued to an ambulance service operator can be transferred by operation of law or otherwise. The following shall be considered transfers for purposes of this section: 
A.  Any change in the business structure of a licensee, including, but not limited to, changes from or to: 
1.  A sole proprietorship, 
2.  A partnership, including any change in the partners, and 
3.  A corporation, including any change in the shareholders, whether by operation of law or otherwise; 
B.  Bankruptcy, an assignment for the benefit of creditors, or the appointment of a receiver; 
C.  A sale or transfer of over ten (10) percent of the assets of a licensee. 
A licensee may apply to the city manager for an amendment to the terms of its business license, which request shall be processed in the same manner as an original application. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, a business license issued to an ambulance service operator may be suspended, revoked, or terminated prior to the expiration date, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 901 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
5.48.050 - Applications. 
A.  Each application for a business license submitted by or on behalf of an ambulance service operator shall be accompanied by an application fee, if any, set by the city council, and be made upon forms prescribed by the city manager pursuant to Section 5.04.030 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
B.  In addition to the information required in order to complete the application forms prescribed by the city manager pursuant to Section 5.04.030 of the Lancaster Municipal Code, an application for a business license submitted by or on behalf of an ambulance service operator shall contain or be accompanied by the following: 
1.  Proof that the applicant has been issued a license pursuant to Chapter 7.16 or Chapter 7.17 of the Los Angeles County Code, as applicable, and proof that such license is current and valid; 
2.  Such other information as the city manager may require in regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
C.  Renewal applications shall be submitted in the same form and require the same materials as original applications. 
(Ord. 901 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
5.48.060 - Investigations. 
Upon receipt of a completed application and the required fee, if any, the city manager shall make, or cause to be made, such investigation as the city manager deems necessary to determine if: 
A.  The applicant is a responsible and proper person to conduct, operate, or engage in the provision of ambulance services; 
B.  The applicant meets the requirements of this chapter and of other applicable laws, ordinances, or regulations. 
(Ord. 901 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
5.48.070 - Issuance or denial of business license. 
A.  The city manager shall issue a business license to an applicant if the city manager, after completing any investigation required pursuant to this chapter, determines the following: (i) that all requirements of this chapter have been met; (ii) that the applicant has been issued and possesses a current and valid license pursuant to Chapter 7.16 or Chapter 7.17 of the Los Angeles County Code; as applicable, and (iii) that the business license fee, if any, set by the city council, has been paid. 
B.  In the event of denial, the applicant shall be informed by the city manager in writing of the reasons therefor. 
C.  In addition to the grounds for denial stated in Section 5.04.100 of the Lancaster Municipal Code, the failure to meet the requirements of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a sufficient basis upon which an application for a business license submitted by or on behalf of an ambulance service operator may be denied. 
(Ord. 901 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
5.48.080 - Business license suspension or revocation. 
A.  In addition to the reasons set forth in Section 5.04.170 of the Lancaster Municipal Code, the city manager may suspend or revoke an ambulance service operator's business license for any or all of the following: 
1.  Failure by the licensee to comply with, and maintain compliance with, or for violation of, any applicable provision, standard, or requirement of state law, or regulation of this chapter, or of any regulations promulgated hereunder; 
2.  Failure by the licensee to maintain a current and valid license issued pursuant to Chapter 7.16 or Chapter 7.17 of the Los Angeles County Code, as applicable; or 
3.  Failure by the licensee to comply with, and maintain compliance with, or for violation of, any applicable provision, standard or requirement of Chapter 7.16 or Chapter 7.17 of the Los Angeles County Code, as applicable. 
B.  Suspension of a license is not a condition precedent to revocation of a license. 
C.  Before issuing a suspension or revocation, the city manager shall give written notice to the licensee. Said notice shall: 
1.  Specify the reason(s) for which the proposed action is to be taken; 
2.  Set a hearing for not more than fifteen (15) days nor less than seven days after the date of the notice; 
3.  Specify the date, time and place of the hearing; and 
4.  Be served on the licensee either by delivery to its principal place of business or to its designated agent for service of such notices, if any. 
D.  If the licensee, subsequent to service of a suspension or revocation notice under this section, remedies some or all of the conditions to which the notice refers, the city manager may rescind the suspension or revocation at any time. 
E.  At the hearing, the city manager has the burden of proof and may present evidence as to why such action should be taken and to answer the evidence presented by the licensee. 
F.  The city manager may reduce the period of time for hearing under a suspension or revocation notice to no less than twenty-four (24) hours when the city manager makes written preliminary findings that such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. When, as a result of such an emergency proceedings, a license is suspended or revoked, the licensee may request an additional hearing at which the licensee will have the burden of establishing renewed compliance justifying reinstatement of the license. Such additional hearing will be commenced within five days of the licensee's request. The request for, and the scheduling of, an additional hearing shall not stay operation of the suspension or revocation order. 
G.  Hearings conducted pursuant to this section shall be conducted before a hearing officer designated by the city council. At the conclusion of said hearing, the hearing officer shall expeditiously prepare a written summary of the evidence, findings and conclusion. 
(Ord. 901 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
5.48.090 - Appeal. 
In the event of denial, suspension, or revocation of a license, the applicant or licensee may appeal the decision by submitting a notice of appeal in accordance with the uniform appeal procedure set forth in Chapter 2.44 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 901 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
5.48.100 - Notification. 
The licensee shall notify the city manager within twenty-four (24) hours after any change in ownership or management of the licensee, or any interruption of service of more than twenty-four (24) hours duration, or any substantial change in staffing or equipment. 
(Ord. 901 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
5.48.110 - Rules and regulations. 
A.  As to all sections of this chapter, the city manager shall make such rules and regulations as may be necessary to implement this chapter. 
B.  The city manager or the fire chief or their respective designee(s) may inspect the records, facilities, transportation units, equipment and method of operating of each licensee whenever necessary and, by the city manager, at least annually. 
(Ord. 901 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
5.48.120 - Complaints. 
The city, any user, subscriber, public safety agency or consumer who believes, or has reason to believe, that an individual has been required to pay an excessive charge for services, received inadequate services, or services provided were not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, may file a written complaint with the city manager setting forth such allegations. The city manager shall notify the ambulance service operator of such complaint. The ambulance service operator shall file a written response within fifteen (15) calendar days after receipt of the notification. 
(Ord. 901 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
5.48.130 - Variance. 
The city manager may grant variances from the terms of this chapter if he or she finds such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare. Such variances may include the issuance of a temporary license. No temporary license shall exceed one hundred eighty (180) days in duration. 
(Ord. 901 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
5.48.140 - Applicability of the business license ordinance. 
This chapter does not supplant, but supplements the city's business license ordinance. In the event of a conflict between this chapter and the city's business license ordinance, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. 901 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
5.48.150 - Violation and penalty. 
Any person violating this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In accordance with Chapter 1.12 of the Lancaster Municipal Code, any person convicted of a misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day or any portion thereof that a person violates any portion of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 901 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
Chapter 5.52 - STREET PERFORMERS 
 
5.52.010 - Purpose. 
The city council finds that the existence in the city of street performers provides a public amenity that enhances the character of the city and seeks to encourage such performances to the extent that they do not interfere with the reasonable expectations of residents to the enjoyment of peace and quiet in their homes or the ability of businesses to operate and conduct their businesses uninterrupted. This chapter seeks to balance the interests of performers with the residents and businesses of the city by imposing reasonable time, place and manner restrictions on street performers to the extent necessary in order to ensure the safety of performers, their audience, and the general public and to prevent unreasonable interference with residents' enjoyment of peace and quiet in their homes or the ability of businesses to operate and conduct their business. 
(Ord. No. 966, § 1, 6-26-2011)  
5.52.020 - Definitions. 
Except as otherwise expressly set forth herein, the following words and terms as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
"City" means the City of Lancaster. 
"City manager" means the city manager of the city or his or her duly authorized representative. 
"Designated performance zone" means the area(s) or zone(s) within the city designated by resolution of the city council as constituting a "designated performance zone" for purposes of this chapter. 
"Perform", "performance" and/or "performing" includes, but is not limited to, the following activities: acting, singing, playing one or more musical instrument, pantomiming, juggling, performing magic, dancing, reading, puppeteering and/or reciting. "Perform" shall not include the production of items for sale. 
"Performance permit" means a performance permit issued by the city to a performer pursuant to this chapter. 
"Performer" means a person who has obtained a permit pursuant to this chapter. 
"Public area" means a public sidewalk, parkway, and/or all other public spaces located in the city. 
(Ord. No. 966, § 1, 6-26-2011)  
5.52.030 - Performance permit required. 
No person may perform in a public area without a performance permit. 
(Ord. No. 966, § 1, 6-26-2011)  
5.52.040 - Application for performance permit. 
A.  An application for a performance permit shall be submitted to the city manager by and in the name of each person proposing to perform in a public area and shall be signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury. A performance permit issued contrary to this chapter, or contrary to any other law, or on the basis of false or misleading information supplied by an applicant, or due to omission of a material fact, shall be revoked pursuant to Section 5.52.100 of this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to vest in any person obtaining and maintaining a performance permit any status or right to perform in contravention of any provision of law. 
B.  All applications pursuant to this section shall be submitted on a form supplied by the city manager. The application shall include the applicant's name, applicant's address, proof of the applicant's identity (such as a photocopy of the applicant's driver's license, identification card, passport or other form of identification approved by the city that contains a photograph of the applicant), a detailed description of the nature of the acts that applicant will perform (including the instrument(s) or prop(s) that will be used), a true and correct photocopy of the applicant's seller's permit issued by the California State Board of Equalization (in order for the applicant to sell recordings of his or her own work pursuant to Section 5.52.070(S)) and any other information the city manager determines is necessary to administer and enforce this chapter. In addition to the foregoing, an application submitted by a minor must include a copy of the entertainment work permit issued to the minor by the Department of Industrial Relations of the State of California and shall identify the responsible adult(s) who will be with the minor at all times that the minor is performing. 
(Ord. No. 966, § 1, 6-26-2011)  
5.52.050 - Performance permit issuance and denial. 
A.  Within ten (10) days of receipt of an application for a performance permit and the required fee, the city manager shall issue a performance permit unless substantial record evidence demonstrates one of the following bases for denial: 
1.  The application is incomplete or inaccurate; or 
2.  The application seeks a performance permit for a person who has had a performance permit revoked pursuant to this chapter; or 
3.  The application seeks a performance permit for a type of performance that is unlawful pursuant to any section of this chapter; or 
4.  The application seeks a performance permit for a type of performance that is unlawful pursuant to any state or federal law. 
B.  The permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall state on its face such information as shall be determined by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 966, § 1, 6-26-2011)  
5.52.060 - Term of performance permit. 
A performance permit shall be valid for a period of one year from the date it is issued. 
(Ord. No. 966, § 1, 6-26-2011)  
5.52.070 - Performance permit terms, conditions and requirements. 
All performance permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to, and all performers shall comply with, the following terms, conditions and requirements: 
A.  A performer may not perform in any of the following locations: 
1.  Within ten (10) feet of any bus stop; 
2.  Within ten (10) feet of any street corner or marked pedestrian crosswalk; 
3.  Within ten (10) feet of the outer edge of an entrance to any business, including, but not limited to, doors, vestibules, driveways, outdoor dining entries, and/or emergency exits, during the hours that such business is open to the public or to persons having or conducting lawful business; 
4.  Outside a designated performance zone. 
B.  A performer may perform only within a designated performance zone. 
C.  A performer may perform only during the following times: 
1.  Mondays through Thursdays, between 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.; 
2.  Fridays and Saturdays, between 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight; and 
3.  Sundays, between 12:00 noon and 10:00 p.m. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city manager may designate certain days and/or times during which no performer may perform within a designated performance zone or within any portion of a designated performance zone. 
D.  A performer may perform in one location for up to two hours, after which time such performer shall move to a different location that is at least five storefronts or one hundred fifty (150) feet (whichever is farther) from the previous location. 
E.  A performer may not block or obstruct the free and safe movement of pedestrians. If a sufficient crowd gathers to observe a performer such that the passage of the public through a public area is blocked or obstructed, a peace officer, code enforcement officer employed by the city and/or a business license enforcement officer employed by the city may disburse that portion of the crowd that is blocking or obstructing the passage of the public. If a performer cannot perform in a location without blocking or obstructing the passage of the public, a peace officer, code enforcement officer employed by the city and/or a business license enforcement officer employed by the city may cause such performer to leave such location or require that such performer relocate, but shall not prevent such performer from occupying another location in compliance with this chapter. 
F.  A performer may not construct, erect or maintain any stage, platform, or similar structure. 
G.  A performer may not use any knife, sword, torch, flame, axe, saw or other object that can cause serious bodily injury to any person, or engage in any activity, including, but not limited to, acrobatics, tumbling, or cycling, that can cause serious bodily injury to any person. 
H.  A performer may not use any generator, wet cell battery with removable fill caps, or any other power source that poses a fire or public safety hazard. A performer may not connect or maintain an electrical cord to an adjacent building or to a city power source. 
I.  A performer may not litter his or her performance site. 
J.  A performer may not utilize during his or her performance or prevent the public from utilizing any public bench or waste receptacle. 
K.  A performer may not place any object on a public sidewalk that causes less than a four-foot contiguous sidewalk width being kept clear for pedestrian passage. 
L.  A performer may not perform with more instruments, props, equipment, merchandise, or other items than such performer can reasonably transport or remove at one time. 
M.  A performer may not place his or her instruments, props, equipment, merchandise, or other items on a public sidewalk, public street, or public right-of-way for more than two hours without performing in accordance with this chapter. 
N.  A performer may not leave his or her instruments, props, equipment, merchandise, or other items unattended. 
O.  A performer may not block or obstruct a curb cut. 
P.  A performer or group of performers may not perform within one hundred (100) feet of another performer or group of performers. 
Q.  A performer may not generate noise or sound that is audible at a distance of more than fifty (50) feet from such performer's performance site or that violates the provisions of Chapter 8.24 of this code. 
R.  A performer may perform for donations, subject to the provisions of Chapter 9.36 of this code. 
S.  A performer may offer for sale recordings of his or her own work in the form of records, cassettes, videotapes, compact disks, or digital versatile disk, without the need for a general business license issued pursuant to Chapter 5.04 of this code, provided that the performer submitted to the city with his or her application for a performer's permit a true and correct copy of his or her seller's permit issued by the California State Board of Equalization. 
T.  A performer shall clearly display his or her performance permit while performing, and shall allow inspection of such permit upon request by any peace officer or city official. 
(Ord. No. 966, § 1, 6-26-2011)  
5.52.080 - Fees for performance permit. 
The city council shall establish by resolution, and from time to time may amend, the fees for the administration of this chapter. Fees required by this chapter shall be in addition to any required under any other chapter of this code. 
(Ord. No. 966, § 1, 6-26-2011)  
5.52.090 - Designated performance zone. 
The city council shall designate by resolution, and from time to time may amend, the areas within the city that constitute a designated performance zone. 
(Ord. No. 966, § 1, 6-26-2011)  
5.52.100 - Revocation of performance permit. 
The city manager shall revoke a performance permit, in addition to any other basis provided by this code, upon determination that any of the following conditions exist: 
A.  A performer has failed to perform in accordance with this chapter and has violated one or more of the provisions of this chapter on two or more separate occasions. For purposes of the preceding sentence, the term "on two or more separate occasions" shall mean on two or more separate days; 
B.  A performer made a material false, misleading, or fraudulent statement or omission of fact to the city, or engaged in fraud, in the application for performance permit; 
C.  A performer has violated any federal, state or local law, regulation or ordinance while engaged in a performance pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 966, § 1, 6-26-2011)  
5.52.110 - Appeal. 
If any person is aggrieved by a decision of the city manager regarding the issuance, denial or revocation of a performance permit, such person may appeal the decision by submitting a notice of appeal in accordance with the uniform appeal procedure set forth in Chapter 2.44 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 966, § 1, 6-26-2011)  
5.52.120 - Violation and penalty. 
A.  Violations of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable in the manner provided in Section 1.12.020(A) of this code. 
B.  Any violation of this chapter shall be and the same is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city attorney or the district attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecution in a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law, and shall take such other steps, and shall apply to such other courts or court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such public nuisance and restrain and enjoin any person from violating the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  For failure to pay a permit fee when due, the finance director shall add a penalty of twenty (20) percent of the permit fee on the first date of the month following the due date and ten percent each month thereafter while the fee remains unpaid, provided that the amount of the penalty shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the amount of the permit fee due. 
D.  If a performer fails to obtain a performance permit, the permit fee due shall be that amount due and payable from the date of the performer's first performance, together with the penalty described in subsection C of this section. 
E.  The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 966, § 1, 6-26-2011)  
5.52.130 - Severability. 
If any part or provision of this chapter is found to be invalid or unenforceable by a court of law, such invalidity shall not affect any other part or provision herein, and all remaining provisions of this chapter will be valid and enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 966, § 1, 6-26-2011)  
Chapter 5.56 - COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, adopted December 11, 2018, repealed and reenacted Chapter 5.56 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, Chapter 5.56 pertained to medical cannabis cultivators, and derived from Ord. No. 1019, § 1, adopted February 28, 2017. 
 
5.56.010 - Purpose and intent. 
Commercial cannabis activity shall be permitted as set forth in this chapter and chapter 17.43 of the Code. Licensure and location approval shall be required pursuant to and in accordance with this chapter, chapter 17.43 of the Code, and any and all regulations promulgated by the city manager to implement the provisions of this chapter and/or chapter 17.43. The purpose of this chapter is to align the city's regulation of commercial cannabis activity with applicable state law and to regulate the types of commercial cannabis activity permitted under state law. This chapter is enacted specifically in response to the state laws that permit commercial cannabis activity and the objective of this chapter is to minimize its negative impacts. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018)  
5.56.020 - Definitions. 
A.  The following terms shall be defined as follows: 
"Adult-use" or "adult-use cannabis" means cannabis or cannabis product that is used or intended to be used by adults who are over twenty-one (21) years of age and who do not possess a physician's recommendation for medicinal cannabis. 
"Applicant" means a person applying for a city commercial cannabis license. 
"Cannabis" means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salts, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtain from cannabis. For the purpose of this chapter, "cannabis" does not mean industrial hemp as that term is defined by Section 81000 of the California Food and Agricultural Code or Section 11018.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
"Cannabis concentrate" means cannabis that has undergone a process to concentrate one or more active cannabinoids, thereby increasing the product's potency. Resin from granular trichomes from a cannabis plant is a concentrate for purposes of this chapter. 
"Cannabis cultivation facility" means a facility wherein cannabis is propagated, planted, grown, harvested, dried, cured, graded, labeled, tagged for tracking or trimmed, or that does all or any combination of those activities. 
"Cannabis dispensary" or "dispensary" means a premises where cannabis, cannabis products, or devices for the use of cannabis or cannabis products are offered, either individually or in any combination, for retail sale, including an establishment that delivers cannabis and cannabis products as part of a retail sale. 
"Cannabis distribution facility" means any facility or location, not associated with a primary or tenant license, where the primary purpose is the procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and cannabis products between entities. 
"Cannabis facility" means collectively any cannabis cultivation facility and/or manufacturing facility, as those terms are defined in this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, "cannabis facility" and "facility" may be used interchangeably. 
"Cannabis manufacturing facility" means a facility where the production of cannabis concentrate, or preparation, propagation, compounding and/or packaging of manufactured cannabis is conducted, either directly or indirectly or by extraction methods, independently by means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis. 
"Cannabis product" means cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients. 
"Canopy" means the total combined indoor area for all locations on a property where cannabis is being cultivated, as measured by the horizontal extent of the plant or combination of plants at the widest point and measured in a straight line. This does not include aisles or walkways. 
"Cultivation" means any activity involving the propagation, planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis. 
"Delivery" means the commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products from a dispensary to a purchaser. "Delivery" also includes the use by a cannabis facility of any technology platform owned and controlled by the cannabis facility, that enables purchasers to arrange for or facilitate the commercial transfer by a licensed dispensary of cannabis or cannabis products. 
"Distribution" means the procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and cannabis products between licensed cannabis business entities. 
"Edible cannabis product" means manufactured cannabis that is intended to be used, in whole or in part, for human consumption, including, but not limited to, chewing gum, but excluding products set forth in Division 15 (commencing with Section 32501) of the Food and Agricultural Code. An edible cannabis product is not considered food as defined by Section 109935 of the Health and Safety Code or a drug as defined by Section 109925 of the Health and Safety Code. 
"Good cause" for purposes of denying, revoking or refusing to renew or reinstate a primary or tenant license includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
1.  The licensee or applicant has violated any of the terms, conditions or provisions of this chapter, of state law, of any regulations and/or rules promulgated pursuant to state law, any applicable local rules and/or regulations, or any special terms or conditions placed upon its conditional use permit, state license, and/or primary or tenant license; 
2.  The licensed premises have been operated in a manner that adversely affects the public health, safety or welfare or the safety of the immediate neighborhood in which the establishment is located, causes adverse economic impacts, increased crime, increased incidence of communicable disease, decreased property values and/or an increase in the number of transients in the area; 
3.  The licensee or applicant has knowingly made false statements, misrepresentations or material omissions on an application form, renewal form, or any other document submitted to the city; 
4.  Issuance of the license would impair the health, safety or welfare of the public, cause negative impacts to property values, impair the city's ability to prevent crime associated with cannabis, and/or impair the city's ability to ensure that cannabis grown remains secure and does not find its way to minors or illicit markets. 
5.  The applicant or licensee's criminal history does not indicate that the applicant or licensee is of good moral character; or the applicant or licensee has been convicted of an offense that is substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of the business or profession for which the application is made. In determining which offenses are substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of the business or profession for which the application is made, the city may consider, without limitation, the factors as set forth in Section 26057 of the Business and Professions Code; 
6.  The licensee or applicant is employing or being financed in whole or in part by any person whose criminal history indicates that person is not of good moral character; 
7.  The applicant or licensee has failed or refused to allow city officials to inspect security recordings, activity logs, or business records, of the licensed premises; 
8.  The licensee has failed to adequately reconcile its inventory, such that shortages in its cannabis and/or cannabis product cannot be accounted for in the paper and/or electronic inventory tracking system(s); 
9.  The applicant or licensee is owned by, has an officer or director who is, or is employing or financed in whole or in part by, a licensed physician making recommendations for medical cannabis; 
10.  The applicant or licensee has had a primary or tenant license revoked or has had more than one suspension on its primary or tenant license by the city; or 
11.  The applicant or licensee operated a cannabis business in violation of this chapter, chapter 17.43, or any other applicable state or local law. 
"Legal parcel" means a parcel of land for which one legal title exists. Where contiguous legal parcels are under common ownership or control, such legal parcels may at the option of the property owner be counted as a single parcel for purposes of this chapter. 
"Licensee" means a person who has been issued a state license, primary license and a conditional use permit pursuant to this chapter. 
"Manufacturer" means a person that conducts the production, preparation, propagation, or compounding of manufactured cannabis or cannabis products either directly or indirectly or by extraction methods, or independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis at a fixed location that packages or repackages cannabis or cannabis products or labels or relabels its container. 
"Medicinal cannabis" or "medicinal cannabis product" means cannabis or a cannabis product, respectively, intended to be sold for use pursuant to the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Section 11362.5 of the Health and Safety Code) by a medicinal cannabis patient in California who possesses a physician's recommendation. For purposes of this chapter, "medicinal" and "medical" may be used interchangeably. 
"Multi-section cannabis facility" means a cannabis cultivation and/or manufacturing facility that consists of multiple cannabis cultivation and/or manufacturing suites rented or leased to one or more persons other than the primary licensee, each of whom holds a tenant license and who operates subject to the primary license and the conditional use permit. 
"Person," as used in this chapter, means and includes any individual, partnership or any kind, corporation, limited liability company, association, joint venture or other organization or entity, however formed. 
"Primary license" means a cannabis regulatory permit issued by the city pursuant to this chapter, which is held by a person who will operate a cannabis facility or a multi-section cannabis facility. 
"State law(s)" shall mean and include California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 (Compassionate Use Act of 1996); California Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.7 through 11362.83 (Medical Cannabis Program Act); California Business and Professions Code Sections 26000 through 26231.2 (Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act ("MAUCRSA")), and all other applicable laws of the state of California. 
"State license," "license," or "registration" means a state license issued pursuant to MAUCRSA. 
"State licensing authority" shall mean the Bureau of Cannabis Control within the California Department of Consumer Affairs, the California Department of Public Health, the California Department of Food and Agriculture, or any other state agency responsible for the issuance, renewal, or reinstatement of a license issued under MAUCRSA or the agency authorized to take disciplinary action against such license. 
"Tenant" means a person who rents or leases a suite from a primary licensee at a multi-section cannabis facility. 
"Tenant license" means a cannabis regulatory permit issued by the city pursuant to this chapter to a person who rents or leases a suite from a primary licensee. 
"Testing laboratory" has the same meaning as that term is defined by Section 26001(as) of the Business and Professions Code and shall mean a laboratory, facility or entity that offers or performs tests of cannabis or cannabis products and that is both of the following: 
1.  Accredited by an accrediting body that is independent from all other persons involved in commercial cannabis activity in the state; 
2.  Licensed by the bureau of cannabis control. 
B.  Words and phrases not specifically defined in this Code shall have the meaning ascribed to them as defined in the following sources: 
1.  The Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5); 
2.  The Medical Cannabis Program Act (California Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.7 through 11362.83); and 
3.  The Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (California Business and Professions Code Sections 26000 through 26231.2) as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018)  
5.56.030 - Permissible cannabis commercial activity; number of permissible facilities. 
A.  Subject to this chapter, chapter 17.43 and all other applicable state and local laws and regulations, a person may operate an indoor cannabis cultivation and/or manufacturing facility within the city. 
B.  A primary or tenant licensee may engage in distribution of cannabis and/or cannabis products, provided such distribution is solely for purposes of procuring, selling and/or transporting cannabis and/or cannabis product for said licensee's facility. 
C.  The maximum number of primary licenses issued by the city may be limited by resolution of the city council. Such limitation may be based on number of primary licenses, the aggregate area of cannabis facilities, or any other measure determined by the city council. 
D.  Testing laboratories, accredited and licensed as required pursuant to MAUCRSA, may be operated within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018)  
5.56.040 - Prohibited commercial cannabis activity. 
Within the city, it shall be unlawful to operate a cannabis distribution facility, cannabis dispensary, cannabis delivery business, or outdoor cannabis cultivation facility. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018)  
5.56.050 - License required. 
It is unlawful for a person to operate a cannabis facility or suite without first having obtained a primary or tenant license. It is unlawful for a person to operate a cannabis testing laboratory without having first obtained a business license pursuant to chapter 5.04 of the Code. A person must have a current and valid license at all times such person is transacting business. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018)  
5.56.060 - Other licenses, permits, approvals required. 
A.  A licensee shall only operate at a location for which a conditional use permit has been approved for use as a cannabis facility, in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 17.43. 
B.  A testing laboratory must first obtain accreditation and state licensure as required pursuant to MAUCRSA prior to applying for, and being issued, a city business license, and must hold current and valid accreditation and state licensure at all times the laboratory is conducting business. 
C.  Prior to commencing cannabis facility or testing laboratory operations, a person shall obtain all approvals, permits and licenses required by other local agencies, including without limitation, the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health and the Los Angeles County Fire Department. 
D.  Prior to commencing cannabis facility operations, a person shall obtain all requisite state licenses, permits and approvals, and must maintain current and valid requisite state licenses at all times such person is operating a cannabis facility. Until such time as the applicable state agencies begin issuing permanent licenses, a cannabis facility shall obtain and maintain a current and valid temporary state license. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018)  
5.56.070 - Primary and tenant license application process. 
A.  Requirements for all primary and tenant license applicants. The applicant shall file an application with the city manager or designee upon a form provided by the city and shall pay an application fee as established by resolution adopted by the city council as amended from time to time. The application shall include a statement by the applicant that he or she certifies under penalty of perjury that all of the information contained in the application is true and correct. The city shall not receive or act upon an application for the issuance of a primary or tenant license pursuant to this chapter until a completed application and the fee established by resolution of the city council is submitted to the city. An applicant shall have an opportunity to cure any incomplete application within ten (10) days of written notice of incompleteness by the city. An application for a primary or tenant license shall include at least the following: 
1.  Proof of organizational status, such as articles of incorporation, taxpayer or employer identification number, by-laws, organizational minutes, partnership agreements, and other documentation as may be required by the city. 
2.  Proof of having paid for and obtained an electronic fingerprint scan, known as Live Scan; which will be used to conduct a criminal background investigation. Live Scan documentation shall be required of the applicant, any management personnel responsible for the day-to-day operations and activities of the cannabis facility, and any shareholder, partner, member, officer and/or director. 
3.  Documentation establishing that the applicant is, or will be, entitled to possession of the premises for which application is made. Evidence of lawful possession consists of a properly recorded deed, lease, evidence of ownership of the premises, or other written documents acceptable to the city. Applicants for a tenant license may provide a rental agreement, lease, or notarized letter from the primary licensee stating that tenant applicant shall be authorized to occupy the premises and operate a cannabis facility in the designated suite or unit, subject to issuance of the tenant license. The licensed premises shall only be the geographical area that is specifically and accurately described in executed documents verifying lawful possession. Licensees are not authorized to relocate to other areas or units within a building structure without first filing a change of location or modification of premises application, obtaining a conditional use permit for the new premises, paying the fee established by resolution of the city council and obtaining approval from the city. 
4.  An operating plan for the proposed cannabis cultivation facility (or suite or unit within a multi-section facility) including the following information: 
a.  A general description of the types of products and services to be provided by the facility; 
b.  A floor plan designating all interior dimensions and the layout of the facility, suite or unit, including all limited access areas, areas of ingress and egress, and all security camera locations. Such floor plan shall also show the principal uses of the floor area depicted therein and shall identify all areas where plants will be located; 
c.  An employee list; 
d.  Name of third-party tracking software the facility, suite or unit will use to track the cannabis; 
e.  A detailed description of the type of cultivation processes to be utilized, including, without limitation, all nutrients, chemicals and other materials; 
f.  A specific description of the types of manufacturing products, activities, extraction and/or infusion methods to be conducted, specific equipment to be utilized, whether and which volatile solvents will be used, and what percentage of the facility will be used for such activity. 
5.  A security plan for the proposed facility, suite or unit including, at a minimum, the following security requirements: 
a.  Video surveillance. The facility, suite or unit must be equipped with a video surveillance system that meets all of the requirements set forth in this subsection. 
i.  Security cameras and digital storage of recordings shall be maintained in good condition and used in an on-going manner, twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week. 
ii.  The security system must maintain at least one hundred twenty (120) concurrent hours of digitally recorded video for each security camera in the licensed premises. Security footage should be stored in an MPEG4, MJPEG, H.264, or another format approved by the city in writing. 
iii.  Security cameras must provide adequate and sufficient coverage for the facility, which must include but need not to be limited to, all restricted and limited access areas, all areas of ingress and egress, the public areas, storage areas, and any other areas as required by this chapter and the MAUCRSA. 
iv.  The video surveillance system must be equipped with a failure notification system that provides prompt notification to a security company licensed by the department of consumer affairs, bureau of security and investigative services, of any surveillance interruption or complete failure of the surveillance system that lasts longer than fifteen (15) minutes. The licensed alarm company must promptly report any such notification to the city's public safety department. 
v.  The video surveillance system shall have sufficient battery backup to support a minimum of four (4) hours of recording in the event of a power outage. 
vi.  The video surveillance system shall stream a live feed accessible to the city and Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department via a secure Internet portal, virtual private network or other form of secure remote access. 
b.  Alarm system. The facility, suite or unit shall have an audible interior and exterior security alarm system installed on all perimeter entry points and perimeter windows, operated, and monitored by a security company licensed by the department of consumer affairs, bureau of security and investigative services, and approved by the city. "Perimeter entry points" includes, regardless of size, all doors, windows, hatches and/or points at which systems (such as HVAC systems) enter a structure. 
c.  Signage requirement. The facility must comply with the following signage requirements. 
i.  A sign shall be posted in a conspicuous place near each point of public access which shall be not less than twelve (12) inches wide and twelve (12) inches long, composed of letters not less than one inch in height, stating "All Activities Monitored by Video Camera." 
ii.  Limited access areas shall be clearly identified by the posting of a sign which shall be not less than twelve (12) inches wide and twelve (12) inches long, composed of letters not less than a half inch in height, which shall state, "Limited Access Area—Authorized Personnel Only." 
d.  Lighting. The facility's, suite's or unit's entrance(s) and all window areas shall be illuminated during evening hours. The applicant shall comply with the city's lighting standards regarding fixture type, wattage, illumination levels, shielding, and other restrictions, and secure the necessary approvals and permits as needed. 
e.  Commercial-grade locks. All points of ingress and egress to a facility, suite or unit shall ensure the use of commercial-grade, nonresidential door locks and/or window locks. 
f.  Onsite security staff twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven days a week. 
6.  Written authorization for the city to seek verification of the information contained within the application and to conduct the background check(s). 
7.  Any additional information that the city may request to process and fully investigate the application. The additional information must be provided to the city no later than ten (10) days after the date of the request unless otherwise specified by the city. Failure to provide such additional information by the requested deadline may result in denial of the application. 
B.  Additional requirements for multi-section primary license applicants. In addition to the requirements set forth in subsection A. of this section, applicants for a multi-section facility primary license shall provide a statement acknowledging and agreeing that the applicant shall be liable and responsible for the conduct of its tenants and tendering to the city the annual surcharge amount attributable to its tenant licensees. The applicant shall further provide a statement attesting that the primary licensee shall enter into a written rental agreement, lease or other agreement with each of its tenants that incorporates, includes a copy of, and expressly requires the tenant to comply with chapter 5.56 and 17.43 of this Code, including, without limitation, the tenant's obligation to do the following: 
1.  Pay to the primary licensee the annual surcharge amount attributable to the tenant licensee's activities; 
2.  Comply with the employee license requirements set forth in this chapter; 
3.  Defend and indemnify the city as set forth in section 17.43.130 of this Code; and 
4.  Comply with the inspection requirements set forth in sections 5.56.140 and 17.43.140 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018)  
5.56.080 - Grounds for denial, suspension, revocation or refusal to renew; conditions of approval. 
A.  The city manager or designee shall reject an application for a primary or tenant license upon a finding of good cause, as defined in section 5.56.020. 
B.  The city manager or designee may place conditions upon the approval of any primary or tenant license which are, in the opinion of the city manager or designee, reasonably related to the protection of the health, safety and welfare of (i) the neighborhood in which the proposed cannabis facility is to be located, and/or (ii) the general public. 
C.  All persons who are engaged in or who are attempting to engage in cannabis activity in any form shall do so only in strict compliance with the terms, conditions, limitations and restrictions of this chapter, chapter 17.43, and all other applicable state and local laws and regulations. 
D.  The City manager or designee is authorized to make policies and procedures consistent with this chapter concerning the applications, the application process, the information required of applicants, the application procedures, and the administration and procedures to be used and followed in the application process. 
E.  A Primary or tenant license issued by the city constitutes a revocable privilege. The applicant has the burden of proving its qualifications for a primary or tenant license at all times. 
F.  The city manager or designee may summarily suspend, revoke or refuse to renew a primary or tenant license if any of the following occur: 
1.  The city manager or designee makes a finding of good cause concerning the licensee, as defined in section 5.56.020; 
2.  The city manager or designee determines that the licensee has failed to comply with this chapter, chapter 17.43 of this Code or any condition of approval, or a circumstance or situation has been created that would have permitted the city manager or designee to deny the primary license; 
3.  Operations cease for more than ninety (90) calendar days; 
4.  Ownership is changed without securing a new primary license; 
5.  The facility, suite or unit fails to maintain one hundred twenty (120) concurrent hours of security recordings; 
6.  The licensee fails or refuses to allow inspection of the premises, security recordings, books, records or other documents by authorized city officials; and/or 
7.  The licensee fails to possess and/or maintain all current and valid requisite state and county licenses. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018)  
5.56.090 - Modification or other material changes. 
In addition to any requirements in this chapter, a modification of a cannabis facility, and/or change of manager, location or other material change of the cannabis cultivation facility, suite or unit shall comply with the following: 
A.  The licensee shall report the proposed modification of cannabis cultivation facility, and/or change of manager, location or other material change of the cannabis cultivation facility, suite or unit to the city manager or designee on forms prescribed by the local licensing authority, pay the fee established by resolution of the city council and receive written approval from the city manager or designee prior to any such transfer or change. 
B.  In the event of a transfer of ownership interest in the primary or tenant licensee, a new license application must be submitted, with all other information and documentation required for said application. The city shall require a criminal background check for any new owner or manager of a cannabis facility, suite or unit that was not previously performed pursuant to this chapter. Should certain information or documentation remain applicable to the facility under new ownership, the applicant shall attest in writing to same, and shall identify specifically which information or documentation so applies. 
C.  A licensee shall not make physical change, alteration, or modification of the cannabis facility, suite or unit that materially or substantially alters the cannabis facility, suite or unit from the plans approved by the city without paying the fee established by resolution of the city council and obtaining the prior written approval of the city. Material changes include, but are not limited to: a decrease in the number of security cameras, the relocation of a security camera identified in the application submitted pursuant to section 5.56.070, an increase or decrease in the total square footage of the cannabis facility, suite or unit or the addition, sealing off, or relocation of a wall, common entryway, doorway, or other means of public ingress and/or egress. Applications for modifications of a cannabis facility, suite or unit shall be made on forms prescribed by the city. The city may deny a requested material modification if, in its sole discretion, it determines that such modification poses or has the likelihood of posing a hazard to public health, safety or welfare. 
D.  For a change of location, a licensee may apply to the city to change the location previously approved for such primary or tenant license to any other place in the city. Applications for changes of location shall be made on forms prescribed by the city. A change in location of a cannabis facility is subject to all zoning and distance requirements set forth in this chapter and chapter 17.43 and any and all other applicable local and state laws and regulation. It is unlawful to relocate any cannabis facility at any such place or location until the city grants express permission and the city has approved a conditional use permit for the new location. 
E.  With the exception of a suite or unit within a multi-section facility, a primary licensee shall not sublet any portion of a licensed premises for any purpose without prior written city approval. A tenant licensee shall not sublet any portion of the licensee's suite or unit. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018)  
5.56.100 - Renewal of a primary or tenant license. 
A.  A cannabis facility licensee may apply for the renewal of a primary or tenant license no less than sixty (60) days prior to the license's expiration date. The city may elect to administratively continue a primary or tenant license past its expiration date, provided that the licensee has tendered all requisite fees and has submitted a renewal application that is complete but pending final action by the city. 
B.  An application for renewal will only be accepted if it is accompanied by the requisite fees. 
C.  Each application for renewal shall include updated information for any part of the application that has undergone a change in circumstance since the original application, last renewal filing, or modification, and shall recertify all information submitted in prior application(s). 
D.  Unless the city has expressly authorized in writing the renewal of the primary or tenant license, a license is immediately invalid upon expiration and the cannabis cultivation facility shall cease operations until such time as a current and valid license is issued. 
E.  All primary and tenant licenses are valid for one year. A primary or tenant license may be valid for less than the applicable license term if revoked, suspended, voluntarily surrendered, or otherwise disciplined. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018)  
5.56.110 - Limitations on city's liability. 
To the fullest extent permitted by law, the city shall not assume any liability whatsoever, with respect to approving any primary or tenant license pursuant to this chapter or the operation of any cannabis facility, suite or unit approved pursuant to this chapter. As a condition of approval a primary or tenant license as provided in this chapter, the applicant shall: 
A.  Execute an agreement indemnifying the city from any claims, damages, liabilities or other obligations of any kind whatsoever, associated with the operation of the cannabis facility; 
B.  Maintain insurance in the amounts and of the types that are acceptable to the city manager or designee, with such additional insured endorsements as may be required by the city; 
C.  Agree to defend, at its sole expense and with counsel of the city's choice, any action against the city, its agents, officers, and/or employees related to the approval of a primary license; and 
D.  Agree to reimburse the city for any court costs and attorney fees that the city may be required to pay as a result of any legal challenge related to the city's approval of a primary license. 
E.  Deposit with the city and maintain security of at least twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) that may be used by the city as, when and to the extent necessary to satisfy the applicant's obligations under this section 5.56.110. The security required by this paragraph shall be in the form of cash or any other form approved by the city in its sole and absolute discretion. 
F.  Expressly acknowledge in writing that (i) the city incurs no liability whatsoever as a result of the city's issuance of a primary or tenant license pursuant to this chapter, a conditional use permit pursuant to chapter 17.43 and/or approval of the security plan required by this chapter, (ii) the applicant is aware that the cultivation of cannabis and/or the manufacture of cannabis products may violate federal law, including, without limitation, the Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. § 801 et seq., and the applicant assumes all liability for such violation. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018)  
5.56.120 - Additional terms and conditions. 
Based on the information set forth in the application, the city manager or designee may impose reasonable terms and conditions on the proposed operations of the cannabis facility in addition to those specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018)  
5.56.130 - Operational requirements. 
A primary or tenant licensee must operate the licensee's cannabis facility, suite or unit in full compliance with the requirements set forth in this chapter at all times. Failure to comply with any of these requirements shall be considered grounds for suspension and/or revocation of a primary or tenant license. 
A.  General obligation to operate in compliance. A licensee shall comply fully with all of the applicable restrictions and mandates set forth in applicable state and local laws and regulations, as well as the operating plan and security plan submitted pursuant to section 5.56.070. 
B.  General obligation to pay taxes. A Licensee shall pay any applicable sales tax pursuant to federal, state, and local law, and all other legally required taxes and fees required by this Code. 
C.  General obligation for compliant facilities. A licensee's facility, suite or unit, as well as all operations as conducted therein, shall fully comply with all applicable rules, regulations, and laws including, but not limited to, this chapter and chapter 17.43 of the Code requiring application and issuance of a conditional use permit, the California Revenue and Taxation Code, the Americans with Disabilities Act, and all applicable state laws. 
D.  Inspection of records. A licensee shall make its books, records and all other documents related to its operation available for inspection by any city officer, city official and/or law enforcement officer for purposes of determining compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
E.  Secure storage of product. Cannabis or cannabis product possessed by a licensee shall be kept and stored in a secured manner within a limited access area or restricted access area at all times in compliance with the security plan approved pursuant to section 5.56.070. 
F.  Prohibition on cannabis consumption on premises. On-site smoking, ingestion, or consumption of cannabis shall be prohibited on the premises of all cannabis cultivation facilities, suites and/or units. The term "premises" as used in this subsection includes the actual building, as well as any accessory structures, common areas and parking areas. A sign shall be posted at each entrance of a cannabis cultivation facility that clearly and legibly states, "Smoking, ingestion, or consumption of cannabis on these licensed premises or in their vicinity is prohibited and a violation of the Lancaster Municipal Code." 
G.  Prohibition on alcohol sales, distribution, or consumption on licensed premises. A licensee shall not sell, provide, store, or distribute any product that would require that the seller possess a license issued by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. 
H.  Display of license. A licensee shall display a copy of its primary or tenant license issued pursuant to this chapter in a conspicuous place at the entrance to the licensed premises. 
I.  No physician evaluations on licensed premises. A licensee shall not permit a physician to evaluate patients or to provide recommendations for medical cannabis within its licensed premises. Cannabis facilities shall not offer or provide any form of remuneration to a physician who recommends medical cannabis. 
J.  Community relations designee. A licensee must provide the city manager or his/her designee with the name, phone number, facsimile number, and email address of an on-site community relations representative or staff person or other representative to whom the city can provide notice if there are operating problems associated with the facility or refer members of the public who may have complaints or concerns regarding the facility. 
K.  Seed to sale tracking required. A licensee must utilize third-party software that tracks all sales, transfers, purchases, receipts, deliveries of cannabis and cannabis products. The software must be capable of producing electronic shipping manifests, tracking all cannabis inventory in possession of the facility, promptly identifying a discrepancy in the stock, and tracking cannabis back to its source in the event of a serious adverse event. 
L.  Unique identifiers. A cannabis facility must comply with the unique identification program required pursuant to MAUCRSA; provided, however, that any unique identification program shall, pursuant to Section 11362.777(f)(2) of the Health and Safety Code, adhere to the requirements set by the California Department of Food and Agriculture and be the equivalent to those administered by the California Department of Food and Agriculture. 
M.  Employee permits. No person shall be employed by or at cannabis facility, suite or unit, without a valid cannabis facility employee permit issued by the city to such person. A primary or tenant licensee shall promptly supplement the information provided as part of its application pursuant to section 5.56.070 with the names of all employees within ten (10) days of any change in the information originally submitted. 
1.  The city manager shall grant, deny and renew cannabis facility employee permits. The application for a permit shall be made on a form provided by the city manager, or his or her designee. The completed application shall contain the following information and be accompanied by the following documents: 
a.  The employee's legal name and any other names used by the employee; 
b.  The employee's age, date and place of birth; 
c.  The employee's present residence address and telephone number; 
d.  Whether the employee has been convicted of a criminal offense; 
e.  Date, issuing state and number of state issued driver's license or identification card and social security number; 
f.  Satisfactory written proof that the employee is at least twenty-one (21) years of age; 
g.  Proof of having paid for and obtained a Live Scan; 
h.  A color photograph clearly showing the employee's face; 
i.  If the application is made for the purpose of renewing a permit, the employee shall the permit number to be renewed. 
2.  The completed application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee adopted by resolution of the city council as may be amended from time to time. 
3.  If the city determines that the employee application is incomplete, the city manager shall notify the employee of such fact, including the reasons the application is not complete. The applicant shall have ten (10) calendar days to complete the application properly. 
4.  Reserved. 
5.  The city manager or designee shall grant, deny, revoke or refuse to renew an employee permit application and so notify the employee. The city manager shall grant the application and issue the permit unless the application is denied for one or more of the following reasons: 
a.  The employee has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a permit or in any report or document required to be filed with the application or has omitted information reasonably necessary for issuance of the permit; 
b.  The employee is under twenty-one (21) years of age; 
c.  The cannabis facility employee permit is to be used for employment in a business prohibited by state or local laws, ordinances, or regulations; 
d.  Within the preceding ten (10) years, the employee has been convicted of one or more of the following crimes: 
i.  Possession of a controlled substance for sale pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 11351. 
ii.  Sale of a controlled substance pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 11352. 
iii.  Any violent crime, as defined by Penal Code Section 667.5. 
iv.  Any crime considered a "strike" pursuant to Penal Code Section 1192.7(c). 
v.  Such other crimes or offenses as may be determined by the City Council by resolution. 
e.  The applicant's or permitee's criminal history does not indicate that applicant or permittee is of good moral character. 
6.  The cannabis cultivation facility employee permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted, and the expiration date. The city shall provide each person issued a facility employee permit with identifying information as determined appropriate by the city. The permit shall be available for inspection at all times during which the employee is on the premises of the cannabis facility. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018)  
5.56.140 - Inspections. 
Recordings made by security cameras, books, records and all other documents related to a cannabis cultivation facility's, suite's or unit's operation shall be made immediately available to the city manager or designee upon request; no inspection warrant, search warrant or subpoena shall be needed to view the materials. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018)  
5.56.150 - Appeals. 
A.  Any decision regarding the denial, suspension or revocation of or refusal to renew a primary or tenant license or employee permit may be appealed by filing a written appeal on a city-approved form, and paying the applicable fee, with the city clerk within ten (10) calendar days from the date of the decision. The basis for the appeal must be specified in detail on the appeal form. If a timely appeal is filed, the effect of the decision shall be stayed pending the outcome of the appeal, unless the city manager specifically finds that the public health and safety is endangered, in which case the decision shall take effect immediately. 
B.  Failure of the city manager to receive a timely appeal constitutes a waiver of the right to contest a decision; in this event, the decision is final and binding. 
C.  As soon as practicable after a timely appeal is filed, the city manager shall fix a date, time and place for a hearing. The hearing shall be conducted by an independent and impartial hearing officer. Written notice of the time and place for the hearing shall be served by first class mail, at the return address indicated on the appeal form, at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. 
D.  An appellant may request, in writing, that the city manager reschedule the hearing if the request is made at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the hearing. The city manager shall grant one continuance of the hearing date. 
E.  Failure of an appellant to appear at the scheduled hearing shall constitute the appellant's waiver of the right to appeal. In this event, the decision is final and binding. 
F.  Appeal hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. The hearing officer shall accept testimony and consider any relevant evidence presented by the city manager or his or her designee concerning the grounds for the contested decision. The hearing officer shall take the testimony of the appellant, and/or his or her witnesses, and will consider any other evidence the hearing officer deems reliable, relevant and not unduly repetitious. The appellant may represent himself or herself or be represented by anyone of his or her choice, including counsel, at his or her sole expense. The appellant may bring an interpreter to the hearing at his or her sole expense. 
G.  The hearing officer shall make findings based on the record of the hearing, and shall prepare a written decision, based on those findings, to uphold, dismiss or modify the city manager's decision concerning the denial, suspension or revocation of primary or tenant license or employee permit. A copy of the written decision shall be served on the appellant by first class mail within ten (10) business days after the hearing. 
H.  The decision of the hearing officer shall be the final administrative decision. The superior court is the sole reviewing authority and an appeal of the hearing officer's decision is not appealable to the city council. The written decision shall contain the following statement: "Judicial review of the director's decision is subject to the time limits set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure, section 1094.6." 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018)  
5.56.160 - Licenses, permits not transferable. 
Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary set forth in this chapter, primary and tenant licenses and employee permits issued pursuant to this chapter are not transferable. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018)  
5.56.170 - Violations; public nuisance. 
A.  It is unlawful and shall constitute a public nuisance to engage in or conduct any commercial cannabis activity in violation of any condition of a license, this chapter, chapter 17.43, or any other applicable local or state law. 
B.  Any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor violation and upon conviction thereof any violation shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day a violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
C.  The city may issue an administrative citation for each violation of this chapter pursuant to the procedures set forth in chapter 9.48; provided, however, that notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 9.48.060(E), the penalty amounts of administrative citations issued for violations of this chapter shall be as follows, which city council may periodically adjust by resolution: 
1.  For the first administrative citation, the penalty shall be ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00); 
2.  For the second and any subsequent administrative citation, the penalty shall be twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00). 
D.  The remedies provided herein are not to be construed as exclusive remedies, and in the event of violation, the city may pursue any proceedings or remedies otherwise provided by law. Any administrative citation issued pursuant to this chapter shall not prejudice or adversely affect any other civil, administrative or criminal action that may be brought to correct or abate any unlawful nuisance condition or use caused by a licensee, permittee or cannabis facility. A civil or criminal action may be brought concurrently with any other process regarding the same violation. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018)  
5.56.180 - Regulations. 
The city manager is authorized to promulgate such regulations as may be necessary or convenient to implement this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018)  
Title 6 - ANIMALS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 6.04 - ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 914, § 1, adopted January 27, 2009, repealed the former Chapter 6.04, §§ 6.04.010—6.04.030, and enacted a new Chapter 6.04 as set out herein. The former Chapter 6.04 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from prior code §§ 3-4.1—3-4.3; Ord. No. 731, §§ 1, 2, 1997; Ord. No. 789. § 1, 2001 and Ord. No. 795, § 1, 2001 
 
6.04.010 - Adoption of Los Angeles County Animal Control Ordinance. 
A.  Subject to the amendments contained in this Chapter, Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code ("Animals"), in affect as of January 1, 2009 and any subsequent amendments thereto, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference, and may be cited as the "County Animal Control Ordinance." A copy of said Title 10 is on file in the office of the city clerk and shall be at all times maintained by the city clerk for use and examination of the public. 
B.  In the event there are any inconsistencies between the county animal control ordinance and this chapter pertaining to animal control, the latter shall prevail. 
C.  In the event there are any inconsistencies between the county animal control ordinance and the city's zoning ordinance relating to the keeping of animals, the latter shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 938, §§ 1, 2, 12-8-2009; Ord. No. 914, § 2(Exh. A), 1-27-2009)  
6.04.020 - Definitions. 
Notwithstanding the definitions provided in Chapter 10.08 of the county animal control ordinance, whenever any of the following names or terms is used in the county animal control ordinance and this chapter, each such name or term shall be deemed or construed to have the meaning ascribed to it in this section as follows: 
"Approved obedience course" means a course of instruction taught by a trainer with at least five years teaching experience. At the end of the class the dog must successfully demonstrate "sit," "down," "stay," "walk politely on leash," and "come." Further proof must be demonstrated by a certificate of completion of the American Kennel Club's Canine Good Citizen Test or American Temperament Test Society test. 
"Board of supervisors" shall mean either the county board of supervisors or the city council of the City of Lancaster, as applicable. 
"City" shall mean the City of Lancaster. 
"City clerk" shall mean the city clerk of the City of Lancaster. 
"City council" shall mean the city council of the City of Lancaster. 
"Code" shall mean the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
"County" or "County of Los Angeles" or "unincorporated territory of Los Angeles County" shall also include the City of Lancaster. 
"Hearing officer" means an independent hearing officer appointed by the city. 
"Investigating officer" means an animal control officer, law enforcement officer or qualified person designated by the city manager of the city. 
"Owner" shall mean any person who holds the license to the animal, or if the animal is not licensed, the person legally entitled to possession of the animal, or any person with primary responsibility for the care of the animal. An owner shall also include any adult person who has possession of, or who exercises control over, an animal. 
(Ord. No. 938, §§ 1, 2, 12-8-2009; Ord. No. 914, § 2(Exh. A), 1-27-2009)  
6.04.030 - Inapplicability of provisions of the animal control ordinance. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 6.04.010 of this chapter, the following provisions of the county animal control ordinance are in applicable in the City of Lancaster: Section 10.20.185 ("Microchipping of dogs required"); and Part 4 of Chapter 10.20 (commencing with Section 10.20.350) ("Mandatory spay and neuter program for dogs"). 
(Ord. No. 938, §§ 1, 2, 12-8-2009; Ord. No. 914, § 2(Exh. A), 1-27-2009)  
6.04.040 - Amendment to the animal control ordinance. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 6.04.010 of this chapter, the following provisions of Chapter 10.37 of the county animal control ordinance for purposes of enforcement within the city are amended as follows: 
A.  Section 10.37.020 of the county animal control ordinance is hereby amended to read as follows: 
10.37.020 Potentially Dangerous Dog. 
 Potentially dangerous dog means any of the follows: 
 A. Any dog which, when unprovoked, on two or more occasions during any 36-month period, engages in any behavior that requires a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury when the person and the dog are off the property of the owner or custodian of the dog; 
 B. Any dog which, when unprovoked, bites a person or otherwise engages in aggressive behavior, causing a less severe injury than as defined in Section 10.37.040; 
 C. Any dog which, when unprovoked, has killed, seriously bitten, inflicted injury, or otherwise caused injury to a domestic animal off the property of the owner or custodian of the dog. 
B.  Section 10.37.030 of the County Animal Control Ordinance is hereby amended to read as follows: 
 "Vicious dog" means any of the following: 
 A. Any dog seized under Section 599aa of the Penal Code and upon the sustaining of a conviction of the owner or keeper under subdivision (a) of Section 597.5 of the Penal Code. 
 B. Any dog that engages in or has been found to have been trained to engage in exhibitions of fighting; 
 C. Any dog which, when unprovoked, in an aggressive manner, inflicts severe injury on or kills a person; 
 D. Any dog previously determined to be and currently listed as a potentially dangerous dog which, after its owner or custodian has been notified of this determination, continues the behavior described in Section 10.37.020 or is maintained in violation of Section 10.37.130. 
C.  Section 10.37.110 of the County Animal Control Ordinance is hereby amended to read as follows: 
10.37.110. Potentially Dangerous or Vicious Dog Hearing. 
 If an investigating officer has investigated and determined that there exists probable cause to believe that a dog is potentially dangerous or vicious, if the dog is licensed or the owner or custodian is otherwise known, the director shall give notice to the owner or custodian of the dog either personally or by first class mail with return receipt requested that a hearing may be held by an independent hearing officer appointed by the city for the purpose of determining whether or not the dog in question should be declared potentially dangerous or vicious and, if applicable, whether the owner or custodian of the dog should be prohibited from owning, possessing, controlling or having custody of any dog for up to three years. No notice or hearing shall be required if the owner or custodian of the dog is not known and the dog has not been licensed. In such event, the director may proceed with the disposition of the dog in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 10.36 and Sections 10.37.130 and 10.37.140 of the County Animal Control Ordinance. 
 If requested by the owner within five days of the notice, a hearing will be held promptly within no less than five working days nor more than 10 working days after the service of the notice upon the owner or custodian of the dog. This hearing shall be open to the public. The hearing officer may admit into evidence all relevant evidence, including incident reports and the affidavits of witnesses, limit the scope of discovery, and may shorten the time to produce records or witnesses. Whenever possible, a complaint received from a member of the public which serves as the evidentiary basis for the investigating officer to find probable cause shall be sworn to and verified by the complainant and shall be made part of the hearing record before the hearing officer. The owner or custodian of the dog may present evidence as to why the dog should not be declared potentially dangerous or vicious. The hearing officer may find, upon a preponderance of the evidence, that the dog is potentially dangerous or vicious and shall make other orders required or authorized by this chapter. The hearing officer may decide all issues for or against the owner or custodian of the dog even if the owner or custodian fails to appear at the hearing. 
 The owner or custodian of a dog determined to be a vicious dog may be prohibited from owning, possessing, controlling or having custody of any dog for a period of up to three years, when it is found, after proceedings conducted pursuant to this section, that ownership or possession of a dog by that person would create a significant threat to the public health, safety and welfare. 
D.  Section 10.37.120 of the County Animal Control Ordinance is hereby amended to read: 
10.37.120 Notice of Determination and Appeal. 
 A. Following the hearing conducted pursuant to Section 10.37.110, the owner or custodian of the dog shall be notified in writing of the determination and order issued, either personally or by first class mail, postage prepaid by the department. If the petitioner or the owner or custodian of the dog contests the determination, he or she may, within five days of the receipt of the notice of determination, appeal the decision, which appeal shall be made to the Superior Court pursuant to the provisions of Section 31622 of the Food and Agriculture Code. In addition to the fee for filing an appeal as provided for by Section 31622(a) of the Food and Agricultural Code which shall be payable to the county clerk. The petitioner or the owner or custodian of the dog shall serve notice of the appeal upon the city personally or by first class mail, postage prepaid. 
 B. The court hearing the appeal shall conduct a hearing de novo, without a jury, and make its own determination as to potential danger and viciousness and make other orders authorized by this chapter, based upon the evidence presented. The hearing shall be conducted in the same manner and within the time periods set forth in Section 10.37.110. The court may admit all relevant evidence, including incident reports and the affidavits of witnesses, limit the scope of discovery, and may shorten the time to produce records or witnesses. The issue shall be decided upon the preponderance of the evidence. The court hearing the appeal may decide all issues for or against the owner or custodian of the dog even if the owner or custodian fails to appear at the hearing. The determination of the court hearing the appeal shall be final and conclusive upon all parties. 
E.  Section 10.37.130 of the county animal control ordinance is hereby amended to read: 
 10.37.130 Conditions of Ownership of Potentially Dangerous Dogs. Any person may own a dog determined to be a potentially dangerous dog pursuant to Section 10.37.110 subject to each of the following conditions: 
 A. The dog shall be properly licensed, micro chipped, and vaccinated at the owner's expense, prior to release of the dog to the owner or custodian. The department shall include the designation in the registration records of the dog, after the hearing officer or court has determined that the designation applied to the dog. 
 B. The dog, while on the owner's premises, shall, at all times, be kept indoors, or in a securely fenced yard or enclosure from which the dog cannot escape, and into which children cannot trespass. The premises' yard or enclosure must be inspected and approved in writing by the department prior to release of the dog to its owner or custodian. 
 C. The dog may be off the owner's premises only if it is muzzled with a cage or basket muzzle or other muzzle approved by the director and restrained by a substantial leash, not exceeding four feet in length, and if it is under the control of an adult capable of restraining and controlling the dog. At no time may the dog be left unattended while off the owner's premises. 
 D. The owner or custodian of the dog shall notify the department immediately in the event the dog is at large, or has committed an attack on any person or animal, has been sold or otherwise disposed of, or has died. 
 E. The dog must complete an approved obedience course at the owner's expense within 60 days after release of the dog to its owner or custodian. The owner or custodian shall provide proof of registration in such course prior to release of the dog to the owner or custodian. 
 F. The dog must be spayed or neutered and implanted with an identifying micro chip at the expense of the owner or custodian prior to the release of the dog to its owner or custodian. 
 G. The owner or custodian of the dog may be required to maintain general liability insurance covering property damage and bodily injury caused by a potentially dangerous or vicious dog, with a combined single limit of $300,000.00 per occurrence, and may be required to show proof of such insurance prior to release of dog to its owner or custodian. 
 H. All charges for services performed by the department and the city pursuant to this Section 10.37.130, including the costs of holding the dog during the pendency of the proceedings provided for herein and all fines shall be paid prior to the release of the dog to its owner or custodian. If said charges and fines are not paid within 14 days after the date the services are performed or the fines are ordered to be paid, the dog shall be deemed to be abandoned to the department. 
 I. The owner of a dog which has been determined to be a potentially dangerous dog as defined in Section 10.37.020, shall pay the cost of the proceedings conducted pursuant to Section 10.37.110, and Section 10.37.120, and a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each separate basis upon which said determination was made. Said fine shall be paid to the city for the purpose of defraying the costs of the implementation of this chapter. 
 J. The director, hearing officer or court may impose such other reasonable conditions as are deemed necessary to protect the public safety and welfare. 
F.  Section 10.37.140 of the Animal Control Ordinance is hereby amended to read: 
Section 10.37.140 Consequences of Vicious Dog Determination. 
 A. A dog determined to be a vicious dog may be destroyed by the department when it is found, after the proceedings conducted under Section 10.37.110, that the release of the dog would create a significant threat to the public health, safety and welfare. 
 B. If it is determined that a dog found to be a vicious dog shall not be destroyed, the director, the hearing officer or judicial authority shall impose each of the conditions upon ownership of potentially dangerous dogs required by Section 10.37.130, and each of the following conditions: 
 1. The enclosure that is required pursuant to subsection B of Section 10.37.130 shall be an enclosure which is enclosed on all sides, and which is locked by a padlock. It may be required to have a top and a cement floor. The enclosure must be approved in writing by the department. 
 2. The owner or custodian of a vicious dog must give written notice of the vicious dog determination to United States Post Office (local branch) and all utility companies which provide services to the premises where the dog is kept. The owner or custodian shall provide a copy of such notice to the department within 30 days after the determination that the dog is vicious and prior to release of the dog to the owner or custodian. 
 3. The owner or custodian of the dog shall post one or more signs on the premises at a location(s) approved by the department stating that a dog which has been determined to be vicious resides on the premises. 
 C. The owner of a dog which has been determined to be a vicious dog pursuant to the provisions of Section 10.37.110 shall pay the costs of conducting the proceedings pursuant to Section 10.37.110 and Section 10.37.120, and a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 for each separate basis upon which said determination was made. Said fine shall be paid to the city for the purpose of defraying the cost of the implementation of this chapter. 
 D. The owner of a dog determined to be a vicious dog may be prohibited from owning, possessing, controlling or having custody of any dog for a period of up to three years, if it is found at the hearing conducted pursuant to the petition to declare the dog vicious, that ownership or possession of a dog by that person would create a significant threat to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 938, §§ 1, 2, 12-8-2009; Ord. No. 914, § 2(Exh. A), 1-27-2009)  
Chapter 6.08 - MANDATORY SPAY AND NEUTER PROGRAM 
Sections: 
 
6.08.010 - Definitions. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided by this section, the definitions applicable to the city's animal control regulations contained in chapter 6.04 apply to this chapter as well. 
B.  As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases have the following meanings: 
"Pit bull" includes any dog that is an American Pit Bull Terrier, American Staffordshire Terrier, Staffordshire Bull Terrier, or any dog that exhibits physical characteristics which predominantly conform to the standards established by the American Kennel Club (AKC), United Kennel Club (UKC), or American Dog Breeders Association (ADBA) for any of the above breeds. 
"Rottweiler" includes any dog that exhibits physical characteristics which predominantly conform to the standards established by the American Kennel Club (AKC), United Kennel Club (UKC), or American Dog Breeders Association (ADBA) for that breed. 
"Unaltered" means an animal which has not been spayed or neutered. 
(Ord. No. 938, § 3, 12-8-2009; Ord. No. 914, § 3 (Exh. B), 1-27-2009)  
6.08.020 - Mandatory spaying, neutering of restricted dogs. 
A.  The following breeds of dogs are "restricted dogs," and are subject to the mandatory spay, neutering, and unaltered dog license requirements of this chapter: 
1.  Pit Bulls, as defined in Section 6.08.010; and 
2.  Rottweilers, as defined in Section 6.08.010. 
B.  No person may own, keep, or harbor a restricted dog in violation of this section. An owner or custodian of an unaltered restricted dog must have the dog spayed or neutered or submit written proof to the department that one of the following exceptions applies: 
1.  The restricted dog is less than four months of age; 
2.  The restricted dog cannot be spayed or neutered without a high likelihood of suffering serious bodily harm or death, which has been confirmed in writing by a licensed veterinarian. If applicable, the writing must also state the date by which the dog may be safely spayed or neutered; 
3.  The owner or custodian has obtained a license for an unaltered restricted dog pursuant to Section 6.08.030; 
4.  The determination of the dog's breed is under appeal pursuant to Section 6.08.020(D)(2); 
5.  The owner or custodian has owned or taken custody of the dog within the past thirty (30) days; 
C.  Determination of Breed and Appeal. 
1.  Determination. The department will make a breed determination upon request, or upon contact with, or impoundment of a dog believed to be an unaltered restricted dog. The determination shall be made by the director's designee in accordance with the department's breed determination checklist. 
2.  Appeal. The dog owner or custodian may appeal a breed determination by filing a written request for appeal with the department within ten days after notice of the determination is mailed to the owner or custodian. The determination of breed by the department's designee is deemed final if a timely appeal is not received by the department. The hearing on the appeal shall be held within thirty (30) days after the department's receipt of the request for appeal. The department shall mail written notification to the owner or custodian of the date, time, and place of the hearing, at least ten days prior to the hearing date. Failure of the owner or custodian or agent to appear at the hearing will result in forfeiture of the right to a hearing. The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer designated by the director. 
The hearing will be informal and the rules of evidence will not be strictly observed. The determination of the hearing officer shall be the final administrative decision. 
3.  Notice of determination following hearing. The department shall mail written notification of the determination to the owner or custodian of the dog within ten (10) days after the hearing. 
4.  Confirmation of compliance with Section 6.08.020. The owner or custodian of an unaltered restricted dog shall comply with Section 6.08.020 within thirty (30) days after receipt of notice of determination that the unaltered dog is subject to Section 6.08.020, by submitting written documentation confirming compliance with that section. If the dog has been moved to another location before such written confirmation is required, the owner or custodian must provide the department with information as to the dog's whereabouts, including current owner or custodian's name, address, and telephone number. 
(Ord. No. 938, § 3, 12-8-2009; Ord. No. 914, § 3 (Exh. B), 1-27-2009)  
6.08.030 - Unaltered restricted dog license—Requirements. 
An owner or custodian of an unaltered restricted dog must obtain an annual license for the dog, or otherwise show compliance with Section 6.08.020. The license shall be issued upon a finding by the director's designee that all of the following conditions are met: 
A.  The owner or custodian has submitted the required application and has paid the fee required by Section 10.90.010 of the Los Angeles County Code; 
B.  The unaltered restricted dog will be maintained in accordance with the provisions of Los Angeles County Code Section 10.40.010, and with applicable state animal care and control laws. The department shall inspect the premises where the restricted dog will be kept prior to issuing the license; 
C.  The department has evaluated the dog and made a finding that the restricted dog is a suitable candidate for an unaltered restricted license. Factors to be considered in the evaluation include, but are not limited to, consideration of the dog's lineage, age, temperament, and health. The restricted dog must be: 
1.  A trained hunting dog whose owner provides proof of the dog's completion of an approved course of training as a hunting dog and a current valid hunting license; 
2.  A law enforcement dog whose owner provides proof of the dog's completion of an approved course of training as a law enforcement dog; 
3.  A service dog, including but not limited to a seeing-eye dog, whose owner provides proof of the dogs completion of training as a service dog; or 
4.  A dog that meets all the following standards in order for an unaltered restricted dog license to be issued: 
(a)  The owner or custodian shall provide verification that the unaltered restricted dog is registered with the appropriate registry for the breed, including the American Kennel Club (AKC), United Kennel Club (UKC), or other valid registry, as determined by the department; and 
(b)  The owner or custodian of the restricted dog shall provide written confirmation that the following health screening tests have been conducted at the age recommended by the veterinary profession as to each test: Orthopedic Foundation for Animals ("OFA") or University of Pennsylvania Hip Improvement Program (PennHIP) certification on hips; OFA certification on heart by a certified cardiologist; and a passing score on either the American Temperament Testing Society's temperament test, the AKC's Canine Good Citizen Test, or other temperament test approved by the department. 
(Ord. No. 938, § 3, 12-8-2009; Ord. No. 914, § 3 (Exh. B), 1-27-2009)  
6.08.040 - Denial or revocation of unaltered restricted dog license—Grounds and re-application. 
A.  The department may deny or revoke an unaltered restricted dog license for one or more of the following reasons: 
1.  The applicant or licensee is not in compliance with all of the requirements of Section 6.08.030; 
2.  The department has received at least one complaint, under penalty of perjury, or otherwise verified to the satisfaction of the director, that the applicant or licensee has allowed a dog to run loose or escape, or has otherwise been found to be neglectful of his or her dog or other animals; 
3.  The applicant or licensee has been previously cited for a violation of any provision of Title 6 of the Lancaster Municipal Code; 
4.  The unaltered restricted dog has been adjudicated by a court or agency of appropriate jurisdiction, to be a potentially dangerous or vicious dog, or to be a nuisance within the meaning of the Lancaster Municipal Code or under state law; 
5.  Any unaltered restricted dog license held by the applicant has been revoked; 
6.  A female unaltered restricted dog has had more than one litter per year, or five or more litters in her lifetime; 
7.  The license application is discovered to contain a material misrepresentation of fact. 
B.  Re-application for unaltered restricted dog license: 
1.  When an unaltered restricted dog license is denied, the applicant may re-apply for a license upon a showing that the requirements of Section 6.08.020 have been met. The department shall refund one-half of the license fee when an application is denied. The applicant shall pay the full fee upon re-application. 
2.  When an unaltered restricted dog license is revoked, the owner or custodian of the dog may apply for a new license after a thirty-day waiting period upon a showing that the requirements of Section 6.08.030 have been met. No part of an unaltered dog license fee is refundable when a license is revoked. 
(Ord. No. 938, § 3, 12-8-2009; Ord. No. 914, § 3 (Exh. B), 1-27-2009)  
6.08.050 - Appeal of denial or revocation of unaltered restricted dog license. 
A.  Request for hearing. 
1.  Notice of intent to deny or revoke. The department shall mail to the owner or custodian a written notice of its intent to deny or revoke the license for an unaltered restricted dog which includes the reason(s) for the denial or revocation. The owner or custodian may request a hearing to appeal the denial or revocation. The request must be made in writing within ten (10) days after the notice of indent to deny or revoke is mailed. Failure to submit a timely written hearing request shall be deemed a waiver of the right to appeal the license denial or revocation. 
2.  Hearing officer. The hearing shall be conducted by the director's designee. 
3.  Notice and conduct of hearing. The department shall mail a written notice of the date, time, and place for the hearing not less than ten (10) days before the hearing date. The hearing date shall be no more than thirty (30) days after the department's receipt of the request for a hearing. Failure of the owner or custodian or his or her agent to appear at the hearing will result in forfeiture of the right to a hearing. The hearing will be informal and the rules of evidence will not be strictly observed. The department shall mail a written decision to the owner or custodian within ten (10) days after the hearing. The decision of the hearing officer shall be the final administrative decision. 
B.  Change in location of dog. If the dog is moved after the department has issued a letter of intent to deny or revoke, but has not yet denied or revoked the license, the owner or custodian must provide the department with information as to the dog's whereabouts, including the current owner or custodian's name, address, and telephone number. 
(Ord. No. 938, § 3, 12-8-2009; Ord. No. 914, § 3 (Exh. B), 1-27-2009)  
6.08.060 - Transfer, sale and breeding of unaltered restricted dogs. 
A.  An owner or custodian residing within the city or conducting a transaction within the city who offers any unaltered restricted dog for sale, trade, or adoption must include a valid unaltered restricted dog license number with the offer of sale, trade, or adoption, or otherwise state and establish compliance with Section 6.08.010. The license number must also be supplied as part of a written agreement for the transaction to the person acquiring the dog. 
B.  The owner or custodian of an unaltered restricted dog over the age of four months, which does not have the registration papers identified in Section 6.08.030(C)(1), must demonstrate compliance with Section 6.08.020 prior to the transfer, and must notify the department of the name and address of the transferee within ten (10) days after the transfer. 
C.  No person may breed a restricted dog which is less than two years of age. 
D.  Within thirty (30) days after a litter is born to a restricted female dog, the owner or custodian of the female dog shall advise the department in writing of the number of live puppies. When a puppy under the age of four months is sold or otherwise transferred to another person, the owner or custodian shall advise the department of the name, address and of the new owner or custodian, and the microchip number of the puppy, if applicable, within ten (10) days after the transfer. 
(Ord. No. 938, § 3, 12-8-2009; Ord. No. 914, § 3 (Exh. B), 1-27-2009)  
6.08.070 - Penalties. 
The penalties for violations of any provision of this chapter are as follows: 
A.  First violation. A first violation shall be an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed $250. If the owner or custodian fails to correct the underlying cause of the violation within 30 days after being notified of the violation, it shall be deemed a second violation. 
B.  Second violation. A violation within a year of a first violation shall be deemed a second violation. A second violation is a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months or by a fine not to exceed $1,000, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each subsequent violation within one year shall be considered an additional misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 938, § 3, 12-8-2009; Ord. No. 914, § 3 (Exh. B), 1-27-2009)  
16.08.080 - Impoundment of unaltered restricted dog. 
A.  When an unaltered restricted dog is impounded, the owner or custodian may reclaim the unaltered restricted dog when one of the following occurs: 
1.  The dog is spayed or neutered by a department veterinarian at the expense of the owner or custodian. Such expense may include additional fees due to extraordinary care required. 
2.  The dog is spayed or neutered by another department approved veterinarian. The owner or custodian may arrange for another department approved veterinarian to spay or neuter the dog, and shall pay to the department the cost to deliver the dog to the chosen veterinarian. The cost to deliver the dog shall be based on the department's hourly rate established by the auditor-controller, billed in minimum one hour increments. The veterinarian shall complete and return to the department within ten (10) days, a statement confirming that the dog has been spayed or neutered and shall release the dog to the owner or custodian only after the spay or neuter procedure is complete. 
3.  At the discretion of the director, the restricted dog may be released to the owner or custodian if he or she signs a statement under penalty of perjury, representing that the dog will be spayed or neutered and that he or she will submit a statement within ten (10) days, signed by the veterinarian, confirming that the dog has been spayed or neutered. 
4.  If the owner or custodian demonstrates compliance with Section 6.08.010. 
5.  During the pendency of any proceedings hereunder for the determination of breed. 
B.  Costs of impoundment. 
1.  The owner or custodian of the unaltered restricted dog shall be responsible for the costs of impoundment, including daily board costs if it is determined that the owner or custodian is in violation of Section 6.08.020. 
2.  The costs of impoundment shall be a lien on the dog, and the unaltered restricted dog shall not be returned to its owner or custodian until the costs are paid. If the owner or custodian of an impounded unaltered restricted dog does not pay the lien against the dog in full within fourteen days, the dog shall be deemed abandoned to the department. 
(Ord. No. 938, § 3, 12-8-2009; Ord. No. 914, § 3 (Exh. B), 1-27-2009)  
6.08.090 - Allocation of fees and fines collected. 
All costs and fines collected under this chapter and the fees collected shall be paid to the department for the purpose of defraying the cost of the implementation and enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 938, § 3, 12-8-2009; Ord. No. 914, § 3 (Exh. B), 1-27-2009)  
6.08.100 - Statistical reporting. 
To the extent the director, or his or her designee, measures the effect of this chapter pursuant to Section 122331(b) of the California Health and Safety Code by compiling statistical information on dog bites, such information shall be provided to the city. 
(Ord. No. 938, § 3, 12-8-2009; Ord. No. 914, § 3 (Exh. B), 1-27-2009)  
6.08.110 - Relationship to Chapter 6.04. 
This Chapter supplements the animal control regulations contained in Chapter 6.04 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. To the extent that this chapter is in conflict with Chapter 6.04, this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. No. 938, § 3, 12-8-2009; Ord. No. 914, § 3 (Exh. B), 1-27-2009)  
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY  
Chapter 8.04 - GENERAL HAZARDS  
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
8.04.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as "general hazards ordinance." 
(Prior code § 3-6.1)  
8.04.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life, limb, safety and public welfare by requiring protections from hazardous bodies of water, wells and other defined excavations and abandoned chests not presently covered by statutes of the state of California. 
(Prior code § 3-6.2)  
8.04.030 - Deputies. 
Whenever, by the provisions of this chapter, a power is granted to a public officer or a duty imposed upon such officer, the power may be exercised or duty performed by a deputy of the officer or by a person authorized pursuant to law by the officer, unless it is expressly otherwise provided. 
(Prior code § 3-6.3)  
8.04.040 - Severance clause. 
If any portion of this chapter or the applicationthereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
(Prior code § 3-6.5)  
8.04.050 - Exceptions. 
Should any exception to the provisions of this chapter be held invalid or should any provision of this chapter be held invalid because of any exception, such exception shall be eliminated from the chapter. The city council declares that it intends this chapter to apply to every excavation which by reason of constitutional limitations cannot be excepted from the provisions of this chapter and to every excavation the exception of which would invalidate this chapter or any portion thereof. 
(Prior code § 3-6.6)  
8.04.060 - Tenses. 
The present tense includes the past and future tenses. 
(Prior code § 3-6.7)  
8.04.070 - Genders. 
Each gender includes the other two genders. 
(Prior code § 3-6.8)  
8.04.080 - Number. 
The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular. 
(Prior code § 3-6.9)  
8.04.090 - Violations. 
Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted constitutes such violation a separate offense. 
(Prior code § 3-6.10)  
8.04.100 - Definitions. 
Unless the provision or the context otherwise requires, the definitions in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter: 
"Article" means an article of this chapter unless some ordinance or statute is mentioned. 
"City council" means the city council of the city of Lancaster. 
"City engineer" means the city engineer of the city of Lancaster. 
"Excavation" means any hole or depression in the ground or body of water created wholly or in part by artificial means including excavation, dam, fill, or combination thereof. 
"Parcel of land" means a contiguous quantity of land, in the possession of, or owned by, or recorded as the property of, the same claimant or person. 
"Party concerned" means the person, if any, in apparent charge and control of the object or premises involved, the person who by the last equalized assessment roll appears to be the owner of the premises involved, the record owner, the holder of any mortgage, trust, deed, or other lien or encumbrance of record, the owner or holder of any lease of record, the record holder of any other estate or interest in or to the object or premises. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
"Section" means a section of this chapter unless some other ordinance or statute is specifically mentioned. 
Shall and May. "Shall" is mandatory. "May" is permissive. 
"Sheriff" means the sheriff of this county. 
"Superintendent" means: 
1.  The city engineer of the city of Lancaster while enforcing Sections 50241, 50242, 50243, 50244 and 50254 of the Government Code. 
2.  The sheriff while enforcing Sections 50234 and 50236 of the Government Code. 
(Prior code §§ 3-6.11—3-6.22)  
Article II. - Oil Well Sumps, Sand and Gravel Pits and Similar Excavations 
 
8.04.110 - Protection required. 
Every person making, maintaining or using, and every person owning or in control of the premises on which there exists, an oil well sump of any depth or a sand and gravel pit, clay pit or similar excavation exceeding three feet in depth shall erect and continuously maintain around such excavation at all places, if an oil well sump, and in other cases at all places where the slope exceeds one foot vertical to one and one-half foot horizontal if not under water, or one foot vertical to four feet horizontal if under water, a fence complying with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3-6.23)  
8.04.120 - Exceptions. 
This chapter does not apply to: 
A.  An oil well sump constantly and immediately attended while drilling operations are continuously proceeding; 
B.  Harbors, marinas and artificial lakes exceeding one acre in surface area used for recreational purposes; 
C.  A temporary excavation for the installation of a public utility, if not abandoned. 
(Prior code § 3-6.24)  
8.04.130 - Fences. 
Fences required by this chapter shall be not less than five feet high mounted on one and one-quarter inch diameter galvanized steel posts with not less than three strands of barbed wire mounted at a forty-five (45) degree angle from the top of the fence. The fence shall be constructed of chain link or other industrial type fencing of not less than eleven (11) gauge wire and of not greater than two-inch nominal mesh. The posts supporting the fence shall be set thirty-six (36) inches in a concrete base and shall be spaced approximately ten (10) feet apart. Tension wires of at least No. 9 gauge coil spring wire, or equivalent, shall be stretched at the top and bottom of the fence fabric and shall be fastened to the fabric at twenty-four (24) inch intervals. There shall be no aperture below the fence large enough to permit any child to crawl under the fence. 
(Prior code § 3-6.25)  
8.04.140 - Gates. 
Gates. Gates shall be of a structure substantially the same as the required fence and shall be kept locked when not attended by an adult. 
(Prior code § 3-6.26)  
8.04.150 - Approved alternate. 
If the city engineer finds that any other type of construction has resulted in, or will result in, a fence or wall in all respects the equivalent in protection, strength and durability to a fence constructed as provided in Section 8.04.130, such alternate type of construction may be used. 
(Prior code § 3-6.27)  
8.04.160 - Clean out of oil sumps, cellars and ditches. 
Every person operating or maintaining an oil well shall cause all sumps, cellars and ditches which were used, or installed, or maintained for use in connection with any well and which have not been used for ninety (90) days for the operation, or the drilling of, such well or any other well in the vicinity, to be cleaned out and all oil, rotary mud and rubbish removed therefrom. 
(Prior code § 3-6.28)  
Article III. - Wells, Test Holes, Cesspools, Cisterns and Septic Tanks 
 
8.04.170 - Protection required. 
Every person who digs, drills, excavates, constructs, owns or controls, and every person owning, or having possession of any premises on which exists, any oil or water well, test hole, cesspool, cistern, septic tank, seepage vat or similar excavation shall cap, close or otherwise protect the opening to such well, hole, cesspool, cistern, septic tank, seepage pit, or similar excavation in such a manner as to prevent persons from falling therein, and in such a manner that such capping, closing or other protection cannot be removed by accident, inadvertence, or such persons shall fill such well, cesspool or pit. 
(Prior code § 3-6.29)  
8.04.180 - Action by city. 
Whenever any person fails or refuses to perform any act required by this chapter the city may itself cap, cover or fill such well. 
(Prior code § 3-6.30)  
8.04.190 - Exceptions. 
This chapter does not apply to: 
A.  Wells, cesspools, cisterns, septic tanks, or seepage pits under construction when constantly and immediately attended by workmen or other adult persons; 
B.  Wells, pits or shafts less than three feet in depth or with an opening not exceeding six inches in diameter; 
C.  Abandoned excavations covered by Section 24400, 24401 or 24402 of the Health and Safety Code. 
(Prior code § 3-6.31)  
Article IV. - Swimming Pools 
 
8.04.200 - Swimming pool must be protected. 
Every person who shall own or be in possession of any premises on which there is situated a swimming pool, fish pond, or other outside body of water created by artificial means, designed or used for swimming or other immersion purposes, by men, women or children, any portion of which is two feet deep or more and the surface area of the water in which does not exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet, shall erect and maintain on such lot or premises, and completely surrounding such body of water, lot or premises, a fence, wall or other structure, which fence, wall or other structure complies with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3-6.32)  
8.04.210 - Required signs. 
Every person who owns, operates or maintains a private swimming pool for the use of himself, his family or friends in the city shall post or display a sign or poster which is clearly visible from any point immediately adjacent to such pool, which is protected against the elements, and which describes and illustrates the proper procedures for giving both mouth-to-mouth and manual artificial respiration. Every such sign or poster shall also contain the following statements or information: 
A.  A statement that in case of need, mouth-to-mouth or manual artificial respiration should be started immediately and should be continued until a physician arrives or until mechanical resuscitators are applied; 
B.  The words "FIRE DEPARTMENT PARAMEDIC RESCUE UNIT" followed by the telephone number of the nearest Los Angeles County fire department dispatcher; 
C.  The location and telephone number of the nearest emergency hospital or other emergency treatment facility and of the nearest physician; and 
D.  The telephone number of the nearest ambulance service. 
(Prior code § 3-6.33)  
8.04.220 - Signs—New swimming pools. 
Every contractor or other person, firm, co-partnership, association or corporation constructing any private swimming pool which is subject to the provisions of Section 8.04.210 shall upon completion of such swimming pool, erect a sign or poster which in all respects complies with the requirements of Section 8.04.210. 
(Prior code § 3-6.34)  
8.04.230 - Design of fence. 
The fence, wall, or other structure required by this chapter shall be not less than five feet high, measured from the existing surface to the top of the fence or wall on the side of the fence or wall opposite the side towards the pool, with no openings except doors or gates within an area greater than fifty (50) square inches, except that a rectangular opening having no horizontal dimension exceeding four inches, may have a greater area. 
(Prior code § 3-6.35)  
8.04.240 - Wood fences. 
Wood fences shall have posts not less than three inches by three inches, spaced not over ten (10) feet on centers, and embedded at least eighteen (18) inches into the ground. Posts, other than redwood, shall be treated with a preservative. Fencing shall be at least one-half inch in thickness and fastened securely to at least two rails not less than two inches by three inches in cross-section. 
(Prior code § 3-6.36.)  
8.04.250 - Wire fences. 
Wire fences shall be constructed of wire mesh of not less than eleven (11) gauge galvanized steel wire supported on one and one-fourth inch diameter galvanized pipe spaced not over ten (10) feet on centers. Posts shall be embedded at least twelve (12) inches into concrete fill-in holes not less than six inches in diameter and eighteen (18) inches in depth. 
(Prior code § 3-6.37)  
8.04.260 - Masonry fences. 
Masonry fences shall be supported on a foundation of concrete extending not less than twelve (12) inches below grade, not less than twelve (12) inches in width, and not less than six inches in thickness. Wall steel, when required, shall be embedded sixteen (16) inches in diameter into the footing. 
(Prior code § 3-6.38)  
8.04.270 - Approved alternate. 
If the city engineer finds that any other type of construction has resulted in, or will result in, a fence in all respects the equivalent in strength and durability to a fence constructed as provided in Section 8.04.240, 8.04.250 or 8.04.260, such type of construction may be used. 
(Prior code § 3-6.39)  
8.04.280 - Six-foot fences. 
All fences or walls exceeding six feet in height shall comply with the provisions of Los Angeles County Ordinance No. 2225. 
(Prior code § 3-6.40)  
8.04.290 - Gates and doors. 
All gates or doors opening through the fence or structure protecting a swimming pool as required by this chapter shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices not less than four feet above grade capable of keeping such gate or door securely closed at all times when not in actual use. 
(Prior code § 3-6.41)  
8.04.300 - Gates and doors, concluded. 
All doors or gates shall be of such size as to completely fill any opening in the fence or wall. The owner or person in possession of the premises on which such swimming pool exists shall keep such doors and gates closed and securely latched at all times when such swimming pool is not in use. 
(Prior code § 3-6.42)  
8.04.310 - Portable pools. 
This chapter does not apply to portable swimming pools which are so designed that the water in them can, at no time, exceed two feet in depth but does apply to all other portable swimming pools. 
(Prior code § 3-6.43)  
8.04.320 - Violators subject to arrest. 
Any person owning, maintaining, operating or in possession of a pool or pond as defined in this chapter and who is in violation of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor and may be arrested and taken immediately before the magistrate by the sheriff or released after giving his written promise to appear before the magistrate as provided in Los Angeles County Ordinance No. 6723. 
(Prior code § 3-6.44)  
Article V. - Water Hazards 
 
8.04.330 - General finding. 
The city council finds that there are numerous bodies of water, both natural and man-made, throughout the city which are not included within the provisions of Article II, III or IV of this chapter, yet are a serious hazard to children and others because of their depth, size, vegetable growth therein, nature of soil, and for many other reasons. The city council further finds that these bodies of water are attractive to children and that children will use them for boating, floating and bathing. 
(Prior code § 3-6.45)  
8.04.340 - Abatement of water hazard. 
Whenever any body of water, whether natural or man-made, or partially natural and partially man-made, is a hazard to children because of its size, depth, vegetable growth therein, nature of soil, or for any other reason, the board may declare by resolution such body of water to be a public nuisance and abate such hazard as provided in Article I of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3-6.46)  
8.04.350 - Protection—Dual ownership. 
If such body of water occupies more than one premises, the owner or person in possession of each such premises shall be responsible for the abatement of the nuisance which exists on his property. 
(Prior code § 3-6.47)  
8.04.360 - Gates. 
Gates shall be kept locked when not attended by an adult. 
(Prior code § 3-6.48)  
Article VI. - Boxes and Chests 
 
8.04.370 - Dangerous boxes and chests. 
Any person who discards or abandons or leaves in any place accessible to children any chest or box having a capacity of one and one-half cubic feet or more, which is no longer in use, which chest or box has an attached lid or door which may be opened or fastened shut by means of an attached latch, which has not had such door removed or the hinges and such portion of the lock mechanism removed to prevent latching or locking of the door, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 3-6.49)  
8.04.380 - Exception. 
This article does not apply to any refrigerator, icebox or deep freeze locker in current use. This chapter does not prohibit or cover any act prohibited by Section 402(b) of the Penal Code of the state of California or by any other state statute. 
(Prior code § 3-6.50)  
8.04.390 - Action by sheriff. 
If the sheriff finds any chest or box in violation of the provisions of this article, he may remove the latch so that such chest or box cannot be fastened shut or he may remove such chest or box to a place not accessible to children. Either of such actions bars a prosecution for violation of this article. 
(Prior code § 3-6.51)  
Article VII. - Hazardous Oil Well Machinery 
 
8.04.400 - Protection required. 
A person owning, having possession of, or in control of any oil well shall not maintain or allow to exist thereon, any moving parts or machinery in use and/or operable at such oil well, unless such machinery or moving parts are securely enclosed by fence complying with the provisions of Section 8.04.130 or 8.04.150, or screening or housing sufficient to prevent the entry of unauthorized persons. If a fence is equipped with gates, such gates shall comply with Section 8.04.140. A single fence, screen or housing may be used to enclose more than one oil well. Exception: Perimeter fencing need not be continuous where (A) the oil well is in an isolated area with no residences other than a caretaker within one-half mile; and (B) the unfenced portion is located in terrain that is equivalent to the fenced portions in protection against trespassing. 
(Prior code § 3-6.60)  
8.04.410 - Competent person in attendance. 
This article does not apply if a competent person is in constant attendance twenty-four (24) hours per day at each oil well. 
(Prior code § 3-6.61)  
8.04.420 - Violators subject to arrest. 
Any person owning, maintaining, operating or in possession of hazardous oil well machinery as defined in this chapter and who is in violation of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor and may be arrested and taken immediately before the magistrate by the sheriff or released after giving his written promise to appear before the magistrate as provided in Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
(Prior code § 3-6.62)  
Article VIII. - Adoption of County of Los Angeles General Hazards Ordinance 
 
8.04.430 - Adoption by reference. 
Except as hereinafter provided, Los Angeles County Ordinance No. 5307 as amended and in effect on February 21, 1978, entitled "An Ordinance Requiring Protection from Excavations and Other Hazards," is adopted by reference as the excavation ordinance of the city. This ordinance shall also be known as, and may be cited as, the "general hazards ordinance." 
(Prior code § 3-6.70)  
8.04.440 - Public record. 
Three copies of Ordinance No. 5307 of the county of Los Angeles, as amended and in effect on February 21, 1978, have been deposited in the office of the city clerk of the city, and shall be at all times maintained by the clerk for use and examination by the public. 
(Prior code § 3-6.71)  
8.04.450 - Definitions. 
Whenever any of the following names or terms are used in said Ordinance No. 5307 of the county of Los Angeles, as amended, each name or term shall be deemed or construed to have meaning ascribed to it in this section as follows: 
"Board of supervisors" means the city council of the city of Lancaster. 
"County" or "county of Los Angeles" or "unincorporated area" means the true territorial boundaries of the city of Lancaster. 
"County engineer" means the city engineer of the city of Lancaster. 
"Superintendent" means the city engineer of the city of Lancaster while enforcing Sections 50241, 50242, 50243, 50244 and 50254 of the Government Code; and means the Sheriff of Los Angeles County, acting as chief of police of the city of Lancaster, while enforcing Sections 50234 and 50236 of the Government Code. 
(Prior code § 3-6.72)  
8.04.460 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion thereof during which such violation continues and shall be punishable therefor as herein provided. 
(Prior code § 3-6.73)  
Chapter 8.08 - HEALTH CODE 
 
8.08.010 - Adoption by reference of the county public health ordinance. 
Except as hereinafter provided, that certain public health ordinance known and designated as the Los Angeles County Public Health Ordinance No. 7583 as amended from time to time, shall be and become the public health ordinance of the city, regulating communicable diseases, environmental sanitation and radiation protection. 
(Prior code § 5-1.1) 
( Ord. No. 1040, § 1, 3-13-2018 )  
8.08.020 - Public record. 
Three copies of the Los Angeles County Public Health Ordinance shall be kept and maintained at all times in the office of the city clerk of the city for use and examination by the public. 
(Prior code § 5-1.2)  
8.08.030 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion thereof during which such violation continues and shall be punishable therefor as herein provided. 
(Prior code § 5-1.3)  
Chapter 8.12 - ABANDONED AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS 
 
8.12.010 - Abatement of closed, vacant and inoperative automobile service stations. 
Any closed, vacant and inoperative automobile service station described in Section 8.12.020 is declared to be a public nuisance. Upon discovery of facts that there exist conditions constituting a public nuisance as defined in the definition of "nonuser" in Section 8.12.020, the city manager, or his designee, is authorized to immediately commence proceedings as hereinafter provided to cause the abatement, removal or enjoinment of such public nuisance. 
(Prior code § 4-1.45)  
8.12.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Automobile service station" means any site where the buildings are designed and built for dispensing and selling fuels for internal combustion engines of any automotive vehicles. 
"Building" means any physical improvement or structure finished or unfinished, on or in real property, which is designed, built or adapted for use as or in connection with an automotive vehicle service station, regardless of its size, shape, height, location, age, or state of repair. Included in this definition are all main buildings, pumps, pump islands, all underground storage tanks, pumps, mechanical equipment, wells, cesspools, septic tanks, foundations, all paving and any other materials originally placed in connection therewith on or at any depth beneath the surface of the real property. 
Nonuser. 
1.  Conditions. Any automobile service station which has been closed, vacant or inoperative for twelve (12) months constitutes nonuser and a public nuisance. 
2.  Discontinuance of Nonconforming Use. A voluntary discontinuance of an automobile service station as a nonconforming use as defined in Title 17, constitutes nonuser and a public nuisance. 
(Prior code § 4-1.45.1)  
8.12.030 - Enforcement procedures. 
Upon discovery of conditions described in the definition of "nonuser" in Section 8.12.020, the city manager, or designee, shall cause notification to be personally served or sent by certified mail to all persons, firms, corporations and other entities which the records of the Los Angeles County recorder disclose claim an interest in the real property. The notice shall be in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE OF VIOLATION 
  DECLARATION OF VIOLATION OF SECTION 8.12.010 OF MUNICIPAL CODE RELATING TO THE STATE OF NON-USE OF CLOSED, VACANT OR INOPERATIVE AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS. 
  NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that as of the ________ day of ___________,19___, the City Council of the City of Lancaster, California, has found and determined that conditions exist on the real property described as Los Angeles County Assessor's Parcel No. _______; commonly known as, Lancaster, California, which constitute a public nuisance and a violation of the provisions of Section 8.12.010 of the Lancaster Municipal Code, in that the on said real property is in a state of non-use; 
  That notwithstanding any other provisions of said Municipal Code, failure to abate the nuisance by re-occupation and re-institution of use of the premises or by demolition and removal of all structures, according to the provisions of Section 8.12.010 of the Municipal Code within thirty (30) days from the date of delivery of this Notice, the City shall undertake the demolition and removal of all structures from the site at the expense of the owners. 
  That if any demolition, dismantling, moving, removal, additions to, or restoration or repair of any buildings, or re-occupancy of the premises is to be accomplished, or if any excavation of earth is to be performed by persons or entitles affected by this Notice, other than City officials, agents or employees, appropriate permits shall be required to be obtained prior to the commencement of any such work. 
  Any appeal from this action shall be taken in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Appeal Procedure. 
Dated: 	___________ 
	___________ 
	City Manager 
	City of Lancaster 
 
(Prior code § 4-1.45.2)  
8.12.040 - Abatement. 
A.  Abatement may be accomplished in either of the following ways: 
1.  Re-occupation by the owner, or any tenant, lessee or other party entitled to possession and re-institution of the previously permitted automobile service station uses, after having obtained an inspection and all permits required by this code including, but not limited to, building permits; 
2.  Demolition and removal of all buildings on and in the premises and filling of all excavations, after having obtained the applicable permits required for such work, including, but not limited to, building permits and grading permits. 
B.  In the event that the owner fails to complete the abatement within thirty (30) days following service of the notice provided for in Section 8.12.030, the city manager shall cause the abatement to be undertaken by the city in the manner provided for in subsection (A)(2) of this section. 
C.  Prior to any re-occupation or re-use of any buildings on or in the premises, the party intending to occupy the buildings must first apply to the department of public works for inspection. The inspection shall be conducted for the purpose of determining the suitability of the buildings for occupancy from the standpoint of health and safety. The inspection shall be conducted according to such of the standards expressed in the adopted Uniform Building Code, current edition, of the city relating to requirements for occupancy as were applicable to the buildings as they existed prior to the state of nonuse. Applicants must remit applicable fees for such inspection. 
D.  Any re-occupation or re-use, of any buildings on or in the premises must also comply with all applicable zoning regulations of the city. 
(Prior code § 4-1.45.3)  
8.12.050 - Costs of abatement. 
When the city manager causes the abatement of a public nuisance as described in the definition of "nonuser" in Section 8.12.020, he shall keep an accounting of the costs thereof, including incidental expenses of such abatement. Upon conclusion of such abatement, the city manager shall serve a copy of this itemized statement of costs on the owners of the property in the same manner as provided in Section 8.12.030. 
(Prior code § 4-1.45.4)  
8.12.060 - Assessment of costs—Lien against the property. 
The cost of abatement of a nuisance, as confirmed by the city council, shall constitute a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel of land to which it relates, and after its recording, as thus made and confirmed, the same shall constitute a lien on said property in the amount of such assessment. After the confirmation of the statement a copy thereof shall be transmitted to the assessor and tax collector for the city by the city clerk. Whereupon it shall be the duty of said assessor and tax collector to add the amount of such assessment, or assessments, to the next regular bills of taxes levied against said respective lot or parcel of land for municipal purposes, and thereafter said amount shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same procedure for foreclosure and sale in the case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. The notice to the assessor's office shall include a request to reappraise the property to reflect the effect of the abatement proceedings. 
(Prior code § 4-1.45.5)  
8.12.070 - Right to appeal. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code to the contrary, any determination made by any city official, agent or employee under this chapter may be appealed according to the uniform appeal procedure. No abatement shall take place during such time as any appeal is pending. 
(Prior code § 4-1.45.6)  
8.12.080 - Alternative procedure. 
The procedures provided in this chapter shall provide an alternative procedure to, and shall be in addition to, any other remedies otherwise provided by this code or by law. 
(Prior code § 4-1.45.7)  
Chapter 8.16 - DUST CONTROL 
 
8.16.010 - Declaration of policy. 
In the interest of the protection of the health, safety, and general welfare, it is declared to be the policy of the city that it is unlawful to contribute to wind erosion and dust emissions by clearing the vegetation, excavating, grading, cultivating or discing the surface or subsurface of the land or other construction activities within the city. 
(Prior code § 5-5.1)  
8.16.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Parcel" or "land" means a contiguous quantity of land in the possession of, or owned by, or recorded as the property of, the same claimant or person. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular. 
(Prior code § 5-5.2)  
8.16.030 - Disturbing surface of land or causing wind erosion prohibited. 
No person who owns or is in possession or control of land shall disturb or cause to be disturbed the surface or subsurface of said land by excavating, grading, leveling, cultivating, plowing, discing, removing any existing vegetation or by depositing or spreading a quantity of soil on said land, or by any other act likely to cause or contribute to dust emission or wind erosion of said land. No person shall cause or aggravate an existing dust or wind erosion condition without providing sufficient protection so as to prevent the soft on said land from being eroded by wind, creating dust, or blowing into a public road or roads or other public or private property. 
(Prior code § 5-5.3)  
8.16.040 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  Activities that are performed by the forester and fire warden, agricultural commission, road department or person acting in compliance with a specific order of that department because of required ordinances, statutes, rules or regulations; 
B.  Unpaved roadways open to public travel or unimproved public rights-of-way. 
(Prior code § 5-5.4)  
8.16.050 - Methods of protecting land. 
Protection of the land shall be provided by means of walls, fences, planting and maintaining vegetation, covering the land, applying water, or other effective method(s) that will control dust emissions and wind erosion. If water is used, the land shall be kept moist to a depth of one inch and shall be applied as follows: (A) five acres or less, application to be by tankers or on-site sprinkler system; (B) more than five acres, application to be by an on-site sprinkler system. 
(Prior code § 5-5.5)  
8.16.060 - Inadequate dust control measures. 
If an investigation of a project site indicates that dust control or wind erosion measures are inadequate, the city engineer or his authorized representative may limit or halt all activities on the site until adequate wind erosion or dust control has been achieved. 
(Prior code § 5-5.6)  
8.16.070 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both fine and imprisonment. 
(Prior code § 5-5.7)  
Chapter 8.20 - LITTERING* 
 
8.20.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Lancaster Anti-Litter Law." 
(Ord. 858 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.20.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
"Aircraft" means any contrivance now known or hereinafter invented, used, or designed for navigation or for flight in the air. "Aircraft" shall include helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons. "Authorized private receptacle" means a litter storage and collection receptacle as required and authorized by Section 13.16.060 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
"Garbage" means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food. 
"Litter" means garbage, refuse, and rubbish as defined in this section and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as set forth in this chapter, tends to create a danger to the public health, safety and welfare. 
"Park" means a park, reservation, playground, recreation center, or any other public area in the city owned or used by the city and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
"Person" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
"Private premises" means any dwelling, house, building, or other structure designed or used, either wholly or in part, for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. "Private premises" includes any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule, or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building, or other structure. 
"Public place" means any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys, or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds, and buildings. 
"Refuse" means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes except body wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleaning, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial wastes. 
"Rubbish" means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, and similar materials. 
"Vehicle" means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is, or may be, transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. 858 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.20.030 - Littering on occupied private property unlawful. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property. 
(Ord. 858 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.20.040 - Littering on public places. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the city except in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles for collection, or in official disposal sites. No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any city-owned receptacle located in a public place the garbage or litter which was accumulated in the residence or place of business occupied by that person. 
(Ord. 858 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.20.050 - Placement of litter in receptacles—Prevention of scattering. 
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Ord. 858 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.20.060 - Placement of private receptacle. 
Receptacles or waste containers and trash cans, shall be stored behind the front yard setback area of a residential dwelling, and shall be obscured from public view by approved fencing, vegetation, topography, or any combination thereof; except for the time allowed to place receptacle(s) at the curb for collection by a refuse hauler, as provided in Section 13.16.040 of this code. 
(Ord. 858 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.20.070 - Maintenance by owners or occupants of businesses. 
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit into any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the city shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. 
(Ord. 858 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.20.080 - Sweeping litter, leaves and similar refuse into gutters prohibited. 
No person shall sweep into or deposit into a gutter, or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter, including leaves and similar refuse, from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter, including leaves and similar refuse. 
(Ord. 858 Att. A (part), 2006) 
(Ord. No. 912, § 1, 11-12-08)  
8.20.090 - Littering on vacant lots unlawful. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the city whether owned by such person or not. 
(Ord. 858 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.20.100 - Litter thrown by persons in vehicles prohibited. 
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the city, or upon private property. 
(Ord. 858 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.20.110 - Truck loads causing litter. 
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within the city, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind. 
(Ord. 858 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.20.120 - Litter in parks. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the city except in public receptacles and in such manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. 
(Ord. 858 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.20.130 - Dropping litter from aircraft. 
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop, or deposit within the city any litter, handbill or any other object. 
(Ord. 858 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.20.140 - Enforcement authority. 
The city manager and his or her designee, all deputies of the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department and code enforcement officers of the city are empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to issue citations or make arrests for violation thereof. 
(Ord. 858 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.20.150 - Violation—Penalty. 
Every person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction and upon conviction is punishable as provided in Chapter 1.12 of the Lancaster Municipal Code or as otherwise provided in California Penal Code Section 374.4. 
(Ord. 858 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.20.160 - Severability. 
If any part or provision of this chapter is found to be invalid or unenforceable by a court of law, such invalidity shall not affect any other part or provision herein, and all remaining provisions of this chapter will be valid and enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. 858 Att. A (part), 2006)  
Chapter 8.24 - NOISE REGULATIONS 
 
8.24.010 - Declaration of policy. 
It is declared to be the policy of the city to prohibit unnecessary, excessive and annoying noises from all sources subject to its police power. At certain levels noises are detrimental to the health and welfare of the citizenry, and, in the public interests, such noise levels shall be systematically proscribed. 
(Prior code § 4-1.1)  
8.24.020 - Definitions. 
Unless the context otherwise clearly indicates, the words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
"Commercial purpose" means and includes the use, operation or maintenance of any sound-amplifying equipment for the purpose of advertising any business, or any goods, or any services, or for the purpose of attracting the attention of the public to, or advertising for, or soliciting patronage or customers to or for any performance, show, entertainment, exhibition or event, for the purpose of demonstrating any such sound equipment. 
"Day" means the time period from seven a.m. to eight p.m. 
"Impulsive sound" means a short-duration sound (such as might be produced by the impact of a drop hammer or a pile driver) with one second or less duration. 
"Motor vehicles" means and includes, but is not limited to, automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, mini-bikes and go-carts. 
"Night" means the time period from eight p.m. to seven a.m. 
"Noncommercial purpose" means the use, operation or maintenance of any sound equipment for other than a commercial purpose. "Noncommercial purpose" means and includes, but shall not be limited to, philanthropic, political, patriotic and charitable purposes. 
"Person" means a person, firm, association, co-partnership, joint venture, corporation, or any entity, public or private, in nature. 
"Sound" means the sensation perceived by the sense of hearing. For the purpose of this chapter, the terms "sound" and "noise" shall be used synonymously. 
"Sound-amplifying equipment" means any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound, but shall not include: 
1.  Warning devices on emergency vehicles; 
2.  Horns, burglar and fire alarms, or other warning devices expressly authorized by law. 
"Sound truck" means any motor vehicle, or any other vehicle, regardless of motive power, whether in motion or stationary, which carries, is equipped with, or which has mounted thereon or attached thereto any sound-amplifying equipment for commercial, political and charitable purposes. 
(Prior code § 4-1.2) 
(Ord. No. 916, § 1, 2-10-09)  
8.24.030 - Loud, unnecessary and unusual noises prohibited. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, and in addition thereto, no person shall make, cause or suffer, or permit to be made upon any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him/her any unnecessary noises or sounds which are physically annoying to persons of ordinary sensitiveness which are so harsh or so prolonged or unnatural or unusual in their use, time, or place as to occasion physical discomfort to the inhabitants of any neighborhood. All animals shall be so maintained. 
(Ord. 791 § 1, 2001: Ord. 693 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 4-1.3)  
8.24.040 - Loud, unnecessary and unusual noises prohibited—Construction and building. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a person at any time on Sunday or any day between the hours of eight p.m. and seven a.m. shall not perform any construction or repair work of any kind upon any building or structure or perform any earth excavating, filling or moving where any of the foregoing entails the use of any air compressor, jack hammer, power-driven drill, riveting machine, excavator, diesel-powered truck, tractor or other earth-moving equipment, hard hammers on steel or iron or any other machine tool, device or equipment which makes loud noises within five hundred (500) feet of an occupied dwelling, apartment, hotel, mobile home or other place of residence. 
(Ord. 693 § 1 (part), 1995: prior code § 4-1.4) 
(Ord. No. 916, § 2, 2-10-09)  
8.24.050 - Exceptions. 
A.  The provisions of Section 8.24.040 do not apply to any person who performs the construction, repair, excavation or moving work pursuant to the express written permission of the city engineer to perform such work at times prohibited in Section 8.24.040. Upon receipt of an application stating the reasons for the request, the city engineer may grant such permission if he finds that: 
1.  The work proposed to be done is effected with the public interest; or 
2.  Hardship or injustice or unreasonable delay would result with the interruption thereof with the hours and days specified in Section 8.24.040; or 
3.  The building or structure involved is devoted or intended to be devoted to a use immediately incident to public interest. 
B.  The provisions of Section 8.24.040 do not apply to the construction, repair or excavation during prohibited hours as may be necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity or work required to protect persons or property from imminent exposure to danger or work by private or public utility companies when restoring utility service. 
(Prior code § 4-1.5)  
8.24.060 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in the amount not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or be imprisoned in the county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Prior code § 4-1.6)  
8.24.070 - Injunctions. 
As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed and is declared to be a public nuisance, and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Prior code § 4-1.7)  
Chapter 8.28 - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE* 
 
8.28.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this chapter are as follows: 
A.  To define as public nuisances and violations those conditions and uses of land that are detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, or which reduce property values in the city. 
B.  To develop regulations that will promote the sound maintenance of property and enhance conditions of appearance, habitability, occupancy, use and safety of all structures and premises in the city. 
C.  To establish administrative procedures for the city's use, upon its adoption, to correct or abate violations of this chapter on real property throughout the city. 
This chapter is not intended to be applied, construed or given effect in a manner that imposes upon the city, or upon any officer or employee thereof, any duty towards persons or property within the city or outside of the city that creates a basis for civil liability for damages, except as otherwise imposed by law. 
(Ord. 857 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.28.020 - Definitions. 
As used in Chapter 8.28, the following definitions shall apply: 
1.  "Abandoned structure" means a building or other structure that is vacant and is maintained in a condition of disrepair or deterioration, as discernible from a public right-of-way or adjoining real property. Factors that may also be considered in a determination of an abandoned structure include, without limitation: present operability and functional utility; the presence of non-functional, broken or missing doors or windows, such that entry therein by unauthorized persons is not deterred; the existence of real property tax delinquencies for the land upon which the structure is located; age and degree of obsolescence of the structure, and the cost of rehabilitation or repair versus its market value. 
2.  "Abandoned personal property" means and refers to any item, object, thing, material or substance that, by its condition of damage, deterioration, disrepair, nonuse, obsolescence or location on public real property or on private real property, causes a reasonable person to conclude that the owner has permanently relinquished all right, title, claim and possession thereto, or that the object, thing, material or substance cannot be used for its intended or designed purpose. Abandoned personal property may include junk and vehicles. 
3.  "Attractive nuisance" means any condition, device, equipment, instrument, item or machine that is unsafe, unprotected and may prove detrimental to minors whether in a structure or in outdoor areas of developed or undeveloped real property. This includes, without limitation, any abandoned or open and accessible wells, shafts, basements or excavations; any abandoned refrigerators and abandoned or inoperable motor vehicles; any structurally unsound fences or structures; or, any lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation which may prove hazardous or dangerous to inquisitive minors. An attractive nuisance shall also include pools, standing water or excavations containing water, that are unfenced or otherwise lack an adequate barrier thereby creating a risk of drowning, or which are hazardous or unsafe due to the existence of any condition rendering such water to be clouded, unclear or injurious to health due to, without limitation, any of the following: bacterial growth, infectious or toxic agents, algae, insect remains, animal remains, rubbish, refuse, debris, or waste of any kind. 
4.  "Building" means any structure having, or originally designed to have, a roof supported by columns or walls used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or property. 
5.  "City" means the city of Lancaster. 
6.  "City manager" means the city manager or his or her duly authorized representative(s). 
7.  "Code" or "Codes" refers to the Lancaster Municipal Code and laws incorporated therein by reference and any adopted and uncodified ordinances. 
8.  "Code enforcement officer" means any individual employed by the city with primary enforcement authority for city codes, or his or her duly authorized representative(s). 
9.  "Inoperable vehicle" means and includes, without limitation, any vehicle that is immobilized or mechanically incapable of being driven on a highway. Factors that may be used to determine this condition include, without limitation, vehicles lacking a current registration, a working engine, transmission, wheels, inflated tires, doors, windshield or any other part or equipment necessary for its legal and safe operation on a highway or any other public right-of-way. 
10.  "Junk" includes, but is not limited to, any cast-off, damaged, discarded, junked, obsolete, salvaged, scrapped, unusable, worn-out or wrecked appliance, device, equipment, furniture, fixture, furnishing, object, material, substance, tire, or thing of any kind or composition. Junk may include abandoned personal property, as well as any form of debris, refuse, rubbish, trash or waste. Factors that may be considered in a determination that personal property is junk include, without limitation, its: 
a.  Condition of damage, deterioration, disrepair or nonuse. 
b.  Approximate age and degree of obsolescence. 
c.  Location. 
d.  Present operability, functional utility and status of registration or licensing, where applicable. 
e.  Cost of rehabilitation or repair versus its market value. 
11.  "Junkyard" means real property of any zoning classification on which junk is kept, maintained, placed or stored to such a degree that it constitutes a principal use or condition on said premises. The existence of a junkyard is not a nuisance when it is an expressly permitted use in the applicable zone and the premises are in full compliance with all provisions of Title 17 of the Lancaster Municipal Code the, and all other applicable provisions of the Lancaster Municipal Code, as well as all future amendments and additions thereto. 
12.  "Owner" means and includes any person having legal title to, or who leases, rents, occupies or has charge, control or possession of, any real property in the city, including all persons shown as owners on the last equalized assessment roll of the Los Angeles County Assessor's Office. Owners include persons with powers of attorney, executors of estates, trustees, or who are court appointed administrators, conservators, guardians or receivers. An owner of personal property shall be any person who has legal title, charge, control, or possession of, such property. 
13.  "Person" as used in this chapter, means and includes any individual, partnership of any kind, corporation, limited liability company, association, joint venture or other organization or entity, however formed, as well as trustees, heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns, or any combination of such persons. "Person" also includes any public entity or agency that acts as an owner in the city. 
14.  "Property" or "premises" means any privately-owned real property, or improvements thereon, or portions thereof, as the case may be. "Property" includes any parkway or unimproved public easement abutting such real property. 
15.  "Personal property" means property that is not real property, and includes, without limitation, any appliance, article, device, equipment, item, material, product, substance or vehicle. 
16.  "Public nuisance" means anything which is, or likely to become, injurious or detrimental to health, safety or welfare, or is offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any public park, square, street or highway. All conditions hereafter enumerated in this chapter, or that otherwise violate or are contrary to any provision of the Lancaster Municipal Code, are public nuisances by definition and declaration, and said enumerated conditions shall not, in any manner, be construed to be exclusive or exhaustive. A public nuisance shall also exist when a person fails to comply with any condition of a city approval, entitlement, license or permit or when an activity on, or use of, real property violates, or is contrary to, any provision or requirement of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
17.  "Hearing officer" means the city employee or representative appointed by the city manager, or a designee thereof, to hear all timely appeals from a notice of public nuisance and intent to abate with city forces or agents. 
18.  "Responsible person" means any person, whether as an owner as defined in this chapter, or otherwise, that allows, causes, creates, maintains, or permits a public nuisance, or any violation of the Lancaster Municipal Code or county or state law, or regulation thereof, to exist or continue, by any act or the omission of any act or duty. The actions or inactions of a responsible person's agent, employee, representative or contractor may be attributed to that responsible person. 
19.  "Structure" means that which is built or constructed, an edifice, wall, fence, or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. For purposes of this chapter, this definition shall supercede any other definition of this term in the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
20.  "Vehicle" means any device, by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway or other public right of way, and includes all vehicles as defined by the California Vehicle Code and all future amendments thereto. "Vehicle" does not include devices (i) that are propelled exclusively by human power such as bicycles and wheelchairs, or (ii) those that are used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. 857 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.28.030 - Public nuisance conditions. 
The city council finds and declares that it is a public nuisance and unlawful for any person to allow, cause, create, maintain, or permit others to maintain, property or premises in the city in such a manner that: 
A.  Any one or more of the following conditions are found to exist thereon: 
1.  Land, the topography, geology or configuration of which whether in natural state or as a result of the grading operations, excavation or fill, causes erosion, subsidence, or surface water drainage problems of such magnitude as to be injurious or potentially injurious to the public health, safety and welfare, or to adjacent properties. 
2.  Buildings or other structures, or portions thereof, that are partially constructed or destroyed or allowed to remain in a state of partial construction or destruction for an unreasonable period of time. As used herein, an "unreasonable" period shall mean any portion of time exceeding the period given to a responsible person by the city for the complete abatement of this nuisance condition with all required city approvals, permit and inspections. Factors that may be used by the city to establish a reasonable period for the complete abatement of this nuisance include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  The degree of partial construction or destruction and the cause therefore; 
b.  Whether or not this condition constitutes an attractive nuisance or if it otherwise poses or promotes a health or safety hazard to occupants of the premises, or to others; 
c.  The degree of visibility, if any, of this condition from public or adjoining private real property; 
d.  The scope and type of work that is needed to abate this nuisance; 
e.  The promptness with which a responsible person has applied for and obtained all required city approvals and permits in order to lawfully commence the nuisance abatement actions; 
f.  Whether or not a responsible person has complied with other required technical code requirements, including requesting and passing required inspections in a timely manner, while completing nuisance abatement actions; 
g.  Whether or not a responsible person has applied for extensions to a technical code permit or renewed an expired permit, as well as the number of extensions and renewals that a responsible person has previously sought or obtained from the city; 
h.  Whether or not a responsible person has made substantial progress, as determined by the city, in performing nuisance abatement actions under a technical code permit that has expired, or is about to expire. 
i.  Whether delays in completing nuisance abatement actions under a technical code permit have occurred, and the reason(s) for such delays. 
3.  Abandoned structure(s) or abandoned personal property that is/are visible from public or private property. 
4.  Interior portions of buildings or structures (including, but not limited to attics, ceilings, walls floors, basements, mezzanines, and common areas) that are maintained in a condition of dilapidation, deterioration or disrepair to such an extent as to result in, or tend to result in, a diminution in property values, or where such condition otherwise violates, or is contrary to, or other provisions of the Lancaster Municipal Code, or state law. 
5.  Exterior portions of buildings or structures (including, but not limited to, roofs, balconies, decks, fences, stairs, stairways, walls, signs and fixtures), as well as sidewalks, driveways and parking areas, that are maintained in a condition of dilapidation, deterioration or disrepair to such an extent as to result in, or tend to result in, a diminution in property values, or where such condition otherwise violates, or is contrary to, provisions of the Lancaster Municipal Code, or state law. 
6.  Clothes lines in front yard areas. 
7.  Obstructions of any kind, cause or form that interfere with light or ventilation for a building, or that interfere with, or hinder, ingress and egress therefrom. 
8.  Broken, defective, damaged, dilapidated, or missing windows or doors in a building or structure. 
9.  Windows or doors that remain boarded up or sealed after ten (10) calendar days written city notice to a responsible person requesting the removal of these coverings and the installation of fully functional or operable windows or doors. City actions to board up or seal windows or doors in order to deter unauthorized entry into structures shall not relieve responsible persons from installing fully functional or operable windows or doors. 
10.  Overgrown vegetation including, but not limited to, any one of the following: 
a.  Vegetation likely to harbor, or promote the presence of, rats, vermin and insects; 
b.  Vegetation causing detriment to neighboring properties, or that is out of conformity with neighboring community standards to such an extent as to result in, or contribute to, a diminution of property values; 
c.  Vegetation that creates, or promotes, the existence of a fire hazard; 
d.  Tree branches within five feet of the rooftop of a structure so as to facilitate rodent or animal access thereto. 
11.  Dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous trees, weeds, ground cover, and other vegetation, or the absence of healthful vegetation, that causes, contributes to, or promotes, any one of the following conditions or consequences: 
a.  An attractive nuisance; 
b.  A fire hazard; 
c.  The creation or promotion of dust or soil erosion; 
d.  A diminution in property values; 
e.  A detriment to public health, safety or welfare. 
12.  Any form of an attractive nuisance. 
13.  Items of junk or other personal property that constitute a fire or safety hazard or that are visible from public or adjoining private real property and which constitute a fire or safety hazard, or that are accumulated, kept, placed or stored in exterior portions of premises in such a manner as to constitute a violation of any provision of the Lancaster Municipal Code, or that are otherwise out of conformity with neighboring community standards to such an extent as to result in, or tend to result in, a diminution in property values. The existence of a junkyard is not a nuisance when it is an expressly permitted use or condition in the applicable zone and the premises are in full compliance with all provisions of the Title 17 of the Lancaster Municipal Code (including all approvals and permits required thereby), and all other applicable provisions of the Lancaster Municipal Code, as well as all future amendments and additions thereto. 
14.  Garbage cans, yard waste containers, and recycling containers that are kept, placed or stored in front or side yards and visible from public streets, except at times that solid or yard waste, or recyclables, are scheduled for collection by the city or its permitted collector(s). 
15.  Combustible or other materials including, but not limited to, composting, firewood, junk, lumber, packing boxes, pallets, plant cuttings, tree trimmings or wood chips, in interior or exterior areas of building or structures, when such items or accumulations: 
a.  Render premises unsanitary or substandard as defined by the 1997 Uniform Housing Code adopted by the city of Lancaster; 
b.  Violate the ___________ Public Health Code; 
c.  Cause, create, or tend to contribute to, a fire or safety hazard; 
d.  Harbor, promote, or tend to contribute to, the presence of rats, vermin and insects; 
e.  Cause, create, or tend to contribute to, an offensive odor; 
f.  Cause the premises to be out of conformity with neighboring community standards to such an extent as to result in, or tend to result in, a diminution of property values. This use of land or condition shall not constitute a nuisance when expressly permitted under the applicable zone classification and the premises are in full compliance with all provisions of Title 17 of the Lancaster Municipal Code and all other applicable provisions of the Lancaster Municipal Code, as well as all future amendments and additions thereto. 
16.  Vehicles exceeding the permissible gross vehicle weight for the streets or public property upon which they are located, as well as construction equipment, or machinery of any type or description that is kept, parked, placed or stored on public or private real property except when such items are being used during excavation, construction or demolition operations pursuant to an active building or other technical code permit. 
17.  Maintenance of signs, or sign structures, on real property relating to uses no longer lawfully conducted or products no longer lawfully sold thereon, or signs and their structures that are in disrepair or which are otherwise in violation of, or contrary to, Title 17 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
18.  Specialty structures that have been constructed for a specific use, and which are unfeasible to convert to other uses, and which are abandoned, partially destroyed or are permitted to remain in a state of partial destruction or disrepair. Such specialty structures include, but are not limited to, the following: tanks for gas or liquid(s), lateral support structures and bulk-heads, utility high-voltage towers and poles, utility high-rise support structures, electronic transmitting antennas and towers, structures which support or house mechanical and utility equipment and are located above the roof lines of existing buildings, high rise freestanding chimneys and smoke stacks, and recreational structures such as tennis courts and cabanas. 
19.  Abandoned, dismantled, inoperable or wrecked boats, campers, motorcycles, trailers, vehicles, or parts thereof, in outdoor areas of real property. 
20.  Any personal property or structure that obstructs or encroaches on any public property, including, but not limited to, any public alley, highway, land, sidewalk, street or other right-of-way. 
21.  Causing, maintaining or permitting graffiti, as defined in Chapter 9.24 of the Lancaster Municipal Code to be present or remain on a building, structure or vehicle, or portion thereof, that is visible from a public right-of-way or from adjoining property. 
22.  Storage of hazardous or toxic materials or substances on real property, as so classified by any local, state or federal laws or regulations, in such a manner as to be injurious, or potentially injurious or hazardous, to the public health, safety or welfare, or to adjacent properties, or that otherwise violates local, state or federal laws or regulations. 
23.  Failure to provide and maintain adequate weather protection to structures or buildings, so as to cause, or tend to cause or promote, the existence of cracked, peeling, warped, rotted, or severely damaged paint, stucco or other exterior covering. 
24.  Any condition recognized in local or state law or in equity as constituting a public nuisance, or any condition existing on real property that constitutes, or tends to constitute, blight, or that is a health or safety hazard to the community or neighboring properties. 
25.  Any discharge of any substance or material, other than storm water, which enters, or could possibly enter, the city's storm sewer system in violation of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
26.  Maintenance of any tarp or similar covering on, or over, any graded surface or hillside, except in the following circumstances: 
a.  A state of emergency has been declared by local, state or federal officials directly impacting the area to be tarped; 
b.  Tarping performed pursuant to an active building or grading permit; 
c.  Tarps installed during the period from December 1 through March 30 of each year, when required due to forecasted rain or other weather likely to damage or erode a hillside or graded surface. 
27.  Maintenance of any tarp or similar covering on, or over, any roof of any structure, except during periods of active rainfall, or when specifically permitted under an active roofing or building permit. 
28.  Unsanitary, polluted or unhealthful pools, ponds, standing water or excavations containing water, whether or not they are attractive nuisances but which are nevertheless likely to harbor mosquitoes, insects or other vectors. The likelihood of insect harborage is evidenced by any of the following conditions: water which is unclear, murky, clouded or green; water containing bacterial growth, algae, insect larvae, insect remains, or animal remains; or, bodies of water which are abandoned, neglected, unfiltered or otherwise improperly maintained. 
B.  A condition, use or activity is present that constitutes a public nuisance as defined by Sections 3479 or 3480 of the California Civil Code, and any future amendments thereto. 
C.  A violation of any uncodified ordinance, or of other provisions of the Lancaster Municipal Code, or of any applicable county or state laws and regulations is present. 
(Ord. 857 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.28.040 - Penalty. 
A.  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or who fails to comply with any obligation or requirement of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor unless the offense is charged as an infraction by a prosecuting attorney. 
B.  Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day, or part thereof, during which a violation of this chapter, or of any law or regulation referenced on this chapter, is allowed, committed, continued, maintained or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable accordingly. 
(Ord. 857 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.28.050 - Abatement of public nuisances. 
All conditions or uses that constitute a public nuisance as defined in Section 8.28.040 of this chapter, or that are contrary to, or in violation of, any other provision or requirement of the Lancaster Municipal Code, or of any applicable county or state law, or regulation thereof, which shall also constitute a public nuisance, shall be abated by rehabilitation, demolition or repair, removal or termination. The procedures for abatement in this part shall not be exclusive and shall not limit or restrict the city from pursuing any other remedies available at law, whether civil, equitable or criminal, or from enforcing city codes and adopted ordinances, or from abating or causing abatement of public nuisances, in any other manner provided by law. 
(Ord. 857 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.28.060 - Continuing obligation of responsible persons to abatement a public nuisance. 
A.  Responsible persons shall not allow, cause, create, maintain or permit a public nuisance to exist on their premises. If public nuisances do arise or occur, responsible persons shall promptly abate them by rehabilitation, demolition or repair, removal or termination with all required city approvals, permits and inspections, when applicable. 
B.  The city may exercise its administrative, civil/injunctive and criminal remedies, or any one or combination of these remedies, to compel responsible persons to abate a public nuisance when, in its judgment, such persons have not completed nuisance abatement actions in a timely or proper manner, or when responsible persons have failed to prevent an occurrence or recurrence of a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 857 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.28.070 - Procedures for the city to establish the right to enter private real property to abate a public nuisance. 
A.  Whenever a code enforcement officer or other public official determines that city employees, representatives or contract agents (hereafter "city personnel") may need to abate a public nuisance, he or she shall give a written "notice of public nuisance and intention to abate with city personnel" (hereafter in this section and in subsequent sections of this chapter, the "notice of abatement") to the responsible person(s) that contains the following provisions: 
1.  The address of the real property on which the nuisance condition(s) exist(s); 
2.  A description of the nuisance condition(s); 
3.  A reference to the law prohibiting or pertaining to the nuisance condition(s); 
4.  A brief description of the required corrective action(s); and, 
5.  A time period and/or schedule in which to complete the nuisance abatement actions (with all required city approvals, permits and inspections, when applicable); 
6.  The period and manner in which a responsible person may contest the notice of abatement pursuant to Section 8.28.100 of this chapter. No such right shall exist when the city is not seeking to establish the right to abate a public nuisance with city personnel; 
7.  Omission of any of these provisions, whether in whole or in part, excepting the required information in Section 8.28.070, or the failure of a responsible person to receive a notice of abatement, shall not render it defective or render any proceeding or action pursuant to this chapter invalid; 
8.  A statement that the city may record a notice of substandard property with the Los Angeles County Recorder's Office against the premises if the public nuisance is not fully abated or corrected (with all required approvals, permits and inspections), as determined by the city, within a thirty (30) day period after service of the notice of abatement and provided that a timely appeal therefrom has not been made. 
B.  The procedure in subsection A shall not apply to public nuisances constituting an imminent hazard. In such instances, the provisions in this chapter shall be followed. 
C.  The city's election to issue a notice of abatement pursuant to this section shall not excuse responsible persons from their continuing obligation to abate a public nuisance in accordance with all applicable laws, regulations and legal requirements. Furthermore, the issuance of this notice shall obligate the city to abate a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 857 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.28.080 - Additional requirements for demolition of buildings or structures. 
A.  The city shall, excepting in cases involving an imminent hazard, provide responsible persons with a reasonable period to elect between options of demolition or repair, as well as a reasonable period of time to complete either option, before city personnel abate a public nuisance by demolishing a building or structure pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  The city shall, excepting in cases involving an imminent hazard, serve a notice of abatement on all secured lien holders of record with the Los Angeles County Recorder's Office in the event abatement actions include demolition of a building or structure. 
(Ord. 857 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.28.090 - Service of notice of abatement. 
A.  Notices of abatement may be personally given to any responsible person or they may be served by first class mail. The date a notice of abatement is placed in a U.S. Postal Service mail receptacle shall be the date of service. Failure of any responsible person to receive a notice of abatement by mail shall not invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  The official issuing a notice of abatement to an owner of real property may rely on that person's mailing address according to the last equalized assessment roll of the Los Angeles County Assessor's Office in determining a service address for the notice of abatement. Failure of any owner to receive a notice of abatement by mail shall not invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 857 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.28.100 - Right of appeal from a notice of abatement. 
A.  A responsible person may contest a notice of abatement by filing an appeal in the manner required by Chapter 2.44 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. Failure of the city clerk to receive a timely appeal constitutes a waiver of the right to contest a notice of abatement. In this event, the notice of abatement is final and binding. 
(Ord. 857 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.28.110 - Sample notice of abatement. 
A.  The notice of abatement shall be written in a form that is substantially consistent with the following: 
Notice of Public Nuisance(s) and Intention to Abate with City Personnel 
[Date] 
___________ [Responsible Person(s)] 
___________ [Mailing Address] 
___________ [City, State and Zip Code] 
Re: ;hg;Real Property at ___________, _____ 
L.A. County A.P.N: ___________ 
Legal description [Optional]: ___________ 
Notice is hereby given that the following public nuisance conditions or activities exist on the premises described above: 
(1) [Describe condition or activities] ___________ in violation of___________ Municipal Code [ as well as county and state laws, if applicable ], Section(s) ___________. 
(a) Required Corrective Action(s): ___________ (with all required permits, approvals and inspections). 
(b) Required Completion Date: ___________ . 
  [ Repeat (1 a-b) for each additional public nuisance to be included in this notice ] 
  The foregoing public nuisance conditions are subject to abatement by rehabilitation, demolition, repair, removal or termination. 
   Please Take Further Notice that City Personnel may abate these public nuisance conditions or activities in the manner contained in this document if you do not perform the required corrective or preventative actions in a timely or proper manner with all required approvals, permits and inspections of the City and other appropriate public agencies. In such instances, the City shall seek recovery of all abatement costs, fees and expenses as allowed by Section 8.28, or by applicable state laws, in any manner allowed by law. 
   Please Take Further Notice that you may appeal this Notice of Public Nuisance and Intention to Abate with City Personnel by filing an appeal on a City approved form with the City Clerk's office (located at 44933 Fern Avenue, Lancaster, California within ten (10) calendar days of service of this notice. No fee shall be due for the filing of an appeal. Failure of the City Clerk to receive a timely appeal constitutes a waiver of your right to any further administrative appeal and renders the Notice of Public Nuisance and Intention to Abate with City Personnel final and binding. 
   Please Take Further Notice that, if the violations are not abated within the time specified and a timely appeal is not made, such nuisance may be abated by City employees, representatives or contract agents (hereafter "City Personnel"), in the manner stated in this notice. On such occasions, all costs of the abatement, including, but not limited to, those stated in Section 8.28 of the Lancaster Municipal Code, shall be assessed against the responsible person(s) and/or the subject property, as a lien, or as a special assessment. 
  Please Take Further Notice that the City may record a Notice of Substandard Property with the Los Angeles County Recorder's Office against the premises if the public nuisance is not fully abated or corrected (with all required approvals, permits and inspections), as determined by the City, within a thirty (30) day period after service of the Notice of Abatement and provided that a timely appeal therefrom has not been made. 
Please Take Further Notice that, in the event of abatement by City Personnel, all personal property constituting a public nuisance may be removed from the subject premises or from public property and destroyed or disposed of, without regard to its actual or salvage value. 
Dated: This _____ day of _____, 20_____. 	
	
	_____
	Public Official [Name and Title] 
[End of Form] 
 
B.  The provisions in this section only apply to instances to where the city has elected to establish the right, but not the obligation, to abate public nuisances with city personnel. In no event does this chapter limit the right of city officials to issue alternative written or oral notices of code violations to responsible persons or to cause the abatement of public nuisances in a different manner, including without limitation, by court orders arising from the city's exercise of its criminal or civil remedies. In such instances, a responsible person shall receive a right to hearing and other due process rights in court. 
(Ord. 857 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.28.120 - Consequence for an untimely appeal. 
A.  If a timely appeal is not received by the city clerk, the right to appeal is waived and the notice of abatement is final and binding. In such instances, the city may, without any administrative hearing, cause the abatement with city forces of any or all of the nuisance conditions or activities stated in the notice of abatement. Entry on improved private real property shall, excepting instances of an imminent hazard, be with an abatement warrant from the superior court. The city shall follow the procedures stated in this chapter for recovery of all abatement costs, fees and expenses. 
B.  Nothing contained in this chapter shall obligate the city to undertake abatement actions pursuant to a notice of abatement, whether or not there is a timely appeal. 
(Ord. 857 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.28.130 - Abatement by responsible person prior to hearing. 
A.  Any responsible person shall have the right to abate a nuisance in accordance with the notice of abatement at his or her own expense, provided all corrective actions are completed with all required city permits, approvals and inspections, prior to the date the matter is set for a hearing. 
B.  A hearing shall be cancelled if all nuisance conditions or activities are, as determined by the city, fully and lawfully abated prior thereto. 
(Ord. 857 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.28.140 - Review by hearing officer. 
A.  Any responsible person who contests a notice of abatement shall, subject to filing a timely appeal, obtain review thereof before a hearing officer. 
B.  At the place and time set forth in the notification of appeal hearing, the hearing officer shall hear the testimony of the appealing person(s), the issuing officer, and/or their witnesses, as well as any documentary evidence presented by these persons concerning the alleged public nuisance(s). 
C.  Appeal hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. The city bears the burden of proof to establish a nuisance exists by a preponderance of evidence. The appellant, and the enforcement officer issuing the notice, as well as all other interested persons, shall have the opportunity to present evidence and to cross-examine witnesses. The appellant, or other interested persons, may represent himself/herself/themselves or be represented by anyone of his/her/their choice. The appellant, or other interested persons, may bring an interpreter to the hearing at his/her/their sole expense. 
D.  If the appellant fails, or other interested persons fail, to appear, the hearing officer shall cancel the hearing and send a notice thereof to the responsible person(s) by first class mail to the address(es) stated on the appeal form. A cancellation of a hearing due to non-appearance of the appellant shall constitute the appellant's waiver of the right to appeal. In such instances, the notice of abatement is final and binding. 
(Ord. 857 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.28.150 - Decision and notice by hearing officer. 
A.  Within a reasonable time, not to exceed fifteen (15) calendar days following conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make any one or more of the following determinations in a written decision: 
1.  A finding and description of each nuisance condition at the subject property, or the non-existence thereof. In the latter instance, the hearing officer shall cancel the notice. 
2.  The name of each person responsible for a nuisance condition, or conditions, at the subject property, as well as the name of any appellant who lacks responsibility therefore. 
3.  The required corrective action and completion date for each unabated nuisance condition. Such provisions in the decision may be referred to as an "order of abatement." 
4.  Any other finding, determination or requirement that is relevant or related to the subject matter of the appeal. 
B.  The decision of the hearing officer is final and conclusive. The decision shall also contain the following statement: Judicial review of the hearing's officer decision is subject to the time limits set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure, Section 1094.6." 
C.  A copy of the decision shall be served on all responsible persons who contested the notice of abatement by first class mail to the address(es) stated on the appeal form. Failure of a responsible person to receive a properly addressed decision shall not invalidate any action or proceeding by the city pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 857 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.28.160 - Abatement of nuisance by responsible persons prior to city abatement actions. 
A.  Any responsible person shall have the right to fully abate a nuisance in accordance with the hearing officer's decision prior to the date of entry of city forces or agents upon the subject real property, provided that all corrective actions are completed with all date. In such instances, all administrative proceedings shall be cancelled. 
B.  Once the city enters a subject real property to abate a public nuisance, it shall have the right to complete this action. 
C.  No person shall obstruct, impede, or interfere with city personnel in the performance of any act that is carried out in complying with an order of abatement pursuant to this article. 
D.  All personal property that is removed by city Personnel from premises in the abatement of a nuisance shall be lawfully disposed of or destroyed without regard to its actual or salvage value. 
(Ord. 857 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.28.170 - Emergency action to abate an imminent hazard. 
A.  Notwithstanding any provision of the Lancaster Municipal Code to the contrary, the sheriff police chief, the fire chief, or the building official, or any of their designees, may cause a public nuisance to be summarily abated if it is determined that the nuisance creates an imminent hazard to a person or persons, or to other real or personal property. Prior to abating the nuisance, the city manager may attempt to notify a responsible person by telephone or in writing of the imminent hazard and request its abatement by said person. A public official may, in his or her discretion, dispense with an attempt of prior notification of a responsible person if the nature or severity of the hazard justifies such inaction. 
B.  If, in the sole discretion of the public official declaring an imminent hazard, the responsible person(s) fail(s) to take immediate and meaningful steps to abate the imminent hazard, the city may abate the nuisance with city personnel, and charge the costs and fees thereof to the responsible person(s). 
C.  Within ten (10) business days following emergency actions of city personnel to abate an imminent hazard, the city shall serve any responsible person with a notice of emergency abatement by city personnel of an imminent hazard by first class mail. The city may, if a responsible person is a property owner, rely on that person's mailing address according to the last equalized assessment roll of the Los Angeles County Assessor's Office in determining a service address for this notice. Failure of any responsible person to receive a notice of emergency abatement by city personnel of an imminent hazard by mail shall not invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to this chapter. 
D.  A notice of emergency abatement by city personnel of an imminent Hazard shall contain the following provisions: 
1.  The name of a known responsible person who is being served with the notice of emergency abatement by city personnel of an imminent hazard and the address of the real property on which the imminent hazard was present; 
2.  A brief description of the condition(s) and reasons why it constitutes an imminent hazard; 
3.  A brief description of the law prohibiting or pertaining to the imminent hazard; 
4.  A brief description of the actions city personnel took to abate the imminent hazard. 
E.  Omission of any of the foregoing provisions in a notice of emergency abatement by city personnel of an imminent hazard, whether in whole or in part, or the failure of a responsible person to receive this document, shall not render it defective or render any proceeding or action pursuant to this chapter invalid. 
F.  Emergency abatement of an imminent hazard by city personnel shall not preclude the city from recording a notice of substandard property in accordance with the provisions of Section 5823 of this chapter, if conditions thereafter remain at the premises that constitute a violation of law or a public nuisance. 
G.  The city shall be entitled to recover its fees and costs for the abatement of an imminent hazard. In such instances, the city shall follow the procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 857 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.28.180 - Combination of notices. 
The notices that are authorized by this chapter may be combined in the discretion of the city. 
(Ord. 857 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.28.190 - Establishment of costs of abatement. 
A.  The city shall keep an accounting of the costs, fees and expenses (collectively hereafter, the "costs") of abating a public nuisance. 
B.  The city shall serve a statement of abatement costs on the responsible persons within twenty (20) calendar days of the city's completion of nuisance abatement actions. Service of this statement may be made in the manner provided for in Section 8.28.090 of this chapter. 
C.  A responsible person shall tender the costs in U.S. currency to the city within ten (10) calendar days of the date of service of the statement of abatement costs. Alternatively, a responsible person may contest the statement in the manner provided for in Subsection D. 
D.  A responsible person has the right to contest a statement of abatement costs by filing an appeal on a city approved form with the city clerk's office (located at 44933 Fern Avenue, Lancaster, California) within ten (10) calendar days of service of the notice of abatement. No fee shall be due for the filing of an appeal. Failure of the city clerk to receive a timely appeal constitutes a waiver of the right to contest a statement of abatement costs. In this event, the statement of abatement costs is final and binding. 
E.  The city may proceed to collect its costs as contained in a final statement of abatement costs in any manner allowed by law. 
F.  If a timely appeal is received by the city clerk, a hearing shall be set before the city council. A notice of the date, time and location of the hearing shall be served on all responsible persons who contested the statement of abatement costs by first class mail to the address(es) stated on the appeal form at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing. Failure of a person to receive a properly addressed notice shall not invalidate any action or proceeding by the city pursuant to this chapter. 
G.  At the time and place fixed for receiving and considering the statement of abatement costs, the city council shall hear and pass upon the evidence submitted by city personnel, together with any objections or protests raised by responsible persons liable for said costs. Thereupon, the city council may make such revision, correction or modification to the statement as it may deem just, after which the statement, as it is submitted, or as revised, corrected or modified, shall be confirmed. The hearing may be continued from time to time. 
H.  The decision of the city council is final. 
I.  The city clerk shall cause a confirmed statement of abatement costs to be served upon all responsible persons who contested the original statement by first class mail to the address(es) stated on the appeal form. This document shall also contain the following statement: Judicial review of the city's council's decision is subject to the time limits set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure, Section 1094.6." Failure of a person to receive a properly addressed confirmed statement shall not invalidate any action or proceeding by the city pursuant to this chapter. 
J.  A responsible person shall tender the costs in U.S. currency to the city within ten (10) calendar days of the date of service of the confirmed statement of abatement costs. The city may thereafter proceed to collect its costs as contained in the confirmed statement of abatement costs in any manner allowed by law. 
(Ord. 857 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.28.200 - Collection of costs of abatement by special assessment. 
A.  The city may cause a special assessment to be made upon real property upon which a public nuisance was abated pursuant to California Government Code, Section 38773.5, and future amendments thereto, in the event a statement of abatement costs or a confirmed statement of abatement costs is not paid in a timely manner. 
B.  A notice of special assessment shall be sent to the owner(s) of the subject real property by certified mail at the time the assessment is the imposed which shall contain the following recitals: 
The property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments. The tax collector's power of sale shall not be affected by the failure of the property owner to receive notice. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment. However, if any real property to which the cost of abatement relates has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for value has been created and attaches thereon, prior to the date on which the first installment of the taxes would become delinquent, then the cost of abatement shall not result in a lien against the real property but instead shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection. 
C.  The city attorney or city prosecutor shall establish the notice of special assessment form for use, or consideration by, the tax collector in collecting a special assessment. 
D.  The notice of special assessment shall be entitled to recordation with the Los Angles County Recorder's Office. 
E.  The amount of a special assessment shall also constitute a personal obligation of the property owners of land upon which the nuisance was abated. 
(Ord. 857 Att. A (part), 2006) 
(Ord. No. 920, § 1, 3-10-09)  
8.28.210 - Collection of costs of abatement by nuisance abatement lien. 
A.  As an alternative to the procedure contained in Section 8.28.090, the city may cause a nuisance abatement lien to be recorded upon real property upon which a public nuisance was abated pursuant to California Government Code, Section 38773.1, and future amendments thereto, in the event a statement of abatement costs or a confirmed statement of abatement costs is not paid in a timely manner. 
B.  A lien shall not be recorded prior to serving the owner of record of the parcel of land on which the public nuisance is maintained, with a notice. This document shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with Article 3 (commencing with Section 415.10) of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure. If the owner of record, after diligent search cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten (10) days and publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county in which the property is located pursuant to Section 6062 of the Government Code. 
C.  The nuisance abatement lien shall be recorded in the Los Angeles County Recorder's office in the county in which the parcel of land is located and from the date of recording shall have the force, effect, and priority of a judgment lien. 
D.  A nuisance abatement lien authorized by this section shall specify the amount of the lien for the city of Lancaster, the name of the city department on whose behalf the lien is imposed, the date of the abatement actions, the street address, legal description and assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel. 
E.  In the event that the lien is discharged, released, or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge containing the information specified in Subsection (D) shall be recorded by the city. A nuisance abatement lien and the release of the lien shall be indexed in the grantor-grantee index. 
F.  A nuisance abatement lien may be foreclosed by an action brought by the city for a money judgment. 
G.  The city may recover from the property owner any costs incurred regarding the processing and recording of the lien and providing notice to the property owner as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien. 
H.  The amount of a nuisance abatement lien shall also constitute a personal obligation of the property owners of land upon which the nuisance was abated. 
(Ord. 857 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.28.220 - Treble the costs of abatement. 
Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two year period finding that an owner of property is responsible for a public nuisance pursuant to this chapter, the court may order that person to pay treble the costs of the abatement. 
(Ord. 857 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.28.230 - Recordation of substandard notice. 
A.  Notwithstanding any provision of the Lancaster Municipal Code to the contrary, if the city determines that any property, building or structure, or any part thereof, is in violation of any provision of the Lancaster Municipal Code and said violation has not been fully abated or corrected, as determined by the city, within a thirty (30) day period after written notice to a responsible person, then the city, in its sole discretion, may record a notice of substandard property with the Los Angeles County Recorder's Office against said premises. As used herein, "fully abated or corrected" includes the procurement of all required city approvals, permits, licenses and the passage of all city required inspections. 
B.  The city may record a notice of substandard property without the issuance of a notice of abatement pursuant to Section 8.28.090 of this chapter, provided that a notice of correction or a notice of violation to a responsible person previously disclosed that a substandard notice may be recorded against a property if a violation is not fully abated or corrected in a period of thirty (30) days. 
C.  A notice of substandard property may be recorded thirty (30) days after service of a notice of abatement provided that: (i) the notice contained this disclosure, (ii) the public nuisance was not fully abated or corrected within that period, and (iii) a timely and proper appeal to the notice of abatement was not made. 
D.  The form that constitutes a notice of substandard property shall be approved by the city attorney or the city prosecutor. 
E.  The city shall record a notice of rescission of substandard property with the Los Angeles County Recorder's Office within ten (10) business days of its determination that a violation or a public nuisance has been fully abated or corrected. 
F.  The city shall cause copies of recorded notices of substandard property and notices of rescission of substandard property to be served on all persons having an ownership interest in the subject real property as shown in the last equalized assessment roll of the Los Angeles County Assessor's Office. Service thereof shall be by first class mail. Failure of any person to receive such notices shall not invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 857 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.28.240 - Code enforcement fees. 
A.  Pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 17951, and any successor statute thereto, responsible persons, who cause, allow or maintain a violation in, or upon, residential properties, shall be charged fees (hereafter "code enforcement fees") by the city to defray its costs of code enforcement actions, as hereafter defined. Such fees shall not exceed the amount reasonably required to achieve this objective and are chargeable whether the city's code enforcement actions occur in the absence of formal administrative or judicial proceedings, as well as prior to, during, or subsequent to, the initiation of such proceedings. 
B.  The amount(s) or rate(s) of code enforcement fees for city personnel time and other resources that are used for code enforcement actions shall be established, and may thereafter be amended, by resolution by the city council. 
C.  The city manager, or a designee thereof, is authorized to adopt regulations for the uniform imposition of code enforcement fees, and for related administrative actions pertaining to such fees. 
D.  The fees imposed pursuant to this section shall be in addition to any other fees or charges that responsible persons may owe in accordance with any other provision of the Lancaster Municipal Code, or which are imposed pursuant to county, state or federal laws or regulations. 
E.  Code enforcement fees shall be recoverable in conjunction with any civil, administrative or criminal action to abate, cause the abatement, or cessation of, or otherwise remove, a violation or a public nuisance. 
F.  Failure to pay code enforcement fees shall constitute a debt that is collectible in any manner allowed by law. 
G.  As used in this section, the following words or phrases shall have the following definitions: 
"Code enforcement actions" shall mean and include, but not be limited to, the time and other resources of public officials expended by them in identifying, inspecting, investigating, seeking or causing the abatement of a violation at a residential structure. These include, but are not limited to, site inspections, drafting reports, taking photographs, procuring other evidence, engaging in meetings, conferences and communications with responsible persons, their agents or representatives, concerning a violation, as well as with attorneys for the city at any time, and appearances before judicial officers or reviewing authorities during the pendency of a judicial or administrative proceeding and other appearances at such judicial or administrative hearings. The time and resources that public officials further expend to confirm that a residential structure remains free of a violation while a responsible person is on probation to a court or when a matter concerning a residential structure remains pending before a reviewing authority in an administrative action, shall also constitute code enforcement actions. 
"Residential structures" shall mean and include all structures and premises that are regulated by the California State Housing Law [California Health & Safety Code, Division 13, Part 1.5, Section 17910 et seq.], and any future amendments thereto. These include, but are not limited to, apartment houses, hotels, motels, and dwellings, and residential buildings and structures accessory thereto. 
"Violation" shall mean and include a public nuisance as described or referred to in this chapter, or any condition, activity or use that is caused, allowed to exist, or maintained (whether due to an affirmative act, or inaction) by a responsible person in violation of any other provision, regulation, or requirement of the Lancaster Municipal Code, or any applicable county state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Ord. 857 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.28.250 - Recovery of attorney's fees. 
A.  A prevailing party in any administrative, civil or equitable judicial action to abate, or cause the abatement of a public nuisance as defined in Part 1 of this chapter, or in any appeal or other judicial action arising therefrom, may recover reasonable attorney's fees in accordance with the following subsections: 
1.  Attorney's fees are not recoverable by any person as a prevailing party unless the city manager, or a designee thereof, or an attorney for, and on behalf of, the city, elects in writing to seek recovery of the city's attorney's fees at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding. Failure to make such an election precludes any entitlement to, or award of, attorney's fees in favor of any person or the city; 
2.  The city is the prevailing party when an administrative or judicial determination is made or affirmed by which a person is found to be responsible for one or more conditions or activities that constitute a public nuisance. A person is the prevailing party only when a final administrative or judicial determination completely absolves that person of responsibility for all conditions or activities that were alleged, in that action or proceeding, to constitute a public nuisance. An administrative or judicial determination that results in findings of responsibility and non-responsibility on the part of a person for conditions or activities that were alleged in that action or proceeding to constitute a public nuisance, shall nevertheless result in the city being the prevailing party. 
B.  Provided that the city has made an election to seek attorney's fees, an award of attorney's fees to a person shall not exceed the amount of reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the city in that action or proceeding. 
(Ord. 857 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.28.260 - Applicability of other laws. 
A.  This chapter does not exclusively regulate the conditions and use of property within the city. This chapter shall supplement other provisions of this code and other statutes, ordinances or regulations now existing or subsequently enacted by the city, the state or any other entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
B.  The procedures for abatement set forth in this chapter are not exclusive and are in addition to any other provisions set forth in this code or by state law for the abatement of public nuisances. 
(Ord. 857 Att. A (part), 2006)  
8.28.270 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council declares that it would have adopted this chapter, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, phrases, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. 857 Att. A (part), 2006)  
Chapter 8.29 - POOL MAINTENANCE 
 
8.29.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the city of Lancaster's Pool Maintenance ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 996, § 1, 1-14-14)  
8.29.020 - Findings and purpose. 
The city council finds and declares as follows: 
A.  Stagnant sources of water create breeding grounds for mosquitoes, which are capable of transmitting the causative agents of human diseases. 
B.  Inadequately maintained swimming pools are a significant source of stagnant or standing bodies of water within the city. 
C.  It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to protect public health, safety and welfare by developing regulations that will promote the maintenance of swimming pools in the city in a healthful, sanitary and safe condition. 
D.  It is further the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish administrative procedures to cause the swift abatement of inadequately maintained swimming pools. 
(Ord. No. 996, § 1, 1-14-14)  
8.29.030 - Definitions. 
"City" means the city of Lancaster. 
"Code" means the Lancaster Municipal Code, and laws incorporated therein by reference, as well as any adopted and uncodified ordinances. 
"City manager" means the Lancaster City Manager and/or his or her authorized designee(s). 
"Owner" means and includes any person having legal title to any real property in the city, including all persons shown as owners on the last equalized assessment roll of the county assessor's office. Owner also includes any person with powers of attorney, executors of estates, trustees, or who are court appointed administrators, conservators, guardians or receivers. 
"Person," for purposes of this chapter, means and includes any individual, partnership of any kind, corporation, limited liability company, association, joint venture or other organization or entity, however formed, as well as trustees, heirs, executors, administrators, assigns and any public entity or agency that acts as an owner in the city. 
"Pool" means any swimming pool, whether above-ground or in-ground. For purposes of this chapter, "pool" also includes any above-ground or in-ground hot tub or spa, ornamental pond, fountain, bird bath, or any other man-made structure or fixture capable of collecting water. 
"Property" or "premises" means any privately-owned real property in the city on which a pool, as defined in this chapter, is present. 
"Responsible person" means any person, whether an owner as defined in this chapter, or a person who leases, rents, occupies or has charge, control or possession of property, who allows, causes, creates, maintains, suffers or permits the presence of a pool that is not maintained in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, by any act or the omission of an act or duty. The actions or inactions of a responsible person's agent, employee, representative or contractor may be attributed to that responsible person. 
(Ord. No. 996, § 1, 1-14-14)  
8.29.040 - Enforcement; administration. 
A.  The city manager is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The city manager is authorized to designate certain city personnel to assist in the enforcement of this chapter. The designees shall have such enforcement powers as are delegated by the city manager. 
C.  The city manager is authorized to promulgate rules, regulations, policies and procedures to implement the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, administrative policies and procedures for the city's use, independently and/or in conjunction with the Antelope Valley Mosquito and Vector Control District, to investigate, identify and abate pools that are not maintained in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 996, § 1, 1-14-14)  
8.29.050 - Inspections; right of entry. 
A.  The city manager is authorized to make such inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Authorized inspections shall be limited to exterior portions of premises. 
B.  When it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this chapter, or when the city manager has reasonable cause to believe that there exists on a premises a pool that is not maintained in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the city manager may enter the premises at reasonable times to inspect. 
1.  If the property is occupied, the city manager shall, before entering the premises, present proper credentials and request entry, explaining his or her reasons for the inspection. 
2.  If the property is unoccupied, the city manager shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other responsible person, as defined in this chapter, and request entry, explaining his or her reasons for the inspection. 
3.  If consent to entry is refused or otherwise cannot be obtained, the city manager shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure lawful entry and inspect the premises, including, but not limited to, securing an inspection warrant pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1822.50 through 1822.57. 
4.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the city manager has reasonable cause to believe that a pool is in such a condition as to pose an imminent hazard to public health and safety, the city manager shall have the right to immediately enter and inspect the premises, and may use any reasonable means required to effectuate the entry and inspection. 
(Ord. No. 996, § 1, 1-14-14)  
8.29.060 - Pool maintenance required; maintenance standards; owners' responsibility. 
A.  Owners, as defined in this chapter, shall, at all times, regularly and continuously maintain a pool in one of the following manners: 
1.  The pool shall be filtered and treated so the water remains clear and circulating; 
2.  The pool shall be fully drained and kept dry. 
B.  Any pool that is not maintained in conformance with subsection A. shall be deemed an "unmaintained pool." 
C.  Notwithstanding any provision of a lease or rental agreement, or other occupancy contract or agreement, which assigns pool maintenance duties to a lessee, tenant or occupant, an owner shall be deemed responsible for the regular and continuous maintenance of his or her pool in accordance with subsection A. 
(Ord. No. 996, § 1, 1-14-14)  
8.29.070 - Violation; public nuisance; penalty. 
A.  The city council finds and declares that it is unlawful for any responsible person, as defined in this chapter, to allow, cause, create, suffer or permit the presence of an unmaintained pool on his or her property. 
B.  The city council finds and declares that an unmaintained pool constitutes a public nuisance subject to abatement. 
C.  Any person violating the provisions of this chapter is subject to the penalty provisions set forth in chapter 1.12. 
(Ord. No. 996, § 1, 1-14-14)  
8.29.080 - Abatement; emergency abatement of an imminently hazardous unmaintained pool. 
A.  The city manager may cause an unmaintained pool to be abated, in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 8.28. 
B.  The city manager may utilize the procedures set forth in section 8.28.170 for the emergency abatement of an unmaintained pool if it is determined that the pool creates an imminent hazard to public health, safety or welfare. Evidence of an imminently hazardous pool shall include, but not be limited to, the presence of mosquitoes, mosquito larvae, bacterial growth or algae, or water which is unclear, murky, clouded, green or discolored. 
(Ord. No. 996, § 1, 1-14-14)  
8.29.090 - Fees; costs. 
A.  The city shall be entitled to recover, and collect, its costs and fees for the abatement of an unmaintained pool, in accordance with and as provided in chapter 8.28. 
B.  A responsible person who causes, allows, suffers or permits the presence of an unmaintained pool shall be charged fees by the city to defray its costs of code enforcement actions, which shall be recoverable in conjunction with any administrative, civil, equitable or criminal action to abate or cause the abatement of an unmaintained Pool, in accordance with and as provided in chapter 8.28. 
C.  A prevailing party in any administrative, civil or equitable judicial action to abate or cause the abatement of an unmaintained Pool, or in any appeal or other judicial action arising therefrom, may recover reasonable attorney's fees, expert witness fees and costs, in accordance with and as provided in section 8.28.250. 
(Ord. No. 996, § 1, 1-14-14)  
8.29.100 - Administrative citations. 
A.  The city manager may issue an administrative citation to a responsible person who causes, allows, suffers or permits the presence of an unmaintained pool. Issuance of a citation shall be in accordance with and as provided in chapter 1.16. 
B.  Notwithstanding any other provisions in this code, the penalty amount of an administrative citation issued for a violation of this chapter shall be assessed as follows: 
1.  For the first administrative citation, the penalty shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
2.  For the second administrative citation, the penalty shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
3.  For the third administrative citation, the penalty shall be one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). 
(Ord. No. 996, § 1, 1-14-14)  
8.29.110 - Remedies not exclusive. 
Any administrative citation pursuant to this chapter shall not prejudice or adversely affect any other civil, administrative or criminal action that may be brought to abate an unmaintained pool or to seek compensation for damages suffered. A civil or criminal action may be brought concurrently with any other process regarding the same violation. 
(Ord. No. 996, § 1, 1-14-14)  
8.29.120 - Applicability of other laws. 
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of pool maintenance or penalty for allowing, causing, creating or permitting the presence of an unmaintained pool. It supplements, and is in addition to, other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, Antelope Valley Mosquito and Vector Control District, state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction, including but not limited to the provisions of Division 3 of the Health and Safety Code (Section 2000, et seq.), as well as administrative regulations adopted pursuant to those laws. 
(Ord. No. 996, § 1, 1-14-14)  
8.29.130 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council declares that it would have adopted this chapter, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, phrases, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 996, § 1, 1-14-14)  
Chapter 8.30 - RESIDENTIAL LANDSCAPING INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE 
 
8.30.010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Director" means the director of community development of the city of Lancaster. 
"Hardscape" means any inorganic materials intended and maintained for decorative use as part of an overall landscape design and may include, but not be limited to, decorative rock, stones, pavers, colored or patterned concrete, and similar materials. 
"Irrigation system" means an overall system of various components, including pipelines, sprayers, bubblers, drip emitters and other materials, including timers, designed and installed to ensure that all landscaped areas and plant materials are adequately watered on a regular basis. An irrigation system shall include a backflow prevention device. "Irrigation system" does not include the use of portable sprinklers, hoses, or hand watering. 
"Landscaping" means the planting and continuous maintenance of a combination of trees, shrubs, vines, groundcovers, flowers, and grass on the land. Except in parkways, "landscaping" includes the installation of various decorative features, such as benches, water features, and artwork, and the use of hardscape as part of an over-all design. "Landscaping" includes the use of xeriscape design, techniques, planting, and irrigation. 
"Mulch" means any material, whether organic or inorganic, such as leaves, bark, straw, compost, gravel, or other materials applied to the surface of the soil designed to reduce water evaporation or discourage the growth of weeds. 
"Multiple family residential" means a development consisting of two or more dwelling units on a lot or parcel located in the Moderate Density Residential (MDR) or High Density Residential (HDR) zoning classification. 
"Parkway" means all areas between the curb and the sidewalk in front of or along side a residential lot. 
"Plant materials" means trees, shrubs, vines, groundcovers, flowers and grass. 
"Single family residential" means a single dwelling unit, or a single dwelling unit and a second dwelling unit approved under the provisions of Section 17.08.360 of the Lancaster Municipal Code, located on an individual lot or parcel located in the R-7,000, R-10,000, or R-15,000 zoning classification. 
(Ord. 877 §§ 1, 2, 2007; Ord. 821 (part), 2003)  
8.30.020 - Applicability of landscape requirements. 
Except as otherwise noted, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to all developed residential lots within the city of Lancaster. 
(Ord. 821 (part), 2003)  
8.30.030 - Exceptions to landscape requirements. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to residential lots located in the rural residential zones (RR-2.5, RR-1, and SRR). 
(Ord. 821 (part), 2003)  
8.30.040 - Landscape requirements for new residential development. 
All residential development issued building permits after the effective date of this chapter shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  Multiple Family Residential Development. All multiple family residential developments shall be landscaped in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 8.50, Landscaping Installation and Maintenance, Title 8, Health and Safety of this code. Such landscaping shall include installation of an irrigation system and an appropriate combination of plant materials and hardscape. 
B.  Single Family Residential Development. Landscaping and irrigation systems shall be installed on all portions of single family residential lots not used for buildings, vehicle access, or parking. 
C.  Maintenance. All landscaping and irrigation systems shall be maintained in accordance with Section 8.30.060. 
(Ord. 821 (part), 2003) 
(Ord. No. 907, § 2, 10-28-08)  
8.30.050 - Landscape requirements for existing residential development. 
All residential development for which a building permit was issued prior to the effective date of this chapter shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 8.50, Landscaping Installation and Maintenance, Title 8, Health and Safety of the Lancaster Municipal Code and the following requirements within six months of the effective date of this chapter: 
A.  Multiple Family Residential Development. All lot areas of existing multiple family residential development not used for buildings, parking, and vehicle circulation shall be landscaped. Irrigation may be provided by an irrigation system, manual application of water, or other method that provides adequate moisture to plant materials; provided, however, that the director may require the installation of an irrigation system in circumstances where a lack of adequate water results in noncompliance with the provisions of Section 8.30.060. 
B.  Single Family Residential Development. All portions of existing single family residential lots open to view from a public street and not used for buildings, vehicle access, or parking shall be landscaped. Irrigation may be provided by an irrigation system, manual application of water, or other method that provides adequate moisture to plant materials; provided, however, that the director may require the installation of an irrigation system in circumstances where a lack of adequate water results in noncompliance with the provisions of Section 8.30.060. 
C.  Maintenance. All landscaping and, where installed, irrigation systems shall be maintained in accordance with Section 8.30.060. 
(Ord. 821 (part), 2003) 
(Ord. No. 907 § 2, 10-28-08)  
8.30.060 - Maintenance of landscaping and irrigation systems. 
All landscaping and irrigation systems installed pursuant to this chapter shall be continuously maintained, including mowing, pruning, weeding, fertilizing, repair, and replacement as necessary. Examples of a lack of maintenance include, but are not limited to: 
A.  Grasses used as part of a lawn that are more than eight inches in height, have significant numbers of seed heads, or are thatched and matted. 
B.  Landscape materials or areas that are infested with insects, disease, or vermin. 
C.  Dead or dry plant material. 
D.  Plant material that has become so overgrown as to inhibit pedestrian or vehicular travel or visibility on a public street or sidewalk. 
E.  Trees or shrubs that contain broken or dead limbs and branches. 
F.  Numerous or large areas of bare dirt within lawns. 
G.  Planter or lawn areas containing significant numbers of large weeds. 
H.  Broken or improperly adjusted irrigation systems that result in significant or continuous spray, spillage, or flow of water onto adjacent property or public streets, or that results in continuous pooling or ponding of water either on or off the site. 
I.  Accumulation of large amounts of plant material debris such as leaves, pulled weeds, grass clippings, branches that are clearly not being used for mulching or composting purposes. 
J.  Inoperative backflow prevention device on an irrigation system. 
(Ord. 821 (part), 2003)  
8.30.065 - Maintenance of parkways. 
It shall be the duty of property owners to provide for maintenance and replacement of all trees, grass and landscaping located in the public parkway located immediately in front of or alongside of their property in the manner required by Section 8.30.050. 
(Ord. 877 § 3, 2007)  
8.30.070 - Waiver of requirements—Director's determination. 
The director may waive the requirements of this chapter, in whole or in part, on a case-by-case basis under the following circumstances: 
A.  Construction, remodeling, or similar work underway on a site that results in the removal, damage, or lack of maintenance of landscaping and irrigation systems. The waiver of requirements shall only remain in effect until the construction work is completed. 
B.  Other circumstances that, in the opinion of the director, constitute sufficient grounds for the temporary or permanent waiver of the requirements of this chapter. 
The director's determinations under this section may be appealed to the city council in accordance with Chapter 2.44 of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 877 § 4, 2007; Ord. 821 (part), 2003)  
8.30.080 - Violations and remedies. 
Violations of this chapter may be remedied by the city through the provisions of Chapter 1.16 or Chapter 8.28 as determined appropriate by the director. 
(Ord. 821 (part), 2003)  
Chapter 8.32 - SMOKING REGULATIONS 
 
8.32.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, wherever used in this chapter, shall be construed as hereafter set out, unless it is apparent from the context they have a different meaning: 
"Bar" means an area which is devoted primarily to the serving of alcoholic beverages and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages. "Incidental" means the serving of hors d'oeuvres and snacks, but not including meals. 
"Employee" means any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit. 
"Employer" means any person, partnership, corporation, including a municipal corporation or public entity, who has more than three employees. 
"Enclosed" means closed in by a roof and four walls with appropriate openings for ingress and egress. 
"Nonprofit entity" means any corporation, unincorporated association or other entity created for charitable, philanthropic, educational or other similar purposes, the net proceeds from the operation of which are committed to the promotion of the objects or purposes of the organization and not to private financial gain. 
"Place of employment" means any enclosed area under control of any employer which employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, employee lounges, conference rooms and employee cafeterias. A private residence is not a place of employment. 
"Public place" means any area to which the public is generally invited or in which the public is generally permitted. 
"Restaurant" means any publicly or privately owned coffee shop, cafeteria, short order cafe, luncheonette, sandwich shop, soda fountain, or other eating establishment which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, patrons or employees as well as kitchens in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere, including catering facilities, except the term "restaurant" shall not include any area within the facility containing the restaurant if such area is noncontiguous to the eating area and otherwise meets the definition of "bar" as set forth in this section. 
"Service line" means any indoor line in which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not such service involves the exchange of money or other consideration. 
"Smoking" means the inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying of any lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, weed, plant or other combustible substances in any manner or in any form. 
(Prior code § 3-15.1)  
8.32.020 - City-owned facilities. 
To the extent allowed by law, all enclosed facilities owned by the city shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3-15.2)  
8.32.030 - Prohibition of smoking in public places. 
A.  Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places within the city during any time they are open for use by members of the public, including, but not limited to, the following places: 
1.  Passenger elevators; 
2.  Buses, taxicabs and other means of public transit, and ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of public transit depots; provided, however, this prohibition does not prevent: 
a.  The establishment of two separate waiting areas for smokers and nonsmokers, or 
b.  The establishment of a maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of a single given waiting area as a smoking area; 
3.  Restrooms; 
4.  Service lines; 
5.  Retail stores, except areas not open to the public and all areas within retail tobacco stores; 
6.  All areas available to and customarily used by the general public in all business and nonprofit entities patronized by the public, including, but not limited to, all offices, banks, hotels and motels; 
7.  Waiting rooms, hallways, wards and semi-private rooms of health facilities, including, but not limited to, hospitals, clinics, physical therapy facilities, doctors' offices and dentists' offices, except that health facilities shall also be subject to the provisions of Section 8.32.040 regulating smoking in places of employment; 
8.  A building or hall used for entertainment, including theater, auditorium and sports arena, except any lobby and any area which is not open to the public; 
9.  In any enclosed theater, auditorium and/or hall which is used for motion pictures, stage dramas and musical performances, ballets and other exhibition, except when smoking is part of such production; 
10.  Retail food marketing establishments, including grocery stores and supermarkets, except those areas of such establishments set aside for the serving of food and drink, restroom and offices and areas thereof not open to the public, which may otherwise be regulated by other sections of this chapter; 
11.  Public schools and other public facilities under the control of another public agency, which are available to and customarily used by the general public, to the extent that the same are subject to the jurisdiction of the city; 
12.  Any restaurant with a seating capacity of fifty (50) or more persons; provided that any owner, operator or manager of a restaurant regulated by this chapter shall, by signs, designate no more than fifty (50) percent of the total eating area seating capacity as a smoking area; 
13.  Ten (10) percent of hotel/motel rooms rented to guests, which shall be clearly posted with signs designating such room as a nonsmoking room. 
B.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner, operator, manager or other person who controls any establishment described in this section may prohibit smoking in all areas of the establishment. 
(Prior code § 3-15.3)  
8.32.040 - Regulation of smoking in places of employment. 
A.  It shall be the responsibility of employers to provide smoke-free areas for nonsmokers within existing facilities to the extent reasonably possible, but employers are not required to incur any expense to make structural or other physical modifications in providing these areas. 
B.  An annual poll of all employees shall be conducted to determine the percentage of smokers and nonsmokers. The employer shall then establish smoking and nonsmoking areas within lunchrooms, cafeterias and employee lounges in proportion to these percentages. In lieu of conducting such a poll, an employer may establish nonsmoking areas of not less than fifty (50) percent of the seating capacity and floor space in lunchrooms, cafeterias and employee lounges. 
C.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, every employer shall have the right to prohibit smoking in all areas of the place of employment. 
(Prior code § 3-15.4)  
8.32.050 - Optional smoking areas. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, the following areas shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this chapter: 
1.  Private residences, except when used as a child care or health care facility; 
2.  Bars; 
3.  Retail tobacco stores; 
4.  Restaurant, hotel and motel conference and meeting rooms and public and private assembly rooms when these places are being used for private functions open only to invitees or members of the organization and their guests; 
5.  A private enclosed office workplace occupied exclusively by smokers, even though such an office workplace may be visited by nonsmokers. Nothing contained herein shall permit smoking where it is otherwise prohibited by other applicable laws; 
6.  Restaurant with a seating capacity of forty-nine (49) or fewer. 
B.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner, operator, manager, or other person who controls any establishment described in this section may prohibit smoking in all areas of the establishment. 
(Prior code § 3-15.5)  
8.32.060 - Posting requirements. 
A.  Every owner, operator, manager or person having control of a building or place where smoking is regulated by this chapter shall clearly and conspicuously post or cause to be posted in every such building or place "Smoking" or "No Smoking" signs, whichever are appropriate, with letters of not less than three inches in height or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it). 
B.  Every theater owner, manager or operator subject to this chapter shall clearly and conspicuously post or cause to be posted signs in the lobby stating smoking is prohibited within the theater or auditorium, and in the case of motion picture theaters, such information shall be shown on the screen for at least five seconds prior to the showing of each feature motion picture. 
C.  Every restaurant subject to this chapter shall have, at its entrance or in its reception area, signs designating smoking and nonsmoking areas which clearly direct patrons to the correct area of the restaurant. The owner, operator or manager of a restaurant shall establish a policy requiring that patrons be asked their seating preference. In any restaurant where smoking is entirely prohibited or entirely permitted, there shall be a sign to that effect at its entrance or reception area. 
(Prior code § 3-15.6)  
8.32.070 - Notice of complaint and of these premises. 
A.  Any person who desires to register a complaint under this chapter may do so with the director of community development. 
B.  Any owner, manager, operator or employee of any establishment regulated by this chapter may inform persons violating this chapter of the appropriate provisions thereof. 
(Prior code § 3-15.7)  
8.32.080 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to regulations under this chapter to fail to comply with any of its provisions. The owner, manager or operator of a restaurant shall not be deemed in violation of Section 8.32.060C if the host or hostess of the restaurant fails to ask the seating preference of patrons, but shall be deemed in violation thereof if the restaurant has no stated policy requiring patrons be asked their preference. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to smoke in any area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by: 
1.  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first violation; 
2.  A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of this chapter within one year; 
3.  A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of this chapter within one year. 
(Prior code § 3-15.8)  
8.32.090 - Nonretaliation. 
No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against any employee or applicant for employment because such employee or applicant exercises any rights afforded by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3-15.9)  
8.32.100 - Exemptions. 
A.  Any owner, operator or manager of a business or other establishment subject to this chapter may apply to the city for an exemption or modification to any provision of this chapter due to financial impracticability, based on the cost of complying with the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  Such exemption shall be granted only upon a finding from the evidence presented by the applicant for exemption at a public hearing before the city council it is financially impracticable for the applicant to comply with the requirements of this chapter based upon the actual costs to be incurred in order to make physical modifications to a facility. 
C.  The applicant for an exemption shall be required to pay a reasonable fee to cover the costs of the hearing. Said fee shall be established by the city council by resolution. Notice of the time and place of said hearing shall be mailed to the applicant and published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city not less than ten (10) days prior to said hearing. 
D.  The city council shall be empowered to grant such an exemption. 
(Prior code § 3-15.10)  
8.32.110 - Governmental agency cooperation. 
The city manager shall annually request other governmental and educational agencies having facilities within the city to establish local operating procedures in cooperation and compliance with this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3-15.11)  
8.32.120 - Other applicable laws. 
This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. 
(Prior code § 3-15.12)  
8.32.130 - Review of chapter. 
The city manager shall review this chapter and submit a report on its review to the city council no later than June 1, 1988. 
(Prior code § 3-15.13)  
Chapter 8.36 - FOOD INSPECTIONS 
 
8.36.010 - County health officer. 
"County health officer" means the health officer of the county of Los Angeles, or his duly authorized representative. 
(Ord. 740 § 1 (part), 1998)  
8.36.020 - Food establishment. 
"Food establishment" means any room, building, or place, or portion thereof, maintained, used, or operated for the purpose of storing, preparing, serving, manufacturing, packaging, transporting, salvaging, or otherwise handling food at the retail level. 
(Ord. 740 § 1 (part), 1998)  
8.36.030 - Food facility. 
"Food facility" means any food establishment, food warehouse, milk warehouse, vehicle, vending machine, swap meet prepackaged food stand, mobile food preparation unit (as such places are defined herein or in Title 8 of the Los Angeles County Code), or any place used in conjunction with the operation of the above, including, but not limited to, storage facilities for food utensils, equipment, and materials. 
(Ord. 740 § 1 (part), 1998)  
8.36.040 - Food official inspection report. 
"Food official inspection report" means the written notice prepared and issued by the county health officer after conducting an inspection of a food facility to determine compliance with all applicable federal, state and local statutes, orders, ordinances, quarantines, rules, regulations, or directives relating to the public health. 
(Ord. 740 § 1 (part), 1998)  
8.36.050 - Grading and letter grade card. 
A.  "Grading" means the letter grade issued by the county health officer at the conclusion of the routine inspection of a food establishment. The grade will be based upon the scoring method set forth in this section resulting from the food official inspection report and shall reflect the food establishment's degree of compliance with all applicable federal, state and local statutes, orders, ordinances, quarantines, rules, regulations, or directives relating to the public health. 
B.  "Letter grade card" means a card that may be posted by the county health officer at a food establishment upon completion of a routine health inspection that indicates the letter grade of the establishment as determined by the county health officer using the scoring method set forth in this section. For the purposes of this provision, a food establishment shall include a food establishment operating in conjunction with a food processing establishment. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the county health officer from creating and using a letter grade card in combination with an inspection score card. The county health officer, in his discretion, shall determine whether to post the letter grade card, the inspection score card, or both. 
C.  The county health officer, in his discretion, may immediately close any food establishment which, upon completion of the routine inspection, does not achieve a "C" grade as defined herein. Nothing in this provision shall prohibit the county health officer from immediately closing any food establishment if, in his discretion, immediate closure is necessary to protect the public health. 
D.  The letter garde shall be based upon the final numerical percentage score set forth in the food official inspection report, as follows: 
1.  A grade of "A" shall indicate a final score of ninety (90) percent or higher as determined by the county health officer; 
2.  A grade of "B" shall indicate a final score less than ninety (90) percent but not less than eighty (80) percent as determined by the county health officer; 
3.  A grade of "C" shall indicate a final score less than eighty (80) percent but not less than seventy (70) percent as determined by the county health officer. 
(Ord. 740 § 1 (part), 1998)  
8.36.060 - Inspection score card. 
A.  "Inspection score card" means a card that may be posted by the county health officer at a food establishment, upon completion of a routine inspection, that indicates the total numerical percentage score for the establishment as determined by the county health officer and as set forth in the food official inspection report. For the purposes of this provision, a food establishment shall include a food establishment operating in conjunction with a food processing establishment. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the county health officer from creating and using an inspection score card in combination with a letter grade card. The county health officer, in his discretion, shall determine whether to post the inspection score card, the letter grade card, or both. 
B.  The county health officer, in his discretion, may immediately close any food establishment which, upon completion of the routine inspection, achieves a total numerical percentage score less than seventy (70) percent as set forth in Section 8.36.050. Nothing in this provision shall prohibit the county health officer from immediately closing any food establishment if, in his discretion, immediate closure is necessary to protect the public health. 
(Ord. 740 § 1 (part), 1998)  
8.36.070 - Notice of closure. 
"Notice of closure" means a public notice that may be posted by the county health officer at a food establishment upon suspension or revocation of the establishment's public health permit and that results in the immediate closure of the establishment and the discontinuance of all operations of the food establishment, by order of the public health officer, because of violations of applicable federal, state and local statutes, orders, ordinances, quarantines, rules, regulations, or directives relating to the public health. 
(Ord. 740 § 1 (part), 1998)  
8.36.080 - Routine inspection. 
"Routine inspection" means a periodic, unannounced inspection of any food facility to determine compliance with all applicable federal, state and local statutes, orders, ordinances, quarantines, rules, regulations, or directives relating to the public health. A routine inspection shall not mean an inspection conducted by the county health officer to determine compliance with a previously issued food official inspection report or any interim inspection conducted to determine compliance with specific regulations or legal requirements. 
(Ord. 740 § 1 (part), 1998)  
8.36.090 - Posting requirements—Penalty for noncompliance—Documents available for public review. 
A.  Upon issuance by the county health officer, the health officer shall post at every food establishment the letter grade card, the inspection score card, or both, as determined by the county health officer, so as to be clearly visible to the general public and to patrons entering the establishment. "Clearly visible to the general public and to patrons" means: 
1.  Posted in the front window of the establishment within five feet of the front door. 
2.  Posted in a display case mounted on the outside front wall of the establishment within five feet of the front door; or 
3.  Posted in a location as directed and determined in the discretion of the county health officer to ensure proper notice to the general public and to patrons. 
B.  In the event that a food establishment is operated in the same building or space as a separately licensed or permitted business, or in the event that a food establishment shares a common patron entrance with such a separately licensed or permitted business, or in the event of both, the county health officer shall post the letter grade card, the inspection score card, or both, in the initial patron contact area, or in a location as determined in the discretion of the county health officer. 
C.  The letter grade card and the inspection score card shall not be defaced, marred, camouflaged, hidden or removed. It is unlawful to operate a food establishment unless the letter grade card, the inspection score card, or both, as determined by the county health officer, is or are in place as set forth hereunder. Removal of the letter grade card, the inspection score card, or both, is a violation of this chapter and may result in the suspension or revocation of the public health permit and shall be punishable as specified in Section 8.08.030 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
D.  Every food establishment shall post a legibly lettered sign which displays the following information so as to be clearly visible to the general public and to patrons entering the establishment: 
Any public health concerns regarding this establishment should be directed to the County of Los Angeles, Environmental Health office located at: (local office address and telephone number to be provided by the county health officer ). 
E.  The food official inspection report upon which the letter garde card, the inspection score card, or both, are based and all subsequent reports issued by the county health officer shall be maintained at the food establishment and shall be available to the general public and to patrons for review upon request. The food establishment shall keep the food official inspection report and all subsequent reports until such time as the county health officer completes the next routine inspection of the establishment and issues a new food official inspection report. 
(Ord. 740 § 1 (part), 1998)  
8.36.100 - Letter grade card and inspection score card—Period of validity. 
A letter grade card, an inspection score card, or both, shall remain valid until the county health officer completes the next routine inspection of the food establishment. 
(Ord. 740 § 1 (part), 1998)  
8.36.110 - Public health permit suspension or revocation—Notice of closure. 
A.  Upon issuance of a written notice of suspension or revocation of the public health permit by the county health officer, the health officer shall post a notice of closure at the food establishment so as to be clearly visible to the general public and to patrons. 
B.  Upon issuance of the written notice of suspension or revocation of the public health permit by the county health officer, the food establishment shall immediately close to the general public and to patrons and shall discontinue all operations until the public health permit has been reissued or reinstated by order of the county health officer or until the establishment no longer operates as a food establishment. 
C.  The notice of closure shall remain posted until removed by the county health officer. Removal of the notice of closure by any person other than the county health officer or the refusal of a food establishment to close upon issuance of the written notice of suspension of the public health permit is a violation of this chapter and may result in the suspension or revocation of the food establishment's public health permit and shall be punishable as specified in Section 8.08.030 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 740 § 1 (part), 1998)  
Chapter 8.40 - FOOD HANDLER'S TRAINING CERTIFICATION 
 
8.40.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Certified food handler" means an owner, operator, or any other person at least eighteen (18) years of age who supervises all or part of the food service operations within a food service operation and is responsible for training the operation's employees in the areas set forth in Section 8.40.040. At the discretion of the director, and upon a showing of good cause, the director may waive the requirement that a certified food handler be at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
"Department" means the county of Los Angeles, department of health services. 
"Director" means the director of the department of health services or his duly authorized designee. 
"Food handler's training certificate" means a certificate issued by the department, certifying that a food handler has satisfactorily demonstrated competency in food protection and practices by passing a written examination administered by the department or by completing a food handler's training course approved by the director. 
"Food service operation" means any food service business which prepared any potentially hazardous food on the premises for sale or gift to the public and includes but is not limited to all restaurants, markets, bakeries, mobile food preparation units, commissaries, and food processing establishments. 
"Potentially hazardous food" shall mean those foods set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 113845 as it currently exists or hereafter may be amended. 
(Ord. 740 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.40.020 - Application and effect. 
A.  Within one year of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, each food service operation as defined in Section 8.40.050 shall have at least one certified food handler on the premises at all times during operating hours. 
B.  Failure to have a certified food service handler on site at all times during the operating hours of the food service operation and as specified in the section within one year from the effective date of said ordinance shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of the operation's public health permit pursuant to the applicable provisions of Chapter 8.36 of this code and shall be punishable as set forth in Section 8.08.030. 
(Ord. 740 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.40.030 - Procedure for obtaining a food handler's training certificate. 
A.  Every person desiring certification as a certified food handler shall file with the department an application for certification, accompanied by an application fee. Upon application, each person desiring certification shall provide: 
1.  Proof of successful completion of a food handler's training course approved by the department; 
2.  A food handler's training certificate which indicates passage of an examination developed and administered by The Center for Occupational and Professional Assessment of the Educational Testing Service; or 
3.  Any other food handler's training certificate which, in the discretion of the director, is equivalent to either subsection (A)(1) or (2) of this section. 
B.  In the alternative to the procedure set forth in subsection A of this section, any person desiring certification as a certified food handler, upon payment of an examination fee, may take an examination administered by the department. The department shall certify only those persons who receive a score of seventy-five (75) percent or higher on its examinations. The payment of any examination fee shall be in addition to the application fee set forth in this section. 
(Ord. 740 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.40.040 - Food handler's training course. 
Any food handler's training course taken by a person desiring certification as a certified food handler shall be a minimum of four hours in duration. The course of instruction shall include, but not be limited to, the following subject matter: microorganisms, sources of foodborne illness microorganisms, foodborne illness, the means by which food is contaminated by microorganisms and toxic substance, the methods for protection of food to prevent foodborne illnesses, personal hygiene for food handlers, proper utensils and equipment washing and sanitizing, and proper receiving and storage of food. 
(Ord. 740 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.40.050 - Multiple food service operations. 
Persons who operate more than one food service operation shall be required to have a certified food handler at each operation at all times during operating hours. 
(Ord. 740 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.40.060 - Exemptions. 
Food service operations which deal exclusively in nonpotentially hazardous prepackaged food and beverages or food service operations required by the department to have only temporary operating permits shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 740 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.40.070 - Display of food handler's training certificate. 
The food handler's training certificate shall be posted in a conspicuous place within the food service operation, or in a location designated and approved by the director. 
(Ord. 740 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.40.080 - Change of certified food handler. 
A certified food handler who changes his or her place of employment after obtaining a food hand-ler's training certificate may display the certificate in any other food service operation in which he or she subsequently is employed. A food service operation which loses its certified food handler must obtain another certified food handler within thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. 740 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.40.090 - List of certified food handlers. 
The department shall maintain a current list of all certified food handlers within the county. 
(Ord. 740 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.40.100 - Expiration. 
The food handler's training certificate shall be valid for four years from the date of issuance. Upon the expiration of the food handler's training certificate, all persons must re-apply for a new certificate according to the procedure set forth in Section 8.40.030. 
(Ord. 740 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.40.110 - Duplicate food handler's training certificate. 
The director, upon a showing of good cause, may issue duplicate food handler's training certificates upon payment of a duplicate certificate fee. 
(Ord. 740 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.40.120 - Revocation of food handler's training certificate. 
A.  The director may immediately revoke any food handler's training certificate when any of the following is found to exist within a food service operation which is operated by or under the supervision of a certificate food handler: 
1.  Evidence indicating repeated or continuing violations of required procedures and practices in the preparation, service, storage, distribution or sale of food or beverage offered for public consumption; 
2.  Any condition detrimental to the public health, which shall include but not be limited to any condition that can cause food infection, food intoxication, disease transmission or any hazardous condition including but not limited to unsafe food temperature; or 
3.  Evidence including falsification of information required by the department for issuance of the food handler's training certificate. 
B.  The director shall issue a notice to the certified food handler setting forth the acts or omissions with which he or she is charged and informing him or her of the right to a hearing, if requested, to show cause why the certificate should be reinstated. 
(Ord. 740 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.40.130 - Right to appeal following revocation. 
A.  Any certified food handler whose certificate has been revoked may make a written request for hearing within fifteen (15) calendar days after receipt of the notice specified in Section 8.40.120 to show cause why the certificate should be reinstated. A failure to request a hearing within fifteen (15) calendar days after receipt of the notice shall be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing. When circumstances warrant, the director may order a hearing at any reasonable time within this fifteen (15) day period to expedite the certificate revocation process. 
B.  The hearing shall be held within fifteen (15) calendar days of the receipt of the request for a hearing. Upon written request of the certified food handler, the director may postpone any hearing date, if circumstances warrant such action. 
C.  An environmental health service manager for the department shall preside over any hearing requested under this section. 
(Ord. 740 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.40.140 - Notice of decision. 
The director shall issue a written notice of decision to the certified food handler within five working days of the hearing. The notice of decision shall specify the acts or omissions with which the certified food handler is charged and shall specify either that the certificate remains revoked or that it has been reinstated. 
(Ord. 740 § 2 (part), 1998)  
8.40.150 - Violation—Penalty. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, violation of this chapter is punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months, or both. Each day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted makes such violation a separate offense. 
(Ord. 740 § 2 (part), 1998)  
Chapter 8.44 - FIREWORKS 
 
8.44.010 - Intent. 
The provisions of this chapter are intended to regulate the use of all fireworks to provide for the safety of the community and the prevention of fires. 
(Ord. 864 § 1 (part), 2006)  
8.44.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "Approved site" means an area approved by the fire chief or fire marshal and prepared in such a manner as to prevent the ignition and spread of fire and the escape of fire to adjoining property. 
B.  "Fireworks" means and includes: 
1.  Any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or combination of substances or articles prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, whether manufactured, homemade or improvised; 
2.  Fireworks classified by the State Fire Marshal as "dangerous fireworks" and as "safe and sane fireworks" pursuant to Health and Safety Code Sections 12561 and 12562; 
3.  Any pyrotechnic device for which the State Fire Marshal requires a license to manufacture, sell transport or operate; and 
4.  Firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, cherry bombs, sparklers, chasers, snakes or other fireworks of like or similar construction and any fireworks containing any explosive or flammable compound or substance. 
This definition of fireworks does not include devices that are: (a) identified in Health and Safety Code Section 12540 which are not subject to the state fireworks law (Division 11, Part 2, of the Health and Safety Code, Section 12500, et seq.); (b) classified as exempt fireworks pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 12565; (c) capable of making an audible popping sound and/or propelling confetti or streamers into the air when the device is twisted or a string is pulled, or a mild audible popping sound when dropped on the ground, provided such devices are not subject to the state fireworks law; or (d) that are classified as model rocket engines pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 12565. 
(Ord. 864 § 1 (part), 2006)  
8.44.030 - Prohibition of fireworks. 
It is unlawful for any person to manufacture, give away, sell, offer for sale, solicit the sale of, possess, purchase, use, ignite, explode, fire, or otherwise discharge any fireworks within the city or to aid or abet any of the above with respect to "dangerous fireworks. 
(Ord. 864 § 1 (part), 2006)  
8.44.040 - Exceptions. 
Section 8.44.030 shall not apply to the following: 
A.  A public display of fireworks in accordance with Section 8.44.050. 
B.  The use of fireworks for television, film, theater, or movie production, provided a permit therefor is first secured from the city as provided in Section 8.44.050. 
C.  The use by railroad or other transportation agencies for signal purposes or illumination by flares or fuses. 
D.  The sale or use of blank cartridges for theatrical purposes, athletic events, or military ceremonials. 
(Ord. 864 § 1 (part), 2006)  
8.44.050 - Public fireworks display. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the city manager may conditionally grant a permit for the supervised public display of fireworks in the city at an approved site to any organization who desires to conduct a public display of fireworks for the general public and citizens of the city upon any approved site as may be approved by the city manager or for television, film, theater or movie productions. Such display of fireworks within the city shall be allowed only upon a permit being granted by the city manager, which permit shall be issued subject to such rules, regulations and conditions as the city manager may impose, including but not limited to, the competency of the persons operating the display of fireworks, the location of such display, the type of fireworks to be used and the time for such fireworks display. 
B.  All applications for any such permit for public display of fireworks shall be made in writing and filed with the city manager at least forty-five days before the proposed date of such display. No permit granted pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable, and any such permit shall only be valid for the time and place specified in such permit. Any permittee granted the right to conduct a public display of fireworks by the city manager shall furnish public liability and property damage insurance in amounts and coverages, and issued by companies, as are approved by the city manager. The city, its officers, employees and agents shall be named as coinsureds. 
C.  Any public display shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of the Health and Safety Code, Section 7802.4 of the California Fire Code and any other rules and regulations of the State Fire Marshal. 
(Ord. 864 § 1 (part), 2006)  
8.44.060 - Seizure by the Los Angeles County Fire Department and Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department authorized. 
The Los Angeles County Fire Department and Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department, acting together or separately, are authorized and directed to seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at the expense of the owner any fireworks offered or exposed for sale, stored or held or possessed in violation of the provisions of this chapter and Section 7802 of the California Fire Code. 
(Ord. 864 § 1 (part), 2006)  
8.44.070 - Penalties. 
In addition to any other penalty provided by law, including, but not limited to, those penalties set forth in Chapter 1.12 of this code, any person failing to comply with the requirements of this chapter shall be subject to an administrative citation and fine in an amount to be determined by city council resolution. 
(Ord. 864 § 1 (part), 2006)  
8.44.080 - Disposition of fines. 
All administrative fines collected by the city as penalties for violating this chapter shall be placed in the general fund to cover the cost of enforcing this chapter. 
All the funds distributed to the city as provided in the preceding paragraph of this section shall not supplant any funds that would, in the absence of this chapter, be made available to support the law enforcement and prosecutorial efforts of the city. 
(Ord. 864 § 1 (part), 2006)  
8.44.090 - Nonexclusive remedy. 
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation or penalty for storage, use, possession and sale of fireworks. It supplements, and is in addition to, the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction, including, but not limited to, the provisions of Division 11, Part 2, of the Health and Safety Code (Section 12500, et seq.) as well as the administrative regulations adopted pursuant to that law. 
(Ord. 864 § 1 (part), 2006)  
Chapter 8.48 - WASTE OF WATER 
 
8.48.010 - Waste of water prohibited. 
Waste of water or excessive and unauthorized use of water in the city is hereby prohibited and declared unlawful. 
(Ord. 905 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
8.48.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Customer" means any person who is an owner, occupant, or user of real property to which water is supplied by a public water system. Customer shall also mean any person who uses water supplied by a public water system, or to any person who is billed for the supply of water from a public water system, or to any person who is responsible for or otherwise has the right or permission to utilize the supply of water provided by a public water system. 
"Person" means any natural person, any group of persons, any firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, public agency or any other organization or entity. 
"Public water system" means any network of pipes, conduits, wells, machinery, reservoirs, holding tanks, and any other components, including any combination thereof, which supplies water to customers who are charged a fee of any kind or nature for such service, or which is designed to supply or is capable of supplying water to customers for a fee at two or more dwellings, buildings, structures, or lots. 
Public Water Utility. The term "public water utility" as herein used shall mean and embrace all corporations, companies, individuals, associations, their lessees, trustees or receivers, that now or may hereafter own, operate, or control any plant or equipment, or any part of a plant or equipment within the city for the production, delivery, or furnishing for or to other persons, firms, associations or corporations, partly or wholly, from an artesian well or wells, or imported water sources water for business, manufacturing, agricultural, domestic or household use. 
"Recycled water" means highly treated effluent from any sewage treatment plant operated by a governmental or private entity. 
"Water" means all water, including wastewater and recycled water, supplied to any customer who uses water. 
"Water supply shortage" means durations of time when water supplies are not available to meet normal water demand as during periods of drought or natural disaster. 
(Ord. 905 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
8.48.030 - Prohibited acts. 
Any one of the following acts shall constitute a waste of water, as the term is used in this chapter, and shall be prohibited at all times: 
A.  Permitting a hydrant, tap, cock, or valve connected with any water system belonging to any public utility, to leak into the ground or into any sink, bowl, toilet, or tub connected with a sewer or cesspool, or permitting water to drain from a person's premises into any street, alley, or road, after the person permitting the same has been notified to remedy such leak or to prevent such draining by any public officer, or an agent of any public utility, as hereinafter defined. 
B.  Permitting water from any water system belonging to any public utility to flow from any hose, tap, valve, hydrant, pipe, or cock directly into any gutter, storm water drain, sewer or cesspool for two minutes or longer without first putting such water to a beneficial use. 
C.  Permitting water to leak from any water main in a water system belonging to any public utility for an unreasonable length of time. 
D.  Allowing runoff into streets, gutters or other paved areas, from irrigating landscaped improvements, whether because of broken or misdirected sprinkler systems, to persist for more than two minutes total duration. 
E.  Irrigating lawns and/or landscaped improvements between ten (10) a.m. and ten (10) p.m. except from October 31st through the following March 1st. 
F.  Washing vehicles with a free running hose where the water is allowed to run into the street, gutter or storm water drain. Hoses that are fitted with operable on/off nozzles or washing vehicles solely using a bucket are permissible. 
G.  Washing, cleaning or hosing down buildings, driveways, patios, parking lots, sidewalks, alleys, etc., provided this subsection shall not prohibit the washing of windows. 
H.  Allowing water, at or as a result of its point of use, to pond deeper than one-quarter inch on any paved or unpaved surface. This section shall not apply to swimming pools, fountains or other similar decorative or recreational water features. 
(Ord. 905 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
8.48.040 - Public nuisance. 
Any act that constitutes a waste of water in violation of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance and shall be subject to abatement in the manner provided in Chapter 8.28. 
(Ord. 905 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
8.48.050 - Presumption. 
In any prosecution charging a waste of water or excessive and unauthorized use of water as set forth in this chapter, the waste of water or excessive and unauthorized use of water, together with proof that such waste originated at any residence or place of business, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the owner, or occupant for the time being of such residence or place of business, was responsible for such waste. 
(Ord. 905 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
8.48.060 - Variance. 
Upon application of a property owner or occupant, the city manager may grant a variance to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 905 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
8.48.070 - Severability. 
If any part or provision of this chapter is found to be invalid or unenforceable by a court of law, such invalidity shall not affect any other part or provision herein, and all remaining provisions of this chapter will be valid and enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. 905 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2008)  
Chapter 8.50 - LANDSCAPING INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE 
 
8.50.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Lancaster Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 907, § 1, 10-28-08)  
8.50.020 - Purpose and intent. 
In accordance with the Water Conservation in Landscaping Act (Government Code Sections 65591 et. seq.) the purpose and intent of this ordinance is to: 
A.  Promote the values and benefits of landscaping while recognizing the need to utilize water and other resources as efficiently as possible. 
B.  Use water efficiently without waste by setting a maximum applied water allowance as an upper limit for water use and reduce water use to the lowest practical amount. 
C.  Establish a structure for planning, designing, installing, maintaining and managing water efficient landscapes in new construction and significantly renovated projects; 
D.  Promote water management practices and water waste prevention for existing landscapes; 
E.  Implement water conservation policies contained in the city's general plan. 
(Ord. No. 907, § 1, 10-28-08)  
8.50.030 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this chapter, the words, phrases and terms included herein have the meaning ascribed to them in this article. 
"Application rate" means the volume of water applied to a given area, measured in inches per minute, inches per hour, or gallons per hour. 
"Applied water" means the quantity of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape. 
"Anti-drain valve" means a valve located under a sprinkler head to hold water in the system to prevent drainage from sprinkler heads when the system is off. 
"Certificate of completion" means the document required under Section 8.50.052 and 8.50.059. 
"Certified landscape irrigation auditor" means a person certified to perform landscape irrigation audits by a recognized professional trade organization or other educational organization. 
"Certified irrigation designer" means a person certified to design irrigation systems by a professional trade organization or other educational organization. 
"Check valve" means a "one way" valve that prevents water from flowing backward through it. Spring loaded check valves are sometimes installed inside or at the inlet of sprinkler heads. The check prevents low head drainage. 
"Common interest developments" means community apartment projects, condominium projects, planned developments and stock cooperatives per Civil Code Section 1353.8. 
"Controller" means an automatic timing device used to remotely control valves or heads to set an irrigation schedule. A weather-based controller is a controller that uses evapotranspiration or weather data. A self-adjusting irrigation controller is a controller that uses sensor data (i.e., soil moisture sensor). 
"Development proposal" shall mean an application for approval of a specific plan, subdivision, conditional use permit, site plan review, tentative tract map, parcel map or any other discretionary development permit or entitlement application which has been filed with and is pending consideration by the city. 
"Drip irrigation" means any non-spray low volume irrigation system utilizing emission devices with a flow rate equal to or less than two gallons per hour. 
"Ecological restoration project" means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem. 
"Effective precipitation" or "usable rainfall" means the portion of total precipitation that is used by the plants. 
"Emitter" means a drip irrigation emission device that delivers water slowly from the system to the soil measured as gallons per hour. 
"Established landscape" means the point at which plants in the landscape have developed significant roots growth into the soil. Typically, most plants are established after one or two years of growth. 
"Estimated applied water use" means the portion of the estimated total water use that is derived from applied water, as described in the current city of Lancaster landscape and irrigation design standards. 
"Estimated total water use" means the annual total amount of estimated water needed to keep the plants in the landscaped area healthy. It is based upon such factors as the local evapotranspiration rate, the size of the landscaped area, the types of plants and the efficiency of the irrigation system, as described in the current city of Lancaster landscape and irrigation standard. 
"ET adjustment factor" means a factor that, when applied to reference evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant factors and irrigation efficiency, two major influences upon the amount of water that needs to be applied to a target landscape. A combined plant mix with a site-wide average of 0.5 is the basis of the plant factor portion of this calculation. 
"Evapotranspiration rate" means the quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil and other surfaces and transpired by plants during a specific time. 
"Flow rate" means the rate at which water flows through pipes, valves, or emission devices, measured in gallons per minute, gallons per hour, or cubic feet per second. 
"Hardscape" means any durable surface material (pervious and non-pervious). Hardscape shall be considered in the determination of the maximum applied water allowance and storm water runoff flows. 
"Hydrozone" shall mean a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs that are served by a valve or set of valves with the same schedule. A hydrozone may be irrigated or non-irrigated. For example, a naturalized area planted with native vegetation that will not need supplemental irrigation once established is a non-irrigated hydrozone. 
"Infiltration rate" means the rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (i.e., inches per hour). 
"Irrigation efficiency" means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. 
"Landscape documentation package" means the documents required under Section 8.50.054. 
"Landscape area" means all of the irrigated planting and turf areas, water features and up to ten (10) percent of the square footage of pervious non-irrigated planting areas in a landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water allowance (MAWA) calculation. The ten (10) percent of non-irrigated planting area shall be added to the low water use hydrozone area, used in the landscape documentation package. The following is not included in the landscaped area: footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or non-pervious hardscape and other non-irrigated areas designated for non-development (i.e., open spaces). Excessive uses of impervious areas are discouraged as it will increase storm water runoff. Designated recreation areas and areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens are subject to the MAWA with an ET adjustment factor not to exceed 1.0. 
"Landscape architect" means a person who holds a license to practice landscape architecture in the state under the authority of Government Code Section 5615 (Landscape Architects Practice Act). 
"Landscape contractor" means a person licensed (i.e., C-27 license) by the state to construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of landscape systems and facilities per Business and Professionals Code, Section 7058 and 7059. 
"Landscape irrigation audit" shall mean a process to perform site inspections, evaluate irrigation systems and develop efficient irrigation systems. At a minimum, the audit shall be in accordance with the California Landscape Water Management Program as described in the landscape irrigation auditor handbook, the entire document that is hereby incorporated by reference. (See landscape irrigation auditor handbook, Department of Water Resources, Water Conservation Office, 2004) 
"Landscape project" means a project, for the purposes of this ordinance, meeting the requirements under Section 8.50.040. 
"Low volume irrigation" means any irrigation system with a flow rate equal to or less than 0.75 inches per hour, including drip irrigation, subsurface drip, micro-sprinklers and similar irrigation systems. 
"Low water use plant material" shall mean trees, shrubs and ground covers that survive with a limited amount of supplemental water, as recommended by the city of Lancaster plant list, or as identified in the most recent edition of the following publication: Sunset Western Garden Book, Sunset Books, Lane Publishing Co., Menlo Park, California. 
"Maximum applied water allowance" means, for design purposes, the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area as specified in the current city of Lancaster landscape and irrigation design standards. It is based upon the area's reference evapotranspiration, the ET adjustment factor and the size of the landscaped area. The estimated applied water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. 
"Mined-land reclamation projects" means any surface mining operation with a reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975. 
"Mulch" means any organic material such as leaves, bark, straw or inorganic mineral materials, such as rocks, gravel and decomposed granite, left loose and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial purposes of reducing evaporation and suppressing weeds. 
"Operating pressure" means the pressure at which an irrigation system is designed by the manufacturer to operate. 
"Overspray" means the water that is delivered beyond the target area, wetting pavements, walks, structures, or other non-targeted areas. 
"Plant factor" means a factor that, in combination with irrigation efficiency, when multiplied by reference evapotranspiration, estimates the amount of water used by plants. For purposes of this ordinance, the plant factor of low water use plants ranges from 0.0 to 0.3, the plant factor of moderate water use plants ranges from 0.4 to 0.6, and the plant factor of high water use plants ranges from 0.7 to 1.0. 
"Precipitation rate" means the rate of rainfall measured in inches per hour. 
"Project applicant" means the individual or entity submitting a landscape documentation package required under Section 8.50.054, to request a permit, plan check, or design review from the city. A project applicant may be the property owner or his/her designee. 
"Rain sensor" or "rain sensing shutoff device" means a component that automatically suspends the irrigation event when it rains. 
"Recreational area" means portions of parks, playgrounds, sports fields, golf course, or schoolyards in public and private projects where turf provides a playing surface or serves other high use recreational purposes. 
"Recycled water or reclaimed water" means treated or recycled waste water of a quality suitable for nonpotable uses such as landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human consumption. 
"Reference evapotranspiration" or "ETo" means a standard measurement of environmental parameters that affect the water use of plants. ETo is given in inches per day, month, or year, and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four-to-seven-inch tall, cool season turf that is well-watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the maximum applied water allowances so that regional differences in climate can be accommodated. 
"Rehabilitated landscapes" means any modification to existing landscaping that requires a permit, plan check, or design review and meets the requirements of Section 8.50.040. 
"Runoff" means water that is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the landscape area. For example, runoff may result from water that is applied at too great a rate (application rate exceeds infiltration rate) or when there is a slope. Grading and landscape shall be designed to minimize runoff. 
"Soil moisture sensor or sensing device" means a device that measures the amount of water in the soil. 
"Soil texture" means the classification of soil based on its percentage of sand, silt and clay. 
"Sprinkler head" means a device that delivers water through a nozzle. 
"Static water pressure" means the pipeline or municipal water supply pressure when water is not flowing or at rest. 
"Station" means an area served by one valve or by a set of valves that operate simultaneously. 
"Turf" means a groundcover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, perennial ryegrass, red fescue and tall fescue are common cool-season grasses. Bermuda grass, kikyu grass, seashore paspalum, St. Augustine grass, zoysia grass and Buffalo grass are common warm-season grasses. 
"Valve" means a device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system. It may also mean all of the sprinklers or emitters in a line controlled by the valve. 
"Water use efficiency statement" means a narrative summary of the water use efficiency practices to be applied in a landscape project. 
"Water conserving plant species" means a plant species identified as using less water than plants in the same water use category. 
"Water efficient landscape worksheet" means the document described in the current city of Lancaster landscape and irrigation design standards. 
(Ord. No. 907, § 1, 10-28-08)  
8.50.040 - Applicability. 
A.  Except as provided in subparagraph B herein below, this chapter shall apply to the following: 
(1)  All new construction and rehabilitated landscaping for public agency and private development projects with a landscape area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet; therefore requiring a permit, plan check, and/or design review; 
(2)  New construction and rehabilitated landscapes which are developer-installed in single-family and multi-family residential projects with a landscape area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet requiring a permit, plan check, and/or design review; 
(3)  New construction and rehabilitated landscapes which are homeowner-provided and/or homeowner-hired landscaping in single-family and multi-family residential projects with a landscape area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, therefore requiring a permit, plan check, and/or design review; 
(4)  Existing landscapes with a landscape area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet are limited to Sections 8.50.070 and 8.50.081; 
(5)  Cemeteries. Recognizing the special landscape management needs of cemeteries, new cemeteries are limited to completing the water efficient landscape worksheet and the landscape and irrigation maintenance schedules found in the city of Lancaster landscape and irrigation design standards and to meeting the requirements of Sections 8.50.061 and 8.50.062. Existing cemeteries are limited to the provisions of Section 8.50.071. Where recycled water is reasonably available, as determined by the director of public works, all cemeteries shall use recycled water for landscape irrigation purposes; 
(6)  All existing improved properties that are purchased by the city under the home foreclosure program for resale as low-moderate income homes. 
B.  This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Registered historical sites; 
(2)  Ecological restoration projects that do not require permanent irrigation systems; 
(3)  Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; 
(4)  Any project with a landscaped area less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet; 
(5)  Any project whose landscaping and water features is supplied solely from recycled water systems; 
(6)  Homeowner-provided and homeowner-hired landscaping at single-family and multi-family residential projects less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. 
C.  Required Approval for Projects. No development proposal shall be approved unless the person or entity authorized to grant approval therefore finds that the project satisfies the criteria set forth in the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  Processing Procedures and Submittal Requirements. As a condition of approval for any development proposal, the applicant shall submit landscape plans meeting the requirements listed below to the planning department for review. 
E.  Residential Landscaping. As a condition of approval for any residential development proposal, the applicant shall submit landscape plans for all areas other than footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or non-pervious hardscape and other approved non-irrigated areas designated for non-development (i.e., open spaces); including front, rear and side yards. 
(Ord. No. 928, § 1, 7-28-09; Ord. No. 907, § 1, 10-28-08)  
8.50.050 - Provisions for new construction or rehabilitated landscapes. 
Landscape projects subject to Section 8.50.040 are also subject to all of the provisions set forth in the provisions of this chapter unless explicitly exempted, and shall meet the city of Lancaster landscape and irrigation design standards which shall be adopted by separate resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 907, § 1, 10-28-08)  
8.50.051 - Compliance with landscape documentation package. 
Prior to construction, the project applicant shall submit a landscape documentation package to the city public works department that meets all the criteria and specifications of this chapter. The specific format of the documentation package shall comply with the city of Lancaster landscape and irrigation design standards. 
(Ord. No. 907, § 1, 10-28-08)  
8.50.052 - Compliance with the certificate of completion. 
A.  The project applicant shall: 
(1)  Prior to backfilling, have a licensed landscape architect, certified irrigation auditor, or licensed landscape contractor conduct a preliminary field observation of the irrigation system; 
(2)  Upon project installation, have a licensed landscape architect or licensed landscape contractor conduct a final field observation for the approval of the certificate; 
(3)  Upon project installation, have a certified irrigation auditor conduct a landscape irrigation audit as required under Section 8.50.062; 
(4)  Submit the signed certificate of completion to the city for approval; 
(5)  Receive the certificate of occupancy or equivalent from the city; 
(6)  Submit copies of the approved certificate of completion to the local retail water purveyor and the property owner or his/her designee. 
B.  The city will: 
(1)  Receive the signed certificate of completion from the project applicant; 
(2)  Conduct a field inspection of the project; 
(3)  Approve the certificate of completion; 
(4)  Issue a certificate of occupancy, or equivalent, to the project applicant. 
(Ord. No. 907, § 1, 10-28-08)  
8.50.053 - Waivers and variances. 
The director of public works may administratively waive or modify one or more requirements of the ordinance when unusual difficulties make their strict application impossible or impracticable, and upon determination that the waiver or variance is consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 907, § 1, 10-28-08)  
8.50.054 - Landscape documentation package. 
The landscape documentation package shall include those documents contained within the current city of Lancaster landscape and irrigation design standards. 
(Ord. No. 907, § 1, 10-28-08)  
8.50.055 - Soil management plan. 
A soil management plan that addresses the soil attributes of the project site shall include a laboratory soil analysis and an on-site assessment with a statement of recommendations by a qualified soil specialist. A soil management plan meeting the following criteria shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package: 
A.  A laboratory soil analysis of soil samples from the project site, prior to installation, that evaluates physical and chemical properties shall be required. At a minimum, the soil analysis report shall include: 
(1)  Soil texture (percent clay, silt, sand), indicating the percentage of organic matter; 
(2)  Approximate soil infiltration rate (either measured or derived from the soil texture infiltration rate tables). A range of infiltration rates shall be noted where appropriate; 
(3)  pH; 
(4)  Total soluble salts; 
(5)  Other soil physical or chemical properties relevant to improving water use efficiency and maintaining plant health (e.g., conductivity, nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, calcium, magnesium, sodium, sulfur, etc.); 
B.  A laboratory soil analysis may be excluded if a qualified soil specialist or scientist provides a certified statement addressing reasons for not completing such a soil analysis; 
C.  Prior to installation, an on-site soil assessment by a qualified soil specialist that identifies soil attributes or conditions that may minimize water use efficiency or limit plant growth shall be required. The on-site soil assessment shall: 
(1)  Identify planting or turf areas that may need amendment; 
(2)  Provide a statement of recommendations to correct or improve soil conditions (i.e., applying organic compost as a soil amendment in planting and turf areas); 
(3)  Conduct a further analysis of soil conditions (i.e., soil profile, hardpan, bulk density, soil toxicity, salinity, etc.), where applicable; 
D.  A project applicant shall implement the recommendations from the on-site soil assessment and apply any relevant information from the on-site soil assessment to the design plans. 
(Ord. No. 907, § 1, 10-28-08)  
8.50.056 - Landscape design plan. 
For the efficient use of water, a landscape shall be carefully designed and planned for the intended function of the project. A landscape design plan meeting the following design criteria and specifications and the city of Lancaster landscape and irrigation design standards shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package. 
A.  Criteria. 
(1)  Plant Material. 
a.  Plant material shall be selected from the city of Lancaster approved plant list or other approved source for the landscape, providing the estimated applied water use recommended for the project site does not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. 
b.  A landscape design plan for projects in fire-prone areas shall address fire safety and prevention. A defensible space or zone around a building or structure is required per California Public Resources Code 4291 (a) and (b). Fire-prone plant materials and mulches are to be avoided. 
c.  Invasive species of plants shall be prohibited near parks, buffers, greenbelts, water bodies and open spaces and are generally discouraged for landscape use. 
d.  The architectural guidelines of a common interest development, which includes community apartment projects, condominium projects, planned developments and stock cooperatives, shall not prohibit or include conditions that have the effect of prohibiting the use of low-water use plants as a group. 
(2)  Turf. 
a.  Turf is prohibited in commercial and industrial development proposals except where approved as a recreational area. 
b.  Turf is not to exceed 30% of the landscape areas in residential development proposals. 
(3)  Water Features. 
a.  Re-circulating water shall be used for decorative water features. 
b.  Where available, recycled water shall be used as the source for decorative water features. 
c.  Surface area of a water feature shall be included in the maximum applied water allowance (MAWA) calculation. The evaporation rate for all water features shall be equivalent to the evapotranspiration rate of a high water use plant. 
d.  Pool and spa covers are required. 
(Ord. No. 907, § 1, 10-28-08)  
8.50.057 - Irrigation design plan. 
For the efficient use of water, the irrigation system shall be carefully designed and planned for the intended function of the project. The irrigation system and its related components shall be planned and designed to allow for proper installation, management and maintenance. The irrigation system design plan meeting the following design criteria and specifications and the city of lancaster landscape and irrigation design standards shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package. 
A.  Criteria. 
(1)  System. 
a.  Dedicated (separate) landscape water meters shall be installed for all projects where the total landscape area exceeds five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
b.  Weather-based irrigation controllers, soil moisture based controllers, or other self-adjusting irrigation controllers, shall be required for all irrigation systems. The controller must be able to accommodate all aspects of the landscape and irrigation design plans. 
c.  All irrigation systems shall be designed to avoid excessive pressure. Water pressure regulators are required on all landscape projects. Static water pressure, dynamic or operating pressure and flow reading of the water supply shall be measured at the time of day the system will operate. These pressure and flow measurements shall be conducted at the design phase, if available, or prior to installation, if not available at the design phase. 
d.  If the static pressure is above or below the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system, pressure regulators, or booster pumps, other devices shall be installed to meet the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system. 
e.  Sensors (e.g., rain, freeze, wind, etc.), either integral or auxiliary, that suspend irrigation operation during unfavorable weather conditions shall be required on all irrigation systems, as appropriate for local climatic conditions. 
f.  High-flow check valves, or other technology to interrupt operation in high flow conditions created by irrigation system damage or malfunction, shall be required. 
g.  The irrigation system shall be designed to prevent runoff, low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where irrigation water flows onto non-targeted areas, such as adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, hardscapes, roadways, or structures. 
h.  Relevant information from the soil management plan, such as soil type and infiltration rate, shall be utilized when designing irrigation systems. 
i.  The design of the irrigation system shall conform to the hydrozones of the landscape design plan. 
(Ord. No. 907, § 1, 10-28-08)  
8.50.058 - Grading design plan. 
For the efficient use of water, grading of a project site shall be designed to minimize soil erosion, runoff and water waste. A grading design plan meeting the following design criteria and specifications and the city of Lancaster landscape and irrigation design standards shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package. 
A.  Criteria 
(1)  All projects where the total landscape area exceeds five thousand (5,000) square feet shall be designed to capture on-property run-off for a 10-year rain event through the use of earth berms, drainage swales, subsurface storage, or other approved methodology. Exceptions maybe granted for design features such as driveways, sidewalks and other features from which it is impractical to capture storm water flow. 
(2)  Grading of a project site shall avoid disturbing natural drainage patterns and avoid soil compaction in landscape areas. 
(Ord. No. 907, § 1, 10-28-08)  
8.50.059 - Certificate of completion. 
A.  The project applicant shall comply with the certificate of completion as specified under Section 8.50.052. See the city of Lancaster landscape and irrigation design standards for a sample of a certificate of completion. 
B.  The certificate shall specifically indicate that: 
(1)  Plants were installed as specified; 
(2)  The irrigation system was installed as designed; 
(3)  An irrigation audit has been performed; 
(4)  Other criteria of this chapter have been met along with a list of any observed deficiencies. 
C.  The following shall be submitted with the certificate of completion: 
(1)  Irrigation schedule, see Section 8.50.060; 
(2)  Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule, see Section 8.50.061(C); 
(3)  Landscape irrigation audit schedule, see 8.50.062; 
(4)  Irrigation audit report.  
8.50.060 - Irrigation scheduling. 
For the efficient use of water, all irrigation schedules shall be developed, managed and evaluated to utilize the minimum amount of water required to maintain plant health. Irrigation schedules meeting the city of Lancaster landscape and irrigation design standards and the following requirements shall be submitted with the certificate of completion: 
A.  Irrigation scheduling shall incorporate the use of evapotranspiration data such as those from the California Irrigation Management Information System (CIMIS) weather stations or other validated weather data or soil moisture monitoring systems to apply the appropriate levels of water for different climates. See CIMIS data for Lancaster area in the city of Lancaster landscape and irrigation design standards; and 
B.  Where automated irrigation systems are installed, irrigation shall be scheduled between ten (10) p.m. and ten (10) a.m. between May 1 and October 31. If allowable hours of irrigation differ from the local retail purveyor, the stricter of the two shall apply. Hand watering of landscape areas is permissible where an automated system is not installed. 
(Ord. No. 907, § 1, 10-28-08)  
8.50.061 - Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule. 
A.  Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water use efficiency. A regular maintenance schedule shall be submitted with the certificate of completion. Maintenance schedules developed for new landscapes shall clearly indicate irrigation controller timing adjustment and inspection after the landscape establishment period. 
B.  A regular maintenance schedule shall include, but not be limited to, routine inspection, adjustment and repair of the irrigation system and its components; conducting water audits; prescribing the amount of water applied per landscaped acre; aerating and dethatching turf areas; replenishing mulch; fertilizing; and pruning and weeding in all landscape areas. 
C.  Repair of all irrigation equipment shall be done with the originally specified components or their equivalents. 
D.  A project applicant is encouraged to implement sustainable or environmentally friendly practices for overall landscape maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 907, § 1, 10-28-08)  
8.50.062 - Irrigation audits and audit schedules. 
A.  At a minimum, all landscape irrigation audits shall be in accordance with the "irrigation association certified landscape irrigation auditor training manual (2004)," the entire document, which is hereby incorporated by reference. 
B.  All landscape irrigation audits and audit reports shall be conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. 
C.  For new construction and rehabilitated landscape projects installed on or after January 1, 2010, the project applicant shall fulfill the following requirements for landscape irrigation audits: 
(1)  Submit a landscape irrigation audit report with the certificate of completion to the city; 
(2)  For landscapes equal to or greater than one acre, submit a schedule of landscape irrigation audits with the certificate of completion to the city; 
(3)  Implement the recommendations from the landscape irrigation audit report; and 
(4)  For landscapes equal to or greater than one acre, submit a landscape irrigation audit report every five years to the city. 
D.  For new construction and rehabilitated landscape projects installed after January 1, 2010, except for homeowner-installed, homeowner-provided landscape less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, the city or the water purveyor will fulfill the following requirements for landscape irrigation audits: 
(1)  Annually compare customers' maximum applied water allowances, which are found in the water efficient landscape worksheet submitted as part of the landscape documentation package, to customer's water use and identify customers whose landscapes exceed the maximum applied water allowance for at least one year, to the extent that customer water use information is available to the city: and 
(2)  Annually conduct landscape irrigation audits on a minimum of twenty (20) percent of the total customer landscapes identified in the paragraph above (customers whose landscapes exceed the maximum applied water allowance). 
a.  The city will obtain permission from the project applicant to access the property for the purposes of conducting a landscape irrigation audit. 
b.  The city's cost of conducting the landscape irrigation audit shall be paid by the project applicant. 
c.  The city of Lancaster shall make a good faith effort to obtain necessary water use information from the local retail water purveyor. 
(Ord. No. 928, § 1, 7-29-09; Ord. No. 907, § 1, 10-28-08)  
8.50.063 - Irrigation efficiency. 
For the purpose of determining the maximum applied water allowance, an irrigation efficiency is assumed. Irrigation systems shall be designed, maintained and managed to meet or exceed the design irrigation efficiency. 
(Ord. No. 907, § 1, 10-28-08)  
8.50.064 - Recycled water. 
A.  The installation of recycled water irrigation systems (i.e., dual distribution systems) shall be required to allow for the current and future use of recycled water, unless a written exemption has been granted as described in this section. 
B.  Irrigation systems shall make use of recycled water unless a written exemption has been granted by the city, stating that recycled water meeting all public health codes and standards is not available and will not be available in the foreseeable future. 
C.  All recycled water irrigation systems shall be designed and operated in accordance with all city and state codes. 
D.  If the irrigation water (recycled water or blended water) has electrical conductivity equal to or greater than three deci-Seimens per meter (dS/m) or three milli-mhos per centimeter (mmh/cm) or two thousand mg per liter total dissolved solids (TDS), a leaching fraction of up to ten (10) percent may be included in the MAWA calculation. The leaching fraction shall not exceed ten (10) percent of MAWA. 
E.  For more information on recycled water, see the University of California Agriculture and Natural Resources "landscape plant salt tolerance selection guide for recycled water irrigation (2005)," the entire document, which is hereby incorporated by reference. 
F.  Recycled water used in landscaping and water features shall be exempted from water budget calculation requirements. 
(Ord. No. 907, § 1, 10-28-08)  
8.50.065 - Public education. 
A.  Publications. The city of Lancaster will provide information to owners of new, single-family residential homes regarding the design, installation, management and maintenance of water efficient landscapes. 
B.  Model Homes. 
(1)  All model homes shall be landscaped to demonstrate, via signs and information, the principles of water efficient landscapes described in this ordinance. 
(2)  Signs shall be used to identify the model as an example of a water efficient landscape and featuring elements such as hydrozones, water efficient irrigation equipment and other elements, which contribute to the overall water efficient theme. 
(3)  Information shall be provided to prospective homeowners about designing, installing and maintaining water efficient landscapes. The information provided should also include potential cost savings associated with water conservation techniques. 
(Ord. No. 907, § 1, 10-28-08)  
8.50.070 - Provisions for existing landscapes—Landscape irrigation audits. 
For existing landscapes installed before January 1, 2010, the following shall apply: 
A.  At a minimum, all landscape irrigation audits shall be in accordance with the "irrigation association certified landscape irrigation auditor training manual (2004)". 
B.  All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. 
C.  For existing landscapes equal to or greater than one acre (forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet), the property owner or his/her designee of the landscape project shall fulfill the following requirements for landscape irrigation audits: 
(1)  Submit a landscape irrigation audit report every five years to the city; and 
(2)  Implement the water management and maintenance recommendations from the landscape irrigation audit report. 
D.  For existing landscapes equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, the city will fulfill the following irrigation audit requirements: 
(1)  Annually survey and compare customer's landscape water use to local reference evapotranspiration and identify customers whose landscapes exceed eighty (80) percent of local reference evapotranspiration for at least one year, to the extent that customer water use information is available to the city; and 
(2)  Annually conduct landscape irrigation audits on a minimum of twenty (20) percent of the total customer landscapes identified in the paragraph above. 
a.  The city will obtain permission from the property owner or his/her designee to access the property for the purposes of conducting a landscape irrigation audit. 
b.  The property owner or his/her designee shall pay the city cost of conducting the landscape irrigation audit. 
c.  The city shall make a good faith effort to obtain necessary water use information from the local retail water purveyor. 
(Ord. No. 928, § 1, 7-28-09)  
8.50.080 - Effective precipitation. 
The city does not have enough reliable annual precipitation to include in water budget formulae; consequently this portion of the formula has been eliminated. 
(Ord. No. 907, § 1, 10-28-08)  
8.50.081 - Water waste prevention. 
Water waste resulting from inefficient landscape irrigation, such as runoff, low head drainage, overspray, etc., is prohibited. Similar conditions where water flows onto non-targeted areas, such as adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, hardscapes, roadways, or structures are also prohibited. Penalties for violation of these prohibitions shall be subject to city policy and procedure. 
(Ord. No. 907, § 1, 10-28-08)  
8.50.082 - Penalties for project applicants. 
The city may administer penalties to the project applicant for non-compliance with the ordinance, including, but not limited to: 
A.  Deny certificate of occupancy or equivalent until the certificate of completion has been submitted, reviewed and approved by the city; 
B.  Issue warning letters or citations; 
C.  Impose and collect monetary penalties or fines; 
D.  Administer an appeals process or equivalent; 
E.  Terminate water service. 
(Ord. No. 907, § 1, 10-28-08)  
Chapter 8.52 - CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY 
 
8.52.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as and may by cited as the "Chronic Nuisance Property Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 908, § 1 (Exh. A), 10-28-08)  
8.52.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to impose on and collect from the owner and/or occupant of real property the cost for law enforcement services that are over and above the cost of providing normal law enforcement services city-wide, if such excess costs are spent to abate a nuisance that has occurred, or is maintained and permitted, on the property. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the city from exercising the authority and procedures authorized under any other section of local, state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 908, § 1 (Exh. A), 10-28-08)  
8.52.030 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Call for law enforcement service" means any reporting of criminal activity that is reasonably likely to, and that actually does, result in a response by the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department. 
"Chronic nuisance property" means property that has generated five or more nuisance service calls during any twelve (12) month period. 
"City" means the city of Lancaster. 
"City manager" means the city manager of the city or his or her duly authorized representative. 
"Nuisance activity" means any of the following activities, behaviors, or conduct whenever engaged in by property owners, operators, tenants, occupants, or persons associated with a property: 
(1)  Disturbing the peace in violation of Section 415 of the California Penal Code. 
(2)  Making, causing or suffering any unnecessary noises or sounds in violation of Chapter 8.24 of this code. 
(3)  Any form of assault as defined in Section 240 of the California Penal Code and/or battery as defined in Section 242 of the California Penal Code; provided, however, that a violation of Section 273.5 of the California Penal Code shall not be considered a nuisance activity for purposes of this section. 
(4)  Littering in violation of Chapter 8.20 of this code. 
(5)  Manufacturing, giving away, selling, offering for sale, soliciting the sale of, possessing, purchasing, using, igniting, exploding, firing or otherwise discharging any fireworks within the city in violation of Chapter 8.44 of this code. 
(6)  Discharging a weapon within the city in violation of Section 9.04.060 of this code. 
(7)  Conducting or maintaining a special event in violation of Chapter 9.40 of this code. 
(8)  Loitering in violation of Chapters 9.12, 9.16 or 9.18 of this code. 
(9)  The committing of any serious felony a defined in Penal Code Section 1192.7(c). 
(10)  The committing of any violent felony as defined in Penal Code Section 667.5(c). 
(11)  Anything which is injurious to health, or is indecent, or offensive to the senses, or is an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by an entire community or neighborhood, or by any considerable number of persons, as provided in Penal Code Sections 370 and 371. 
"Nuisance service call" means a call for law enforcement service that is a verifiable event and that is for nuisance activity. 
"Person associated with" means any person who, whenever engaged in a nuisance activity, enters, patronizes, visits or attempts to enter, patronize or visit, a property including any officer, director, customer, agent, employee or independent contractor of a property owner, tenant, or occupant. 
"Property" means any parcel of land or structure, regardless of zoning, residential or business classification. 
"Verifiable event" means any of the following: (i) an event that is initially observed by a peace officer as defined in the California Penal Code; (ii) a call for law enforcement service to the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department by a known person who is identifiable to support the event; or (iii) a call for service to the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department by an unknown person if the event is substantiated by a peace officer as defined by the California Penal Code or a witness. 
(Ord. No. 908, § 1 (Exh. A), 10-28-08)  
8.52.040 - Chronic nuisance prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any property owner, tenant, or person associated with a property to allow the establishment of, keep, maintain, or fail to abate a chronic nuisance property. 
(Ord. No. 908, § 1 (Exh. A), 10-28-08)  
8.52.050 - Nuisance incident notice. 
A. When the city manager determines that the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department has been dispatched to the same property on four or more nuisance service calls within any twelve (12) month period, the city manager may, but shall not be required to, issue a written nuisance incident notice to the owner of the property and tenant, if applicable. The nuisance incident notice may be served upon the owner of said property by regular mail, to the mailing address indicated on the last equalized assessment roll of the Los Angeles County Assessor's Office. The nuisance incident notice may be served upon a tenant by regular mail, to the tenant's last known address. The service of a nuisance incident notice, as provided in this section, shall be prima facie evidence that the owner or tenant served is the person in control of the property and has knowledge of and has permitted subsequent conduct or behavior at or upon the property. 
B. The nuisance incident notice authorized by this section shall: (i) identify the type and specific location of nuisance service call(s), including tenant or lessee names where applicable; (ii) summarize the evidence of the nuisance occurring on the property; (iii) provide the dates on which the nuisance calls for service were made and the dates of any prior responses by the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department to nuisance incidents on the property; and (iv) warn the owner of the property and any tenant that future nuisance service calls may subject them jointly and severally to liability for the cost associated with any response to such nuisance service call, based upon the actual cost of the response. 
(Ord. No. 908, § 1 (Exh. A), 10-28-08)  
8.52.060 - Notice of abatement. 
A.  When the city manager, or his designee, determines that Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department has been dispatched to five or more nuisance service calls, as defined in Section 8.52.030 of this code, at the same property within any twelve (12) month period, a written notice of abatement will be issued to the owner of the property and to all tenants. The notice of abatement may be served upon the owner of said premises by regular mail, to the mailing address indicated on the last equalized assessment roll of the Los Angeles County Assessor's Office. The notice of abatement may be served upon a tenant by regular mail, to the tenant's last known address. The service of a notice of abatement, as provided in this Section 8.52.060, shall be prima facie evidence that the owner or tenant served has knowledge of and has permitted subsequent conduct or behavior at or upon the property. 
B.  The notice of abatement required by this Section 8.52.060 may be in a form substantially similar to that set forth in Section 8.28.110, but at a minimum shall: (i) state that the property constitutes a chronic nuisance property in violation of this chapter; (ii) identify the type and specific location of nuisance service calls, including tenant or lessee names, where applicable; (iii) summarize the evidence of the nuisance occurring on the property; (iv) provide the dates on which the nuisance service calls were made and the dates of any prior responses by the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department to nuisance incidents on or at the property; and (v) warn the owner of the property and any tenant that future nuisance service calls will subject them jointly and severally to liability for the cost associated with any response to such nuisance service call, based upon the actual cost of the response. 
C.  A subsequent and separate notice of abatement shall be issued pursuant to this section for each and every nuisance service call received after the first notice of abatement is issued. 
(Ord. No. 908, § 1 (Exh. A), 10-28-08)  
8.52.070 - Cost recovery. 
A.  When an abatement notice has been properly served as set forth in Section 8.52.060, the owner of the property and any tenant shall be jointly and severally responsible for each successive nuisance incident occurring on the property and shall be jointly, severally and individually responsible for payment of any and all costs associated with each successive nuisance service call within any twelve (12) month period, based upon the actual cost of the response. The cost of a response shall include, without limitation, the gross salaries, including all benefits and overhead paid to the responding employees of the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department, city administrative costs, the pro rata cost of all equipment and the cost of repairs to any equipment or property owned by the city of Lancaster that is damaged in responding to the nuisance service call. 
B.  The costs of the response shall be included in a statement of abatement costs, which shall be prepared and served subject to the provisions of Section 8.28.190 of this code. If a statement of abatement costs is not timely paid, the city may cause a special assessment to be made upon the property pursuant to Section 8.28.200 of this code or may cause a nuisance abatement lien to be recorded upon the property pursuant to Section 8.28.210 of this code.  
8.52.080 - Revocation of rental housing business license. 
In addition to the remedies specified in Section 8.52.070, in the event the owner fails to pay the amount set forth in the statement of abatement costs or in the event a subsequent nuisance abatement notice is served pursuant to Section 8.52.060(C), owners rental housing business license shall be revoked pursuant to Section 5.40.170 of this code.  
8.52.090 - Property owner's affirmative defense. 
When a chronic nuisance property is occupied by, in the possession of and/or under the exclusive control of a tenant, it shall constitute an affirmative defense to the imposition of liability pursuant to Section 8.52.070 and revocation of the rental housing business license pursuant to Section 8.52.080 that the owner of the chronic nuisance property has completed unlawful detainer proceedings against the tenant or tenants responsible for the nuisance service call. The property owner shall not relet any portion of the property to a tenant evicted pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 908, § 1 (Exh. A), 10-28-08)  
8.52.100 - Appeal. 
Any property owner or tenant who contests a notice of abatement issued pursuant to Section 8.52.060 shall, subject to filing a timely appeal, obtain review thereof before a hearing officer in the same manner as set forth in Sections 8.28.140 and 8.28.150. 
(Ord. No. 908, § 1 (Exh. A), 10-28-08)  
8.52.110 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council declares that it would have adopted this chapter, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, phrases, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 908, § 1 (Exh. A), 10-28-08)  
Chapter 8.56 - SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES 
Sections 
 
8.56.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and restrict the use and operation of skateboards, roller skates and other similar devices in order to ensure that such devices are not operated within unsafe areas and to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 1, 8-28-2012)  
8.56.020 - Definitions. 
Except as otherwise expressly set forth herein, the following words and terms as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
"Business district" has the same meaning as set forth in Section 235 of the California Vehicle Code. 
"City" means the City of Lancaster. 
"Private property" means any real property held by private interests that is used primarily for business, commercial, retail, office space, business park, religious, multifamily or recreational purposes. The term "private property" shall include the sidewalks, parking lots, alleys, parking facilities, plazas, outdoor sitting areas and courtyards located within and/or upon such property. 
"Public property" means any real property owned or maintained by the city or any other public entity or public utility within the city's jurisdictional boundaries. 
"Roller skates" means any footwear, or device which may be attached to the foot or footwear, to which wheels are attached (including wheels that are in line) and where such wheels may be used to aid the wearer in moving or propulsion. 
"Skateboard" means a board of any material that is designed for the user/rider to stand or sit upon, which has wheels attached to it, is propelled or moved by human, gravitational or mechanical power and may be operated with or without a separate steering mechanism to control the turning of the wheels and may be operated with or without a mechanical braking system that will allow the user/rider to stop the wheels. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 1, 8-28-2012)  
8.56.030 - Operation upon designated public property prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to utilize any skateboard, roller skates or other similar device to ride or move about in or on any public property when such public property has been designated by resolution of the city council as set forth in Section 8.56.060 and posted as a "No Skateboard or Roller Skating Area" as set forth in Section 8.56.070. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 1, 8-28-2012)  
8.56.040 - Operation upon designated private property prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to utilize any skateboard, roller skates or other similar device to ride or move about in or on any private property within a business district without the direct or implied consent of the owner if there is displayed in plain view on such private property a sign prohibiting such conduct and referring to this chapter. It shall be the responsibility of the private property owner to post and maintain all signs pursuant to this section, and such signs shall conform to the size and content requirements set forth in Section 8.56.070. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 1, 8-28-2012)  
8.56.050 - Helmet required; unsafe operation prohibited. 
A.  In addition to the requirements imposed by Section 21212 of the California Vehicle Code, it is unlawful for any person under (18) years of age to ride upon or utilize any skateboard, roller skates or other similar device in or on any public property, including, without limitation, a public sidewalk, unless that person is wearing a properly fitted and fastened helmet that meets the standards of either the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) or the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), or standards subsequently established by those entities. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to ride upon or utilize any skateboard, roller skates or other similar device in a manner that creates a nuisance. For the purpose of this section, "nuisance" is defined as any activity that: 
1.  Threatens injury to any person or property, public or private; 
2.  Creates an obstruction or presents a hazard to the free and unrestricted use of public or private property by pedestrians or motorists; or 
3.  Generates loud or unreasonable noise. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 1, 8-28-2012)  
8.56.060 - Designation of public property as a no skateboard or roller skating area. 
The city council may designate any public roadway, sidewalk or other public property as a "No Skateboarding or Roller Skating Area." The city council shall designate such area(s) and the time(s) when such activity is prohibited by resolution and order the posting of appropriate signage as required by Section 8.56.070. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 1, 8-28-2012)  
8.56.070 - Posting of required signs. 
An area designated by resolution of the city council as a "No Skateboard or Roller Skating Area" shall be posted with signs that provide substantially as follows: "Skateboarding, roller skating or similar activity is prohibited by Chapter 8.56 of the Lancaster Municipal Code." Such signs shall be posted in plain view of all entrances to the property or area and shall be not less than seventeen (17) inches by twenty-two (22) inches in size with lettering not less than one (1) inch in height. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 1, 8-28-2012)  
8.56.080 - Exemptions. 
Any device designated, intended and used solely for the transportation of infants, the handicapped or incapacitated persons, devices designed, intended and used for the transportation of merchandise to and from the place of purchase and other wheeled devices, when being used for either of these purposes, shall be exempt from this chapter. Additionally, the city council may, by resolution, suspend the enforcement provisions of this chapter to accommodate special events. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 1, 8-28-2012)  
8.56.090 - Violation and penalty. 
A first violation of this chapter shall be deemed an infraction and is punishable by a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). A second violation of this chapter committed by the same person shall be deemed an infraction and is punishable by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00). A third violation and each subsequent violation of this chapter committed by the same person shall be deemed an infraction and is punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 1, 8-28-2012)  
8.56.100 - Severability. 
If any part or provision of this chapter is found to be invalid or unenforceable by a court of law, such invalidity shall not affect any other part or provision herein, and all remaining provisions of this chapter will be valid and enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 980, § 1, 8-28-2012)  
Chapter 8.60 - BURIAL OR ENTOMBMENT OF PERSON COMMITTING A TERRORIST ACT 
 
8.60.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to exercise the authority granted by section 8115 of the California Health and Safety Code by imposing reasonably necessary standards governing burial and entombment and such standards of maintenance for cemeteries, including mausoleums and columbariums, in order to protect the public health and safety, assure decent and respectful treatment of human remains, and prevent offensive deterioration of cemetery grounds, structures, and places of interment. The provisions of this chapter apply to every public and private cemetery within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1011, § 1, 2-9-2016)  
8.60.020 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, wherever used in this chapter, shall be construed as set forth below, unless it is apparent from the context they have a different meaning: 
"Cemetery" means any public or private cemetery, including mausoleum and/or columbarium, within the city. 
"City" means the city of Lancaster. 
"City clerk" means the city clerk of the city, or his or her designee. 
"City manager" means the city manager of the city, or his or her designee. 
"Entombment" means entombment in a mausoleum or columbarium. 
"Responsible person" means any person having ownership, control or management responsibility over any cemetery. The actions or inactions of a responsible person's agent, employee, representative or contractor may be attributed to that responsible person. 
"Terrorist" means a person who has been identified by the Federal Bureau of Investigation as participating or engaging in any act of "international terrorism" or "domestic terrorism" as defined in section 2331 of title 18 of the United States Code. 
(Ord. No. 1011, § 1, 2-9-2016)  
8.60.030 - Cemetery's duty to determine whether deceased committed a terrorist act. 
A cemetery shall exercise reasonably diligence to determine whether a person to be buried or entombed was a terrorist. 
(Ord. No. 1011, § 1, 2-9-2016)  
8.60.040 - Notification of and conditions to burial or entombment of person committing a terrorist act. 
Prior to burial or entombment of a terrorist, a cemetery shall submit written notification to the city clerk on a form provided by the city clerk for such purpose. The city clerk shall immediately forward any completed written notification submitted pursuant to this chapter to the city manager and to the county sheriff's department. Within two business days following submission of a completed written notification pursuant to this chapter, the city manager shall, in conjunction with the county sheriff's department, take one of the following actions: (i) approve the burial or entombment; (ii) approve the burial or entombment with conditions; or (iii) deny the burial or entombment. In determining whether to approve, conditionally approve or deny a request pursuant to this chapter, the city manager shall consider whether and to what extent the proposed burial or entombment may (i) pose a risk to public health or safety, (ii) jeopardize the decent and respectful treatment of human remains, and/or (iii) result in the offensive deterioration of cemetery grounds, structures, and places of interment. The city manager shall not impose any condition(s) or deny any request pursuant to this chapter if such conditions(s) or denial would interfere with a person's vested right to burial or entombment or would otherwise violate any statutory or constitutional right. Written notice of the city manager's action shall be sent to the requesting cemetery by first class mail and electronic delivery (e.g., facsimile and/or email). If electronic delivery is not possible, the city manager's written notice of action may be personally delivered. A proposed burial or entombment shall be deemed unconditionally approved if the city manager does not otherwise timely notify the requesting cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 1011, § 1, 2-9-2016)  
8.60.050 - Penalty. 
Any responsible person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, the penalty shall be a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 1011, § 1, 2-9-2016)  
8.60.060 - Severability. 
If any part or provision of this chapter is found to be invalid or unenforceable by a court of law, such invalidity shall not affect any other part or provision herein, and all remaining provisions of this chapter will be valid and enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 1011, § 1, 2-9-2016)  
Chapter 8.62 - SHOPPING CART CONTAINMENT, RETRIEVAL AND ABATEMENT 
 
8.62.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the city's shopping cart containment, retrieval and abatement ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 1048, § 2(Att. A), 9-25-2018 )  
8.62.020 - Findings and declaration. 
The city council finds and declares as follows: 
A.  The presence of abandoned, stolen, wrecked and/or dismantled shopping carts, or parts thereof, on public and private property is found to create a condition tending to promote blight and deterioration, to reduce property values, to constitute a public nuisance, to be aesthetically detrimental to the community and to be injurious to the general welfare. 
B.  Responsibility for eliminating or minimizing this impact rests with individuals who use shopping carts and the businesses which provide such carts for their patrons. Therefore, pursuant to Cal. Business and Professions Code Section 22435.8, effective containment or control of shopping carts shall be mandated, and the presence of abandoned, stolen, wrecked and/or dismantled shopping carts, or parts thereof, on property located outside the premises or parking lot of the business that provided such cart, shall be cause to institute impoundment and abatement procedures in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and of Cal. Business and Professions Code, Division 8, Chapter 19 "Shopping and Laundry Carts." 
( Ord. No. 1048, § 2(Att. A), 9-25-2018 )  
8.62.030 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases have the meanings set forth below: 
"Abandoned shopping cart" means a shopping cart located outside the store premises of a business establishment which furnishes such cart for use by its patrons. 
"Cart" means a shopping cart as defined in this section. 
"City manager" means the city manager of the City of Lancaster, or his or her designee. 
"Code" means the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
"Director" means the director of development services or his or her designee. 
"Shopping cart" means a basket of any size which is mounted on wheels or a similar device, provided by a store operator for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind within a business establishment or designated parking or loading area of that business establishment. 
"Shopping cart owner" or "owner" means the owner of a shopping cart, the agent of the owner of such cart, including individuals or business entities, or the business establishment which furnishes such cart for use by its patrons. The actions or inactions of an owner's agent, on-site or off-site manager, or employee may be attributed to the owner. 
"Store premises" means the lot area, maintained and managed by the business, that may include the building, parking lot and adjacent walkways, and where the business's carts are permitted. The parking area of a business establishment located in a multi-store complex or shopping center shall include the entire parking area used by the complex or center. 
( Ord. No. 1048, § 2(Att. A), 9-25-2018 )  
8.62.040 - Administration. 
The city manager is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and may designate in writing the city employees or contractors who are authorized to assist in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter (collectively, "enforcement officers"). The city manager shall have the authority to promulgate and/or adopt regulations to implement the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 1048, § 2(Att. A), 9-25-2018 )  
8.62.050 - Unauthorized removal or possession. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any of the following acts with respect to a shopping cart, when such cart has a permanently affixed sign in conformity with this chapter: 
1.  To remove a shopping cart from the store premises with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the shopping cart owner of possession of the cart; 
2.  To be in possession of any shopping cart that has been removed from the store premises with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the shopping cart owner of possession of the cart; 
3.  To be in possession of any shopping cart with serial numbers or identification signage removed, obliterated, or altered, with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the shopping cart owner of possession of the cart; 
4.  To leave or abandon a shopping cart at a location other than the store premises with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the shopping cart owner of possession of the cart; 
5.  To alter, convert, or tamper with a shopping cart, or to remove any part or portion thereof or to remove, obliterate or alter serial numbers or identification signage on a cart, with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the shopping cart owner of possession of the cart; 
6.  To be in possession of any shopping cart while that cart is not located on the store premises, with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the shopping cart owner of possession of the cart. 
B.  This section shall not apply to a shopping cart owner, an owner's employee, a person or business entity engaged in the business of cart retrieval on behalf of the owner, or a customer who has written consent, on store letterhead and signed by the shopping cart owner, to be in possession of a cart or to remove a cart from the store premises. 
( Ord. No. 1048, § 2(Att. A), 9-25-2018 )  
8.62.060 - Abandoned shopping carts abatement, removal and storage. 
A.  The city may impound a shopping cart that has a permanently affixed sign, in conformity with this chapter, provided both of the following conditions have been met: 
1.  The cart is located outside the store premises, as defined in this chapter; 
2.  The cart is not retrieved within three (3) business days from the date the cart owner receives notice from the city of such cart's discovery and location. 
B.  Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, the city may immediately retrieve a shopping cart from public or private property when the location of such cart will impede emergency services, as determined by the city manager or a duly designated enforcement officer. 
C.  A shopping cart that has been impounded by the city pursuant to subsection A. or B. of this section shall be held at a location that is reasonably convenient to the shopping cart owner and open for business at least six (6) hours of each business day. 
D.  When the city has impounded a shopping cart pursuant to subsection A. or B. of this section, the city may recover its actual costs for providing such service. 
E.  The city may fine a shopping cart owner fifty dollars ($50.00) for each occurrence in excess of three (3) during a six-month period for failure to retrieve shopping carts in accordance with this section. For purposes of this subsection, an occurrence shall include all shopping carts impounded in accordance with this section during a calendar day. 
F.  Notwithstanding subsection A., the city may impound a shopping cart that is located outside the store premises without complying with the three-day advance notice requirement of subsection A., provided that: 
1.  The shopping cart owner has been provided actual notice within twenty-four (24) hours following the impound, and is informed of the location where the cart may be claimed; 
2.  The impounded shopping cart is held at a location in compliance with subsection C.; 
3.  Any shopping cart reclaimed by the shopping cart owner within three (3) business days following the date of actual notice of the impound shall be released and surrendered to the shopping cart owner at no charge; 
4.  Any shopping cart not reclaimed within three (3) business days following the date of actual notice of the impound shall be subject to the fees and fines set forth in subsections D. and E. commencing on the fourth business day following the date of notice of the impound. 
G.  The city may sell or dispose of any shopping cart not reclaimed within thirty (30) days following the date of notice of the impound. 
H.  Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, the city may immediately impound, sell and/or dispose of a shopping cart that does not contain a permanently affixed sign required pursuant to this chapter and whose ownership cannot otherwise be ascertained. 
I.  The actions described in this section may be performed by city personnel or contractor. 
J.  A shopping cart owner shall be deemed to have been provided any notice required pursuant to this section when the city notifies the owner's designated person, as set forth in section 8.62.070, by telephone call or email. 
( Ord. No. 1048, § 2(Att. A), 9-25-2018 )  
8.62.070 - Cart containment and retrieval plan. 
A.  No shopping cart owner shall commence or conduct business operations without having implemented a city-approved cart containment and retrieval plan to prevent the unauthorized removal of carts from store premises, and if removed, to retrieve such carts within twenty-four (24) hours of the removal or notice of removal. 
B.  A proposed cart containment and retrieval plan shall be submitted in writing, on a city-approved form, and shall include the following: 
1.  Owner/business information: The name of the business owner; the name of the business establishment; the physical address of the store premises; the name, address, telephone number and email address of each on-site or off-site manager; and designation of the person to whom the city should give notices related to shopping carts, as set forth in section 8.62.060, and such person's telephone number and email address. 
2.  Cart inventory: A complete inventory of all shopping carts maintained on or in the store premises. 
3.  Cart identification: A description of the identification sign to be affixed to each shopping cart on the store premises. The identification must, at a minimum, contain the information set forth in section 8.62.090 of this chapter. 
4.  Store premises signage: A description of the signage to be posted on the store premises, including sign and typeface size, sign text, and posting locations. Signage must, at a minimum, conform to the requirements set forth in section 8.62.100 of this chapter. 
5.  Mandatory cart retrieval: Evidence of a contract with a cart retrieval service employed to retrieve shopping carts which have been removed from the store premises within twenty-four (24) hours of the removal, or notice of removal. 
6.  Containment methods: A detailed description of all methods the shopping cart owner shall implement to prevent removal of carts from the store premises. These methods may include, but need not be limited to, those set forth in section 8.62.120. 
C.  Except as set forth in subsection D. of this section, no proposed cart containment and retrieval plan shall be accepted unless accompanied by payment of a fee, established by resolution of city council and as may be amended from time to time. 
D.  Shopping cart owners engaging in business in the city on the effective date of this chapter shall submit evidence of a contract with a cart retrieval service, and provide the name of the person to whom the city should give notices as set forth in section 8.62.060 within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this chapter, and shall submit the complete cart containment and retrieval plan to the city within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this chapter. 
Shopping cart owners engaging in business in the city on the effective date of this chapter who are already contracting with a cart retrieval service and/or utilizing an on-site cart containment system(s) shall submit contracts, plans, specifications, photographs and/or other additional evidence (collectively, the "documentation") as the director may request. Such shopping cart owner shall not be required to tender the cart containment and retrieval plan fee. The documentation will undergo director's review to verify compliance with the requirements set forth in this chapter and efficacy of containment system(s). 
E.  It shall be the responsibility of a shopping cart owner to implement and continuously maintain all provisions and measures of the city-approved cart containment and retrieval plan at all times the owner is engaging in business in the city. 
( Ord. No. 1048, § 2(Att. A), 9-25-2018 )  
8.62.080 - Review and approval or denial of cart containment and retrieval plan. 
A.  Cart containment and retrieval plans shall be subject to director's review, in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 17.43, article VI of this Code. The director may approve, conditionally approve, or deny a plan. 
B.  The director shall deny a plan based upon any of the following grounds: 
1.  Implementation of the plan would violate provisions of the building, zoning, health, safety, fire or other municipal codes, or any county, state or federal law which substantially affects public health, safety or welfare; 
2.  The plan fails to include all information provided by this chapter; 
3.  The plan is insufficient or inadequate to prevent removal of carts from the store premises, as determined by the director; 
4.  Implementation of the plan would violate a term or condition of a city license, permit or other approval; 
5.  The applicant has made a false, misleading or fraudulent material statement or omission of fact in the cart containment and retrieval plan. 
C.  The director may conditionally approve a plan if imposing such conditions will, in the director's determination, eliminate any grounds requiring denial of the plan. 
D.  The director shall make findings and render a written decision of the proposed plan. A copy of the decision shall be served on the applicant by first class mail. Service shall be deemed complete on the date the decision is placed in a U.S. Postal Service mail receptacle. 
E.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, the director's denial or conditional approval of a proposed cart containment and retrieval plan shall be the final administrative decision. The superior court is the sole reviewing authority and an appeal of the director's decision is not appealable to the planning commission or city council. The written decision shall contain the following statement: "Judicial review of the director's decision is subject to the time limits set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure, section 1094.6." 
( Ord. No. 1048, § 2(Att. A), 9-25-2018 )  
8.62.090 - Cart identification. 
A.  It shall be the responsibility of a shopping cart owner to maintain each cart with a sign permanently affixed to it. Cart identification shall be in conformity with that described in the owner's city-approved cart containment and retrieval plan and shall, at a minimum, contain all of the following information: 
1.  The identity of the shopping cart owner or the business establishment, or both; 
2.  Notification to the public that the unauthorized removal of the cart from the store premises, or the unauthorized possession of the cart, is a violation of state and municipal law; 
3.  The address or telephone number for returning a cart removed from the store premises to the shopping cart owner. 
B.  Shopping cart owners engaging in business in the city on the effective date of this chapter shall affix identification to each cart, in accordance with this section, within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this chapter. If the owner subsequently makes a change to the cart identification in the city-approved cart containment and retrieval plan, the new cart identification shall be affixed within thirty (30) days of city approval of the plan. 
( Ord. No. 1048, § 2(Att. A), 9-25-2018 )  
8.62.100 - Store premises signage. 
A.  It shall be the responsibility of a shopping cart owner to maintain signage concerning cart removal posted on the store premises. Signage shall be in conformity with that described in the owner's city-approved cart containment and retrieval plan and shall, at a minimum, meet the following requirements: 
1.  Each sign shall be not less than eighteen (18) inches in width and twenty-four (24) inches in height with block lettering not less than one-half (½) inch in width and two (2) inches in height; 
2.  A sign shall be posted in a conspicuous place within two (2) feet of each customer entrance and exit; 
3.  Each sign shall state, at a minimum, as follows: "REMOVAL OF SHOPPING CARTS FROM THE PREMISES IS PROHIBITED BY STATE AND MUNICIPAL LAW (B&P §22435.2; LMC §8.62.050)"; 
4.  Each sign shall be in English and Spanish. 
B.  Shopping cart owners engaging in business in the city on the effective date of this chapter shall post signage on the store premises, in accordance with this section, within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this chapter. If the owner subsequently makes a change to the store premises signage in the city-approved cart containment and retrieval plan, the new store premises signage shall be installed or erected within thirty (30) days of city approval of the plan. 
( Ord. No. 1048, § 2(Att. A), 9-25-2018 )  
8.62.110 - Cart retrieval; retrieval service. 
A.  It shall be the responsibility of a shopping cart owner to secure and continuously maintain a service to retrieve shopping carts which have been removed from their store premises within twenty-four (24) hours of the removal, or notice of removal. Service shall only be established with a person or business entity engaged in the business of shopping cart retrieval who possesses a valid Lancaster business license. 
B.  A person or business entity engaged in the business of cart retrieval shall maintain a current and valid Lancaster business license at all times the person or entity conducts business in the city. 
C.  A person or business entity engaged in the business of cart retrieval shall retain records showing written authorization from the shopping cart owner, or an agent thereof, to retrieve carts and to be in possession of carts retrieved. A copy of said records shall be maintained in each vehicle used for cart retrieval. 
D.  Each vehicle used for the retrieval of shopping carts shall display a sign that clearly identifies the person or business entity engaging in the business of cart retrieval. 
( Ord. No. 1048, § 2(Att. A), 9-25-2018 )  
8.62.120 - Cart containment. 
A.  It shall be the responsibility of a shopping cart owner to effectively contain or control all carts within the boundaries of the store premises. A shopping cart owner shall install and/or implement each method of containment described in the city-approved containment and retrieval plan. Methods of containment may include, but need not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Electronic or other disabling devices installed on the shopping carts that prevent their removal from the store premises; 
2.  Bollards or other structures, installed or erected on the perimeter of the store premises, which restrict shopping carts to the premises. Such structures shall not interfere with fire lanes, disabled access, or conflict with federal, state and local laws, including municipal building and zoning codes; 
3.  Use of courtesy clerks to accompany customers to their vehicles and return shopping carts to the store; 
4.  Security deposit for a customer's use of a shopping cart; 
5.  Other demonstrably effective method, as determined by the director, that is likely to prevent cart removal from the store premises. 
B.  Shopping cart owners engaging in business in the city on the effective date of this chapter shall implement methods of cart containment, in conformity with this section, within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this chapter. If the owner subsequently makes a change to the cart containment methods in the city-approved cart containment and retrieval plan, the new cart containment methods shall be implemented within thirty (30) days of city approval of the plan. 
( Ord. No. 1048, § 2(Att. A), 9-25-2018 )  
8.62.130 - Penalty. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of the municipal code to the contrary, any person who violates any provision of this chapter, and any cart owner who violates or fails to comply with or continuously maintain any provision of the shopping cart owner's city-approved cart containment and retrieval plan, is guilty of a misdemeanor unless the offense is charged as an infraction by a prosecuting attorney. 
( Ord. No. 1048, § 2(Att. A), 9-25-2018 )  
8.62.140 - Enforcement. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, and any cart owner who violates or fails to comply with or continuously maintain any provision of the owner's city-approved cart containment and retrieval plan, shall be subject to enforcement procedures for each violation by any lawful means available to the city, including but not limited to, those set forth in Cal. Business and Professions Code (Division 8, Chapter 19), and chapters 1.12, 1.16, and 8.28 of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 1048, § 2(Att. A), 9-25-2018 )  
8.62.150 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council declares that it would have adopted this chapter, and each section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, phrases, clauses or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
( Ord. No. 1048, § 2(Att. A), 9-25-2018 )  
Chapter 8.70 - GASOLINE POWERED LANDSCAPE EQUIPMENT 
 
8.70.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, wherever used in this chapter, shall be construed as set forth below, unless it is apparent from the context they have a different meaning: 
"City" means the City of Lancaster. 
"Gasoline powered" means powered by an internal combustion engine that runs on gasoline, diesel or other volatile fuel. 
"Landscape equipment" means equipment such as, but not limited to, a lawn mower, leaf blower and/or edger-trimmer used to maintain lawns, gardens, sidewalks and driveways. 
"Landscape maintenance business" means a business, as defined in section 5.04.010 of this code, that performs lawn and yard maintenance such as, but not limited to, cutting grass and removing leaves. 
(Ord. No. 1063 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-2019)  
8.70.020 - Prohibition against use of gasoline powered landscape equipment. 
Effective April 1, 2024, a landscape maintenance business shall not use gasoline powered landscape equipment within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1063 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-2019)  
8.70.030 - Scope and limitations of chapter. 
This chapter shall be construed and applied in a manner consistent with all federal and state laws applicable to the city and shall not apply to any of the following: (a) a department, agency or contractor of the federal government; (b) a department, agency or contractor of the State of California; (c) a local public entity or its contractor; and/or (d) a person or entity performing landscape maintenance on property that he, she or it owns, rents or leases. 
(Ord. No. 1063 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-2019)  
8.70.040 - Penalty. 
Any landscape maintenance business violating this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, the penalty shall be a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a period of not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 1063 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-2019)  
8.70.050 - Severability. 
If any part or provision of this chapter is found to be invalid or unenforceable by a court of law, such invalidity shall not affect any other part or provision hereof, and all remaining provisions of this chapter will be valid and enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 1063 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-23-2019)  
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE  
Chapter 9.04 - FIREARMS 
 
9.04.010 - Furnishing weapons to minors. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful in the city for any person, firm or corporation to sell, give, lend or in any way furnish or cause or permit to be sold, given, lent or in any way furnished to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, any gun, revolver, pistol, firearm, spring gun, air gun, sling, slingshot, or any device designed or intended to discharge or capable of discharging any dangerous missile. 
(Prior code § 3-10.1)  
9.04.020 - Furnishing ammunition to minors. 
Except as otherwise provided in Section 9.04.040, it is unlawful in the city for any person, firm or corporation to sell, give, loan or in any way furnish or cause or permit to be sold, given, lent or in any way furnished, to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, any cartridge, shell, ammunition or device containing any explosive substance designed or intended to be used in or fired from any gun, revolver, pistol or firearm. 
(Prior code § 3-10.2)  
9.04.030 - Discharge of firearms by minors. 
Except as otherwise provided in Section 9.04.040, it shall be unlawful in the city for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to fire, discharge, shoot or operate or to assist or participate in the firing, discharging, shooting or operation, or have in his or her possession, care, custody or control any gun, revolver, pistol, firearm, spring gun, air gun, sling, slingshot or device designed to or intended to discharge or capable of discharging any dangerous missile or any cartridge, shell, ammunition or device containing any explosive substance designed or intended to be used in or fired from any gun, revolver, pistol or firearm. 
(Prior code § 3-10.3)  
9.04.040 - Exceptions. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to prohibit in the city the selling, giving, lending or furnishing to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years upon the written consent of a parent or guardian of said person any article mentioned in Sections 9.04.010 and 9.04.020 nor to prohibit any such person under the age of eighteen (18) years from having in his or her possession, care, custody or control any article mentioned in Section 9.04.030, in the event that such possession, care, custody or control of these articles is had with the consent of the parent or guardian of such person, and is under the direct supervision and control of such adult person. 
(Prior code § 3-10.4)  
9.04.050 - Selling knives to minors. 
Every person who sells to any minor any dirk or dagger or any knife with a blade three inches or more in length or any snap-blade or spring-blade knife, regardless of the length of the blade, unless the minor is accompanied by an adult person and unless the person selling the dagger or knife keeps a full and complete record of the name and address of the purchaser, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 3-10.5)  
9.04.060 - Discharge of weapon within city prohibited. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a person shall not within the city, shoot any arrow or similar missile or fire, discharge, shoot or operate or assist or participate in the firing, discharging, shooting or operating of any gun, revolver, pistol, firearm, spring gun, air gun, sling, slingshot, or device designed or intended to discharge or capable of discharging any dangerous missile or any cartridge, shell, ammunition or device containing any explosive substance designed or intended to be used in or fired from any gun, revolver, pistol or firearm. 
(Prior code § 3-10.6)  
9.04.070 - Exceptions. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to prohibit in the city the shooting of any arrow or similar missile when the arrow is shot from and at all times remains on or over the lands upon private property if all persons occupying who have the right to occupy such private property or portion thereof consent thereto. 
(Prior code § 3-10.7)  
9.04.080 - Violation—Penalty. 
Every person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in a county jail for not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Prior code § 3-10.8)  
9.04.090 - Replica firearms and firearms definitions. 
A.  As used in this chapter, the term "replica firearm" shall include any device or object made of plastic, wood, metal or any other material which is a facsimile or toy version of, or is otherwise recognizable as, a pistol, revolver, shotgun, sawed-off shotgun, rifle, machine gun, rocket launcher, or any other firearm as that term is used under the provisions of the State Penal Code. 
B.  For purposes of this chapter, the meaning of the term "firearm" shall be same as the meaning of that term under the State Dangerous Weapons Control laws and shall include air rifles, pellet guns or BB guns. 
(Prior code § 3-10.9)  
9.04.100 - Threats with replica firearms. 
Every person who, except in self defense, in the presence of any other person, draws, exhibits or brandishes a replica firearm or who simulates a firearm in a rude, angry and threatening manner, or who in any manner, unlawfully uses the same in any fight or quarrel and causes the victim to reasonably believe that the person is actually in possession of an operable firearm is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 3-10.10)  
Chapter 9.08 - IMPERSONATING CITY OFFICIALS 
 
9.08.010 - Impersonation of district attorney, sheriff or city official. 
It is unlawful for any person, in the city to falsely personate, or to cause or permit to be falsely personated, either the district attorney, sheriff or any city official of the city, or to falsely represent himself, or another to be a deputy agent, investigator or representative of, or to be connected with or employed by the district attorney, sheriff or city official. 
Provided, that no provision of this chapter shall be deemed or construed as prohibiting any act or representation prohibited by Sections 529, 530 or 6501/2 of the Penal Code of California or by any general law of said state. 
(Prior code § 4-1.60)  
9.08.020 - Wearing any distinctive part of sheriff's uniform. 
It is unlawful for any person other than the sheriff or a deputy sheriff of the county of Los Angeles to wear the duly prescribed uniform of the sheriff or a deputy sheriff of the county of Los Angeles or any distinctive part of such uniform or a uniform any part of which is similar to a distinctive part of the duly prescribed uniform of the sheriff or a deputy sheriff of the county of Los Angeles. 
(Prior code § 4-1.61)  
9.08.030 - Possession or sale of district attorney's identification. 
It is unlawful for any person other than a duly authorized member of the district attorney's office serving with compensation from the county of Los Angeles to have in his possession or on his person an identification card as prescribed by this section, and it is unlawful for any person to make, print, issue, give or sell any such identification card as prescribed by this section, or to have in his possession or on his person any identification card such as is prescribed in this section, or any imitation thereof, or card similar thereto, without the previous authorization in writing of the district attorney of the county of Los Angeles, or of the assistant district attorney, or of the chief deputy district attorney. 
(Prior code § 4-1.62)  
Chapter 9.12 - LOITERING 
 
9.12.010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter: 
"Loitering" means to delay, linger or stand idly in one location. 
"Shopping center" means a group of retail stores and/or service establishments designed to serve the community. 
(Prior code § 4-1.10)  
9.12.020 - Prohibition. 
A.  Rights-of-Way. No person, after first being warned by a peace officer to vacate the premises, or where a sign has been posted giving notice of the provisions of this chapter, shall loiter in or upon any public street, sidewalk, curb, crosswalk or other public right-of-way so as to obstruct the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic thereon. This section does not prohibit a person from sitting upon a public right-of-way if: 
1.  Necessitated by physical disability; 
2.  Viewing a legally conducted parade; or 
3.  On a bench lawfully installed. 
B.  Buildings. No person shall loiter so as to obstruct or prevent access to any structure or building open to the public. 
C.  Shopping Centers. No person, after first being warned by a peace officer to vacate the premises, or where a sign has been posted giving notice of the provisions of this chapter, shall loiter in a parking lot of a shopping center without lawful business in any of the retail stores or service establishments of such shopping center. 
(Prior code § 4-1.11)  
9.12.030 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply when application would abridge the exercise of a person's rights protected under the United States Constitution, including but not limited to, the right of free speech, right of peaceable assembly and right to object to unreasonable search and seizure. 
(Prior code § 4-1.12)  
Chapter 9.16 - LOITERING BY MINORS 
 
9.16.010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall be applicable: 
"Loiter" means and includes being dilatory, standing idly, lingering, or delaying an activity with aimless idle stops and pauses. 
"Minor" means any person under the age of eighteen (18). 
(Prior code § 4-1.20)  
9.16.020 - Prohibition. 
A.  No minor shall loiter about the public streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other public places between the hours of ten (10) p.m. and six a.m. of the following day. 
B.  No minor who is subject to compulsory education or to compulsory continuation education shall loiter, idle, wander or be in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, or eating places, vacant lots or any unsupervised place during the hours of seven-thirty a.m. and two p.m. on days when school is in session. 
(Ord. 783 § 1, 2000; Ord. 719 § 1, 1996: prior code § 4-1.21)  
9.16.030 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this part shall not apply to the following: 
A.  Any minor accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or a responsible adult to which custody of the minor has been given by the parent or legal guardian; 
B.  Any minor performing any task at the direction of his or her legal guardian; 
C.  Any minor responding to an emergency with or without parental consent; 
D.  Any minor acting within the course and scope of his or her lawful employment; 
E.  Any minor on the property of, or the sidewalk directly adjacent to, or the building immediately adjacent to the building in which the minor resides; 
F.  Any minor legally married; 
G.  Any minor in the military service; 
H.  Any minor attending organized associational activities, including, but not limited to, school meetings, classes or sporting events, religious meetings, dances, concerts, theatrical performances or similar events, or other constitutionally protected activities; 
I.  Any minor engaged in reasonable and direct travel to and from those activities described in the exceptions above; 
J.  Any minor who has permission to leave school campus for lunch or school-related activity and has in his or her possession a valid, school issued, off-campus permit. 
(Ord. 719 § 2, 1996; prior code § 4-1.22)  
9.16.040 - Enforcement. 
Every peace officer is authorized and empowered on public and private property to demand from any person, whom the officer has reasonable cause to believe is in violation of this chapter, that such person give his or her name, address, proof of age, the name of a parent, guardian or adult having care or custody of such person, and other information reasonably necessary to determine whether such violation exists. 
(Prior code § 4-1.23)  
9.16.050 - Violation—Penalty. 
A violation of any provision of this chapter is punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Prior code § 4-1.24)  
Chapter 9.18 - LOITERING BY CRIMINAL STREET GANGS 
 
9.18.010 - Prohibited acts. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person who is a member of a "criminal street gang" as that term is defined in California Penal Code Section 186.22(f) or who is in the company of or acting in concert with a member of a "criminal street gang" to loiter or idle in a "public place" as defined in Section 9.18.010(B), or to attend or be physically present at any "city event" as defined in Section 9.18.010(C), under any of the following circumstances: 
1.  With the intent to publicize a criminal street gang's dominance over certain territory in order to intimidate nonmembers of the gang from entering, remaining in, or using the public place or adjacent area; 
2.  With the intent to conceal ongoing commerce in illegal drugs or other unlawful activity. 
B.  For purposes of this chapter, a "public place" means the public way and any other location open to the public, whether publicly or privately owned, including, but not limited to any street, sidewalk, avenue, highway, road, curb area, alley, park, playground or other public ground or public building, any common area of a school, hospital, apartment house, office building, transport facility, shop, privately owned place of business, to which the public is invited, including any place of amusement, entertainment, or eating place. Any "public place" also includes the front yard area, driveway and walkway of any private residence, business, or apartment house. 
C.  For purposes of this chapter, a "city event" means either (or both) of the following: (i) an event held or sponsored by the city; and/or (ii) an event conducted or held by any person, entity, business or group that is held in any public park or facility or on any public property. 
(Ord. 765 § 2, 1999) 
(Ord. No. 953, § 2, 9-28-2010)  
9.18.020 - Powers of law enforcement officers not limited. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in any way to limit the power or right of a law enforcement officer to make any investigation, detention or arrest as such law enforcement officer would be permitted to make in absence of this chapter. 
(Ord. 765 § 2 (part), 1999)  
9.18.030 - Parental control. 
Any parent(s), legal guardian(s), or other adult person(s) authorized by such parent(s) or guardian(s) to have the care and custody of a minor, who knowingly permits or by insufficient control allows a minor to violate the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 765 § 2 (part), 1999)  
9.18.040 - Penalty. 
Violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both. 
(Ord. 765 § 2 (part), 1999)  
9.18.050 - Severability. 
If any provision or clause of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect any other provision or application of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end of provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. 765 § 2 (part), 1999)  
Chapter 9.20 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
 
9.20.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Alcoholic beverage" means and includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances. 
(Prior code § 4-2.1)  
9.20.020 - Consuming alcoholic beverages on school property prohibited. 
Every person who enters, goes onto or remains on, the premises of any public school in the city, or any stadium or athletic field while being used by any public school for any athletic contest, while such person is consuming alcoholic beverages, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 4-2.2)  
9.20.030 - Consuming alcoholic beverages on public streets or parking lots prohibited. 
Every person who consumes any beer, wine, or other intoxicating beverage on any street, sidewalk, alley, highway or parking lot open to the public is guilty of a misdemeanor. This section shall not be deemed to proscribe any act which is positively permitted or prohibited by any law of the state of California. 
(Prior code § 4-2.3)  
9.20.040 - Violation—Penalty. 
Every person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Prior code § 4-2.4)  
Chapter 9.22 - NUISANCE GATHERINGS AND SOCIAL HOST ACCOUNTABILITY 
 
9.22.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the city's nuisance gatherings and social host accountability ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § 1, 7-14-2015)  
9.22.020 - Findings and purpose. 
The city council finds and declares as follows: 
A.  Unruly gatherings, including but not limited to those where alcohol is consumed by underage persons, pose a hazard to public health, safety, the quiet enjoyment of property and the general welfare. 
B.  Gatherings at which underage persons and/or others consume alcoholic beverages may result in physical altercations, violent crimes including sexual offenses, automobile accidents, neighborhood vandalism and excessive noise disturbance. 
C.  Unruly gatherings frequently require a response by numerous law enforcement personnel, limiting their ability to respond to other service calls in the city. 
D.  Unruly gatherings are often the result of inadequate, or a lack of, adult supervision. 
E.  It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to protect the public health, safety and general welfare by reducing the occurrence of inadequately supervised and unruly gatherings, by holding persons responsible who allow, encourage, are aware of or should be aware of such gatherings, including but not limited to those where alcoholic beverages are consumed by underage persons. 
F.  It is further the purpose and intent of this chapter that the city deter persons from allowing unruly gatherings by assessing administrative penalties against such persons. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § 1, 7-14-2015)  
9.22.030 - Definitions. 
"Alcoholic beverage" has the same meaning as in the California Business and Professions Code section 23304 or any successor section. 
"City" means the City of Lancaster. 
"Code" means the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
"City manager" means the city manager of the City of Lancaster and his or her designee(s). For purposes of this chapter, the director of the city's department of public safety is a designee. 
"Enforcing officer" means a public officer or employee authorized by this chapter or designated by the city manager to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
"Gathering" means a party, assembly or other social event attended by two (2) or more persons. 
"Responsible person" means any person with a recorded ownership interest in, or a right of possession, control or use of a residence or other property at which a gathering is conducted. For purposes of this chapter, "responsible person" includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
A.  Owner of the premises where a gathering takes place; 
B.  Tenant of the premises where a gathering takes place; 
C.  Person organizing and/or hosting a gathering; 
D.  Person receiving money or consideration for granting access to a gathering; 
E.  Parent or legal guardian of a person under the age of eighteen (18) years who is also a responsible person. 
"Underage drinking" means and includes possessing or consuming alcoholic beverages by an underage person and/or serving or providing alcoholic beverages to an underage person. For purposes of this chapter, the service, possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages which occurs between an underage person and his or her parent or legal guardian or which occurs as part of a legally protected religious activity does not constitute underage drinking. 
"Underage person" means any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
"Unruly conduct" means and includes disturbing the peace, disorderly conduct, and other activities, behavior or conduct that threatens the public health, safety or general welfare and/or interferes with the quiet enjoyment of property. For purposes of this chapter, "unruly conduct" includes, but is not limited to, fights, assaults or batteries; sexual offenses; vandalism; public intoxication; possession or consumption of controlled substances by, or service of controlled substances to, underage persons; crowds of people who have spilled over into public streets; obstruction of public streets; excessive noise, as defined in city or state law; and excessive traffic. 
"Unruly gathering" means a gathering at which underage drinking and/or unruly conduct occurs. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § 1, 7-14-2015)  
9.22.040 - Enforcement. 
Any county sheriff's deputy, city public safety officer, city community services officer, and any other public officer or employee designated by the city manager shall be authorized to issue administrative citations in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § 1, 7-14-2015)  
9.22.050 - Prohibition; duty; knowledge. 
A.  It is unlawful for any responsible person, as defined in this chapter, to conduct, host, permit or allow a gathering if the person knows or reasonably should know that underage drinking or unruly conduct is occurring or has occurred. 
B.  It is the duty of a responsible person to take all reasonable steps to prevent underage drinking and unruly conduct at a gathering. Reasonable steps include, without limitation: controlling access to alcoholic beverages; controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages to an amount that can be monitored and to which access can be effectively controlled; verifying the age of persons at the gathering by inspecting drivers' licenses or other government-issued identification cards; supervising the activities of underage persons at the gathering; and removing persons from the premises who engage in underage drinking or unruly conduct or who enable or encourage such to occur. 
C.  A responsible person shall not be in violation of subsection (A) if he or she has taken all reasonable steps to prevent an unruly gathering and seeks assistance from law enforcement or city personnel to either: 
1.  Remove any attendee of a gathering who engages in, enables or encourages underage drinking or unruly conduct, or 
2.  Terminate the gathering because the person has been unable to prevent underage drinking or unruly conduct despite having taken all reasonable steps to prevent it, provided that the responsible person has sought such assistance before any other person makes a complaint to law enforcement or city personnel. 
D.  A responsible person who is present at the property at the time of an unruly gathering shall be deemed to have actual or constructive knowledge that underage drinking or unruly conduct is occurring or has occurred. 
E.  A responsible person who is not present at the property at the time of an unruly gathering may be deemed by an enforcing officer to have actual or constructive knowledge of, and to have permitted, underage drinking or unruly conduct: 
1.  If such person has previously been given verbal warning and/or an administrative citation or other written notice concerning an unruly gathering; or 
2.  Based on the totality of the circumstances as determined by the enforcing officer. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § 1, 7-14-2015)  
9.22.060 - Public nuisance; violation. 
A.  The city council finds and declares that an unruly gathering constitutes a public nuisance, subject to abatement by all reasonable means including, but not limited to, an order requiring the gathering to be disbanded and the citation and/or arrest of any person violating this chapter or any other applicable local or state law. 
B.  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or who fails to comply with any obligation or requirement of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § 1, 7-14-2015)  
9.22.070 - Administrative citations. 
A.  Any enforcing officer, as defined in this chapter, may issue an administrative citation to a person when the officer has determined, through personal observation or after undertaking standard law enforcement investigatory actions, that the person is a responsible person, as defined in this chapter, who has conducted, hosted, permitted or allowed an unruly gathering. 
B.  Within five (5) days after issuance of a citation, an officer shall submit a copy of the citation and a written statement of facts to the city manager. Alternatively, the officer may elect to submit the written statement of facts to the city manager, who may then issue the citation. 
C.  An administrative citation may be personally given to the responsible person, or the responsible person may be served by first class mail to an address which is either: (i) indicated on any form of identification presented to the officer, or (ii) discovered by the officer during the course of his or her standard law enforcement investigatory actions. The date a citation is placed in a U.S. Postal Service mail receptacle shall be the date of service. A declaration of service shall be made by the person mailing the administrative citation showing the date and manner of service by mail and reciting the name and address of the citation addressee. Failure of any responsible person to receive an administrative citation by mail shall not invalidate any citation issued pursuant to this chapter. 
D.  The citation shall be in a city-approved format, and shall include the following information: 
1.  The date, location and approximate time of the unruly gathering; 
2.  A brief description of the activities, conduct or behavior at the location that constituted an unruly gathering; 
3.  A statement describing the right to appeal the citation; 
4.  A statement advising that the fine shall be paid to the city within thirty (30) days from the date of the administrative citation, procedure for payment, and the consequences of failure to pay. 
E.  The penalty amounts of administrative citations issued pursuant to this chapter shall be as follows: 
1.  For the first administrative citation, the penalty shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00); 
2.  For the second and any subsequent administrative citation, the penalty shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
F.  The failure of any person to pay a penalty assessed by administrative citation within the time specified on the citation constitutes a debt to the city, which may be collected in accordance with Chapter 1.16 or in any other manner allowable by law. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § 1, 7-14-2015)  
9.22.080 - Right of appeal from an administrative citation. 
A.  A person who has been issued an administrative citation pursuant to this chapter may contest the citation by filing a written appeal on a city-approved form with the city manager within ten (10) calendar days from the date of the citation. The basis for the appeal must be specified in detail on the appeal form. There shall be no filing fee for the appeal, however, a deposit in the amount of the citation must be paid at the time the appeal is filed. If the citation is dismissed as a result of the appeal hearing, the deposit shall be returned to the appellant within thirty (30) days from the date of the written appeal decision. 
B.  Failure of the city manager to receive a timely appeal constitutes a waiver of the right to contest a citation; in this event, the citation is final and binding. 
C.  As soon as practicable after a timely appeal is filed, the city manager shall fix a date, time and place for a hearing. The hearing shall be conducted by an independent and impartial hearing officer. Written notice of the time and place for the hearing shall be served by first class mail, at the return address indicated on the appeal form, at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. 
D.  An appellant may request, in writing, that the city manager reschedule the hearing if the request is made at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the hearing. The city manager shall grant one (1) continuance of the hearing date. 
E.  Failure of an appellant to appear at the scheduled hearing shall constitute the appellant's waiver of the right to appeal and a forfeiture of the citation amount deposited at the time the appeal was filed. 
F.  Appeal hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. The city bears the burden of proof to establish, by a preponderance of evidence, that the appellant conducted, hosted, permitted or allowed an unruly gathering. The officer issuing the administrative citation and/or submitting the written statement of facts shall not be required to appear at the hearing. The hearing officer shall accept testimony by declaration under penalty of perjury relating to the commission of the offense, as set forth in the issuing officer's statement of facts, and shall consider any other relevant evidence concerning the commission of the offense that the city manager may present at the hearing. The hearing officer shall also take the testimony of the appellant, and/or his or her witnesses, and will consider any other credible relevant rebuttal evidence the appellant may wish to present. The appellant may represent himself or herself or be represented by anyone of his or her choice, including counsel, at his or her sole expense. The appellant may bring an interpreter to the hearing at his or her sole expense. 
G.  The hearing officer shall make findings based on the record of the hearing, and shall prepare a written decision, based on those findings, to either uphold or dismiss the citation. A copy of the written decision shall be served on the appellant by first class mail within ten (10) days after the hearing. If the citation is dismissed, the city shall refund the amount of the citation deposit to the appellant within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision. 
H.  The decision of the hearing officer is final and conclusive, subject only to review by the superior court in accordance with the time limits set forth in Government Code Section 53069.4 and/or Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § 1, 7-14-2015)  
9.22.090 - Remedies not exclusive. 
An administrative citation assessed pursuant to this chapter shall not prejudice or adversely affect any other civil, administrative or criminal action that may be brought to abate an unruly gathering or to seek compensation for damages suffered. A civil or criminal action may be brought concurrently with any other process regarding the same violation. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § 1, 7-14-2015)  
9.22.100 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council declares that it would have adopted this chapter, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more sections, subsections, phrases, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 1004, § 1, 7-14-2015)  
Chapter 9.24 - GRAFFITI[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1000, § 2, adopted December 9, 2014, repealed ch. 9.24, §§ 9.24.010—9.24.100, in its entirety, and enacted a new ch. 9.24, to read as set out herein. Former ch. 9.24 pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from prior code §§ 2-5.11, 3-16.1—3-16.9 and Ord. 678 §§ 1—12, adopted 1995. 
 
9.24.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the city of Lancaster's Graffiti ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 2, 12-9-2014)  
9.24.020 - Findings and purpose. 
The city council finds and declares as follows: 
A.  Graffiti on public or private property is a condition of blight that not only depreciates the value of property which has been the target of such vandalism, but also depreciates the value of the adjacent and surrounding properties so as to create a negative impact upon the entire community. 
B.  Graffiti has also been found to be associated with criminal activity and delinquency. It is also a means of identification and intimidation utilized by gangs and its presence may further gang-related activities. The power of graffiti to create fear within the community and blight upon the landscape, devaluing property and detracting from a sense of community enjoyed by the residents of the city goes beyond the cost of clean-up or removal. Not only is graffiti a criminal act of vandalism, but it is also a social crime upon the quality of life and freedom from intimidation that residents desire in their neighborhoods. 
C.  California Government Code Section 53069.3 authorizes the city to provide for the use of city funds to remove graffiti and other inscribed materials from publicly or privately owned real or personal property. California Government Code Section 38772 provides for the summary abatement by the city of a nuisance resulting from the defacement of property of another by graffiti, at the expense of the minor or other person creating or causing the nuisance. Unless the city causes graffiti to be removed from public and private property, it tends to remain. Other properties then become the target of graffiti with the result that the entire neighborhood is affected and becomes a less desirable place in which to be. 
D.  It is the intent and purpose of the city council, through the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, to provide for the use of all enforcement tools authorized under law to protect public and private property from acts of vandalism and defacement. It is further the intent and purpose of the city council to authorize the city to utilize all available remedies to recover its costs associated with the removal of graffiti and the identification and apprehension of persons responsible for creating, causing and/or committing such vandalism and defacement. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 2, 12-9-2014)  
9.24.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
"Aerosol paint container" shall mean any aerosol container, regardless of the material from which it is made, which is adapted or made for the purpose of spraying paint, undercoating, spray insulation, or other substance capable of defacing property. 
"City agents" shall mean city employees, representatives, or contract agents. 
"City manager" shall mean the city manager of Lancaster and/or the person(s) designated by the city manager to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
"Enforcement officer" shall mean any official authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, law enforcement, public safety and code enforcement personnel, as well as any other city employee or contract agent authorized by the city to abate graffiti nuisances described in this chapter. 
"Felt-tip marker" shall mean any indelible marker or similar implement with a tip which, at its broadest width, is greater than one-eighth of an inch and which contains an ink or other pigmented liquid. 
"Graffiti" shall mean any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, mark, or design that is written, marked, etched, scratched, drawn, painted, applied or engraved on or otherwise glued, posted, or affixed to or on any surface of any public or private real or personal property located within the city to the extent that the same was not authorized in advance by the owner or occupant thereof. 
"Graffiti implement" shall mean an aerosol paint container, a felt tip marker, gum label, paint stick, etching tool capable of scarring glass, metal, concrete, wood, adhesive label or any other surface. "Graffiti implement" shall also include any other device capable of being used to leave a visible mark at least one-sixteenth of an inch in width upon any surface of any material. 
"Minor" shall mean a person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
"Paint stick" shall mean a device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and upon application, leaving a mark at least one-eighth of an inch in width. 
"Responsible party" shall mean any and/or all of the following: 
1.  Any person, of any age, who has been determined to have placed, applied, installed or otherwise created, caused or committed graffiti on public or private real or personal property of another. 
2.  A minor who has confessed to, admitted to, or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a violation of Section 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6, or 640.7 of the Penal Code, or a minor convicted by final judgment of a violation of Section 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6, or 640.7 of the Penal Code, or a minor declared a ward of the juvenile court pursuant to Section 602 of the Welfare and Institutions Code by reason of the commission of an act prohibited by Section 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6, or 640.7 of the Penal Code. 
3.  A parent or guardian having custody and control of a minor who is a responsible party, as defined in this section. 
4.  Any person who owns, possesses, occupies, or otherwise has responsibility for the repair or maintenance of personal or real property on which there exists graffiti. 
"Structure" shall mean any structure as defined in the city's building code, and shall include, but not be limited to, buildings, walls, fences, sidewalks, curbs, poles and signs. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 2, 12-9-2014)  
9.24.040 - Graffiti declared a public nuisance. 
Graffiti on public or private property is a condition of blight that not only depreciates the value of property which has been the target of such vandalism, but also depreciates the value of the adjacent and surrounding properties so as to create a negative impact. Pursuant to California Government Code Section 38771, the city council hereby declares that the presence of graffiti on any surface of a structure, sidewalk, curb, vehicle, tree, shrub, rock or tangible item, or on any portion of publicly or privately owned real or personal property constitutes a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 2, 12-9-2014)  
9.24.050 - Prohibition against maintenance of graffiti. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, cause, place, apply or permit the maintenance, placement or application of any graffiti on any surface of a structure, sidewalk, curb, vehicle, tree, shrub, rock or other tangible item, which is visible from publicly or privately owned real property, public street, sidewalk, alley, or other public right-of-way or area open to the public. 
B.  In the event the owner or manager or person in control of property where graffiti has been found fails to provide consent for the city to enter upon the property for the purpose of removing graffiti in accordance with this chapter, the property owner or manager or person in control shall remove the graffiti at private expense within twenty-four (24) hours of receipt of written or verbal notification by the city of the obligation to do so. No owner, manager or person in control of property shall permit graffiti to remain affixed to such property for a period in excess of twenty-four (24) hours after receipt of such notification. 
C.  The city council declares that a violation of this section is a public nuisance which is subject to abatement pursuant to the abatement provisions set forth in Chapter 8.28. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 2, 12-9-2014)  
9.24.060 - Appropriation of funds. 
The city may appropriate money from other funds to use to remove graffiti from publicly or privately owned real or personal property, and to replace or repair publicly or privately owned property that has been defaced with graffiti that cannot be removed cost effectively, pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 9.24.070. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 2, 12-9-2014)  
9.24.070 - Use of city funds to repair damages caused by graffiti. 
A.  The city may use funds appropriated pursuant to Section 9.24.060 to remove graffiti from publicly or privately owned real or personal property, and to replace or repair publicly or privately owned property that has been defaced with graffiti that cannot be removed cost effectively. This section authorizes only the removal of the graffiti itself, or, if the graffiti cannot be removed cost effectively, the repair or replacement of that portion of the property that was defaced; it does not authorize the painting, repair or replacement of other parts of the property that were not defaced. Such removal, repair or replacement may only be performed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and/or Chapter 8.28. 
B.  The local law enforcement agency may promulgate procedures for pre-removal preservation of sufficient evidence of the graffiti for criminal prosecutions pursuant to Section 602 of the Welfare and Institutions Code pertaining to the person(s) who created, caused or committed the graffiti. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 2, 12-9-2014)  
9.24.080 - Abatement of graffiti by city. 
The city manager, or his or her designee, is authorized to summarily abate a public nuisance caused by the presence of graffiti, pursuant to the following conditions: 
A.  In abating the public nuisance from public property owned or leased by the city, the painting, repair, and/or replacement of an area more extensive than where the graffiti is located shall not be authorized, except where the city manager, or his or her designee, determines that a more extensive area must be repainted, repaired, and/or replaced. 
B.  Where the structure or surface is owned by a public entity other than the city, the removal of graffiti by city agents may be performed only after securing the consent of the public entity having jurisdiction over the structure or surface. In abating the public nuisance from a structure or property owned by another public entity, the painting, repair, and/or replacement of an area more extensive than where the graffiti is located shall not be authorized, except where: 
i.  The city manager, or his or her designee, determines that a more extensive area must be repainted, repaired, and/or replaced in order to avoid aesthetic disfigurement to the neighborhood or community; or 
ii.  The other public entity agrees in writing to pay for the costs of repainting, repairing, and/or replacing a more extensive area. 
C.  Where the structure or surface is privately owned, the removal of graffiti by city agents may be performed only after securing the written consent of the owner or possessor. In abating the public nuisance from a structure or property owned by a private party, the painting, repair, and/or replacement of an area more extensive than where the graffiti is located shall not be authorized, except where: 
i.  The city manager, or his or her designee, determines that a more extensive area must be repainted, repaired, and/or replaced in order to avoid aesthetic disfigurement to the neighborhood or community; or 
ii.  A responsible party agrees in writing to pay for the costs of repainting, repairing, and/or replacing a more extensive area. 
D.  As an alternative to the procedures provided in this section, enforcement officers shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal of graffiti in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 8.28, and may utilize the cost recovery procedures set forth therein. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 2, 12-9-2014)  
9.24.090 - Costs of abatement by city; liability. 
A.  For purposes of this section and Sections 9.24.100 and 9.24.110, "abatement and related administrative costs" include, but is not limited to, court costs, attorney's fees, costs of removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material, costs of repair and replacement of defaced property, costs of administering and monitoring the participation of a defendant and his or her parents in a graffiti abatement program, and the law enforcement costs incurred by the city in identifying and apprehending the person who created, caused or committed the graffiti. 
B.  City abatement of a graffiti nuisance shall be at the expense of the person who created, caused or committed the nuisance. The city may recover its abatement and related administrative costs incurred in abatement of graffiti in accordance with Sections 9.24.100 and 9.24.110. 
C.  All responsible parties, as defined in this chapter, for graffiti at or on a particular property shall be jointly and severally liable for graffiti nuisance abatement and related administrative costs. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 2, 12-9-2014)  
9.24.100 - Graffiti nuisance abatement lien. 
A.  The city may make the expense of a graffiti nuisance abatement a lien against real property owned by the minor or other person who created, caused or committed the graffiti, and may further make such expense a personal obligation against the minor or other person. 
B.  The parent or guardian having custody and control of a minor described in subsection (A) shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor. The city may make the expense of abatement a lien against real property owned by a parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor. 
C.  Prior to the recordation of a lien against real property owned by a person who caused, created or committee the graffiti nuisance, or property owned by that person's parent or guardian, if applicable, the city shall notify the person of that fact. Such notice shall describe the parcel of property which is to be subject to the lien, state the amount which the person, parent or guardian is required to pay pursuant to this chapter and indicate that unless payment is received by the city within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice, the lien shall be recorded against the described real property. 
D.  The notice required by this section shall be personally served upon the minor or other person who caused, created or committee the graffiti nuisance, or the minor's parent or legal guardian. If personal service cannot be made after diligent search, the notice may be posted in a conspicuous place on the property where city abatement occurred and published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city for a period of ten (10) days. 
E.  If the person parent or guardian to whom notice has been given has not paid the amount set forth in the notice required by this section within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice or within thirty (30) days of completion of the publication of the notice, the city may record the nuisance abatement lien against the parcel of property described in the notice. 
F.  The nuisance abatement lien authorized by this section shall specify the amount of the lien, the fact that it is recorded on behalf of the city, the date of the abatement order, the street address, legal description and assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed and the name and address of the record owner of the parcel. 
G.  The nuisance abatement lien shall be recorded in the county recorder's office in the county in which the parcel of land is located unless payment is received as set forth in subsection (E). 
H.  If the nuisance abatement lien is discharged, released or satisfied, through payment of foreclosure, notice of discharge containing the information specified in subsection (F) shall be recorded. 
I.  The city may bring a foreclosure action to satisfy the nuisance abatement lien. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 2, 12-9-2014)  
9.24.110 - Special assessment for graffiti nuisance abatement. 
A.  As an alternative to the procedure set forth in Section 9.24.100, the city may make the expense of a graffiti nuisance abatement a special assessment against a parcel of land owned by the minor or other person who created, caused or committed the graffiti nuisance or by the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor. 
B.  Prior to levying a special assessment against property owned by a person who created, caused or committed the graffiti nuisance, or that person's parent or guardian, if applicable, the city shall notify the person of that fact. Such notice shall describe the parcel of property which is to be subject to the special assessment, state the amount which the person, parent or guardian is required to pay pursuant to this chapter, and indicate that unless payment is received by the city within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice, the special assessment shall be levied against the described real property. The notice will also specify that the property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments. 
C.  The notice required by this section may be served by personal service or by certified mail upon the person, parent or guardian. The failure of such person to receive notice shall not invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to this section. 
D.  If the person, parent or guardian to whom notice has been given has not paid the amount set forth in the notice required by this section within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice or within thirty (30) days of completion of the publication of the notice, the city may levy the special assessment against the property identified in the notice. Notices or instruments relating to the abatement and/or special assessment may be recorded. 
E.  The city may conduct a sale of vacant residential developed property for which the payment of a special assessment, levied pursuant to this section, is delinquent, in accordance with applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 2, 12-9-2014)  
9.24.120 - Violations; penalties. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any requirement of this chapter. Each day or portion thereof that a violation occurs or is present constitutes a separate offense. Any person in violation of this chapter is subject to the penalty provisions set forth in Chapter 1.12. 
B.  Any person who violates any provision or fails to comply with any requirement of this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation. The civil penalty prescribed may be sought in addition to any other remedy. The city is authorized to seek recovery by any means authorized by law. The parent or legal guardian having custody and control of a minor offender shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor. 
C.  Any graffiti created, caused or committed by a minor that results in the defacement of publicly or privately owned real or personal property shall be attributed to each parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor for all purposes of civil damages, including court costs and attorney's fees, to the prevailing party, and the parent or guardian having custody and control shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor for any damages resulting from said graffiti, in an amount not to exceed thirty-nine thousand three hundred dollars ($39,300.00), or any amount as may be adjusted by the California Judicial Council, pursuant to and in accordance with California Civil Code Section 1714.1. 
D.  Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period finding that any of the following persons is responsible for graffiti that may be abated as a nuisance in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.24.080 or Chapter 8.28, the court may order such person to pay treble the costs of the abatement: 
i.  An owner of property; 
ii.  A minor who has confessed to, admitted to, or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a violation of Section 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6, or 640.7 of the Penal Code; 
iii.  A minor convicted by final judgment of a violation of Section 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6, or 640.7 of the Penal Code; or 
iv.  A minor declared a ward of the juvenile court pursuant to Section 602 of the Welfare and Institutions Code by reason of the commission of an act prohibited by Section 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6, or 640.7 of the Penal Code. 
E.  The following additional penalties may also be imposed: 
1.  Suspension or delay of issuance of a driver's license upon a conviction for graffiti/vandalism which was committed while the offender was thirteen (13) years of age or older, pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 13202.6; 
2.  Performance of community service, including graffiti removal service, by a minor determined to be a ward of the court as a result of committing a graffiti/vandalism offense in the city, pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Section 727.5; 
3.  When a person has been convicted of creating, causing or committing graffiti or of possessing a destructive implement with intent to commit graffiti, and the offense was committed when the person was under the age of eighteen (18) years, in lieu of community service such person and his or her parent or guardian may be ordered to keep a specified property in the city free of graffiti for at least sixty (60) days, pursuant to Penal Code Section 594.8. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 2, 12-9-2014)  
9.24.130 - Collection of abatement costs through the juvenile court 
A.  For purposes of this section only, the following definitions are applicable to this section only: 
1.  "Minor" means a person under the age of eighteen (18) years who has been convicted of violation of Section 594, 594.3, 594.4, 640.5, 640.6 or 640.7 of the Penal Code, or has been found to be a person described by Section 602 of the Welfare and Institutions Code by reason of the commission of an act prohibited in the Penal Code sections identified in this subdivision. 
2.  "Graffiti abatement costs and expenses" means: 
i.  The average law enforcement costs per unit of measure incurred in identifying and apprehending a minor; and 
ii.  The average cost per unit of measure incurred by the city in removing graffiti; and 
iii.  The average cost per unit of measure incurred by the city in repairing and replacing property of the types frequently defaced with graffiti that cannot be removed cost effectively. 
B.  Cost findings shall be reviewed at least once every three years to ensure their adequacy. Recommendations shall be made to the city council regarding any appropriate updates to the amounts of graffiti abatement costs and expenses. City council may adopt updated cost findings by resolution. Immediately after adoption, the city clerk shall forward a certified copy of the adopted cost findings to the clerk of the Los Angeles County juvenile court and the Los Angeles County probation officer. 
C.  The Los Angeles County probation officer is hereby authorized, on behalf of the city, to collect from the minor, the minor's estate or the minor's parent or guardian, the city's graffiti abatement costs and expenses through juvenile court proceedings, and to promptly transfer said funds to the city. 
D.  Upon the request of the probation officer, the city shall promptly transmit to the probation officer data about the city's expenditure of resources for graffiti abatement in a particular case, for collection pursuant to this part. That data shall be sufficient to enable the probation officer and the juvenile court to calculate the costs to the city for that particular graffiti abatement. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 2, 12-9-2014)  
9.24.140 - Conditions to issuance of city permits and approvals. 
A.  In approving tentative or parcel maps, subdivision maps, conditional use permits, variances, planning director's review approval, or other discretionary land use entitlements, the city may consider imposing conditions reasonably related to the control of graffiti or the mitigation of the impacts of graffiti, or both. Such conditions may include, without limitation, any or all of the following: 
1.  Requiring the installation and use of city-approved anti-graffiti materials on surfaces which are likely to be graffiti attracting surfaces; 
2.  Requiring the installation and use of landscaping to screen or provide a barrier to surfaces which are prone to graffiti or likely to be a graffiti attracting surface; 
3.  Requiring the installation and use of additional lighting to areas that are likely to be graffiti attracting surfaces and areas adjacent thereto; 
4.  Requiring the owner, developer or other applicant to immediately remove any graffiti, to the city's satisfaction; 
5.  Requiring the owner, developer or other applicant to grant to the city, in writing, the right of entry onto the property and to remove graffiti on any structure, surface or portion of the premises; 
6.  Requiring the owner, developer or other applicant to supply the city with sufficient matching paint and/or anti-graffiti material on demand for use in the abatement of graffiti by city agents. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 2, 12-9-2014)  
9.24.150 - Retail display of graffiti implements. 
Every person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail commercial establishment selling graffiti implements, containing anything other than a solution which can be removed with water after it dries, shall store or cause such graffiti implements to be stored in an area that may be viewable by but is not accessible to the public in the regular course of business without employee assistance, pending the lawful sale or disposition of each graffiti implement. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 2, 12-9-2014)  
9.24.160 - Reward for information. 
The city may offer and pay rewards for information leading to the identification, apprehension and conviction of any person who willfully or maliciously damages or destroys any real or personal property within the city. Rewards shall be in an amount established by resolution of the city council. Eligibility for rewards shall be determined by the city council following receipt of a report from city personnel indicating that information was received which led to the arrest and conviction of a person for willful or malicious damage to or destruction of public or private property within the city, and indicating the final disposition of such matter. No law enforcement officers, municipal officers or employees of the city shall be eligible for such reward. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 2, 12-9-2014)  
9.24.170 - Liability for amount of rewards. 
Any person who is adjudicated guilty of willful or malicious destruction of or damage to property shall be liable to the city for the amount of any reward paid pursuant to this chapter. If such person is a minor who is unable to pay such amount, the parent or legal guardian of that minor shall be liable for such amount. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 2, 12-9-2014)  
9.24.180 - Remedies not exclusive. 
The abatement of graffiti or the assessment of civil penalties against a responsible person shall not prejudice or adversely affect any other civil, administrative or criminal action that may be brought relating to a graffiti nuisance. A civil or criminal action may be brought concurrently with any other process regarding the same violation. Disposition of a criminal prosecution relating to a graffiti nuisance does not preclude the city from seeking full cost recovery as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 2, 12-9-2014)  
Chapter 9.28 - SHORTWAVE RADIO RECEIVER REGULATIONS 
 
9.28.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, "shortwave radio receiver" means and includes any radio receiver or other device capable of receiving messages or communications transmitted on any radio transmission station operating on a frequency between one thousand six hundred (1,600) kilocycles and two thousand five hundred (2,500) kilocycles, or on a frequency between thirty (30) megacycles and forty (40) megacycles, or between one hundred fifty (150) megacycles and one hundred sixty (160) megacycles. 
(Prior code § 4-1.27)  
9.28.020 - Vehicles. 
Except as provided in Section 9.28.050, every person who, without obtaining a permit from the sheriff or from the forester and fire warden authorizing him to do so, equips any vehicle with, or operates any vehicle equipped with, a shortwave radio receiver is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 4-1.28)  
9.28.030 - Permit from forester and fire warden. 
The forester and fire warden may issue permits for equipment of vehicles with shortwave radio receivers which can receive messages broadcast by the forester and fire warden, and for the operation of vehicles so equipped in accordance with the terms and conditions prescribed by him, if he finds as a fact that the operation of such vehicle so equipped will be of material aid to the forester and fire warden in the performance of his duties. 
(Prior code § 4-1.29)  
9.28.040 - Permit from sheriff. 
The sheriff may issue permits for equipment of vehicles with shortwave radio receivers other than those described in this section and for the operation of vehicles so equipped in accordance with the terms and conditions prescribed by him, if he finds as a fact that the operation of such vehicle so equipped will be of material aid to the sheriff in the enforcement of the laws of the state or the ordinances of this city. 
(Prior code § 4-1.30)  
9.28.050 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of Section 9.28.030 do not apply to: 
A.  A vehicle owned or operated by the United States, the state of California, any county, city and county, or municipality of this state, or any subdivision agency, or instrumentality of the foregoing if the department head or other governmental officer in responsible control over the operation of such vehicle has expressly ordered, authorized or approved the use of a shortwave radio receiver therein. 
B.  Any vehicle owned or operated by a person or association of persons licensed by the Federal Communications Commission to operate a fixed or mobile shortwave transmission station, one of the authorized purposes of which is to communicate, by radio with such vehicle or with other vehicles owned or operated by such person or association. The owner of such vehicle coming within the foregoing exemption shall inform the sheriff of such use and give him the license number of the vehicle. Failure to do so is a misdemeanor. 
C.  Mobile telephone equipment for use in conjunction with communication service furnished by public utilities under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California or the Federal Communications Commission. 
(Prior code § 4-1.31)  
9.28.060 - Interception of message. 
Every person who intercepts, overhears or receives any message or communication transmitted by any radio transmission station operating upon a wavelength or radio frequency assigned by the Federal Communications Commission for use by any police or law enforcement department or county forester and fire warden, and who, for the financial benefit of himself or another, communicates such message or communication to another or directly or indirectly uses the information so obtained is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 4-1.32)  
9.28.070 - Violation—Penalty. 
Every violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months or by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Prior code § 4-1.33)  
Chapter 9.30 - ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE VEHICLES 
 
9.30.010 - Abatement of nuisance vehicles. 
A.  Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Carrying illegal weapons" means the unlawful possession of any firearm or weapon in a vehicle. 
"Controlled substance" shall have the meaning set forth in Section 11007 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
"Driver" means any person who drives or is in physical control of a vehicle. 
"Illegal dumping" means the disposing of rocks, soil, grass clippings, branches, leaves, equipment, vehicles, furniture, furnishings or accessories, or any other item, material, debris or liquid or solid waste on any public property or private property without the consent of the owner thereof. 
"Prostitution" means engaging in lewd or sexual conduct for money or other consideration, including, but not limited to, any conduct prohibited by Penal Code Sections 647(b) and 653.20 et seq. 
"Unlawful possession" means either the possession of a firearm or weapon that is unlawful pursuant to the provisions of Penal Code Section 12020, or the possession or operation of an otherwise lawful firearm or weapon the possession of which is prohibited by operation of law including, but not limited to, those prohibitions set forth in Penal Code Sections 12021, 12025, 12031, 245, 246 and 247. 
"Vehicle" means any transportation device that requires the driver to have in his or her immediate possession a valid driver's license for the appropriate class of vehicle being driven. 
(Ord. 826 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 818 § 2 (part), 2003)  
9.30.020 - Abatement of nuisance vehicle by seizure and forfeiture. 
A.  Any vehicle used for the purpose of: 
1.  Soliciting or attempting to solicit an act of prostitution, or loitering for the purpose of soliciting an act of prostitution; 
2.  Possessing, transporting, attempting to sell, use or acquire any controlled substance; 
3.  Carrying illegal weapons; or 
4.  Engaging in or attempting to engage in an act of illegal dumping 
is declared a nuisance, and the vehicle shall be enjoined and abated as provided in this chapter. 
B.  Any person or his or her servant, agent or employee who owns, leases, conducts or maintains any vehicle used for any of the purposes or acts set forth in this section is responsible for creating a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 826 § 2 (part), 2004: Ord. 818 § 2 (part), 2003)  
9.30.030 - Title to vest in the city. 
All right, title and interest in any vehicle described in this chapter shall vest in the city upon commission of the act giving rise to the nuisance under this chapter. 
(Ord. 818 § 2 (part), 2003)  
9.30.040 - Seizure of vehicle. 
A.  A peace officer may seize a vehicle subject to forfeiture under this chapter upon the issuance of an order by a court having jurisdiction of the vehicle. Seizure without court order may be made in any of the following circumstances: 
1.  The seizure is incident to an arrest or search under a search warrant; 
2.  There is probable cause to believe the vehicle was used in violation of this chapter. 
B.  A peace officer seizing a vehicle under this section shall complete a receipt in accordance with Penal Code Section 1412 and deliver it to the person from whose possession the vehicle was seized. 
C.  An immediate investigation shall be made by the Los Angeles County Sheriff Department as to any potential claimant to a vehicle whose right, title, interest, or lien is of record in the Department of Motor Vehicles of this or any other state or appropriate federal agency. If the Los Angeles County Sheriff Department finds that any person, other than the registered owner, is the legal owner, and the ownership did not arise subsequent to the date and time of arrest or seizure of the vehicle or notification of the forfeiture proceedings, it shall within two business days of the vehicle's seizure, send a notice of seizure to the legal owner at his or her address appearing on the records of the Department of Motor Vehicles of this or any other state or any appropriate federal agency. 
D.  The notice of seizure sent pursuant to the requirements of Section 9.30.040 shall set forth the time in which a claim of interest in the vehicle seized or subject to forfeiture is required to be filed. 
E.  A vehicle seized pursuant to this section, where appropriate may be held as evidence in any proceeding brought by the district attorney. 
(Ord. 818 § 2 (part), 2003)  
9.30.050 - Forfeiture and notice of intended forfeiture of vehicle. 
A.  The district attorney may, pursuant to this section, order the forfeiture of vehicles seized under this section. 
B.  If the district attorney determines that the factual circumstances warrant forfeiture of the vehicle described in this chapter, the district attorney shall serve a notice of intended forfeiture upon any person who has an interest in the seized vehicle. The notice shall be served as soon as practicable, but in any event within ninety (90) days of the seizure of the vehicle subject to forfeiture. 
C.  The notice of intended forfeiture shall be served as follows: 
1.  The notice of intended forfeiture shall be served by personal delivery or certified mail, return receipt requested, upon any person who has an interest in the seized vehicle as determined pursuant to Section 9.30.040. 
2.  In the event that the person entitled to service refuses to accept certified return receipt mail or cannot be personally served, service may be made by substituted service. Substituted service may be accomplished by any one of the following methods: 
(a)  By leaving a copy during usual business hours at the recipient's business with the person who is apparently in charge, and by thereafter mailing by first class mail a copy to the recipient where the copy was left; 
(b)  By leaving a copy at the recipient's dwelling or usual place of abode, in the presence of a competent member of the household and thereafter mailing by first class mail a copy to the recipient at the address where the copy was left. 
3.  If the person entitled to service lives out of state and will not accept certified return receipt mail, then service may be made by first class mail. 
4.  If the person entitled to notice cannot be located, or service cannot be effected as set forth in this subsection, service may be made by publication in a Lancaster newspaper of general circulation. Service shall be deemed sufficient when it is accomplished pursuant to Government Code Section 6063. 
D.  A notice of intended forfeiture shall include: 
1.  A description of the vehicle; 
2.  The date and place of seizure; 
3.  The violation of law alleged with respect to forfeiture of the property; 
4.  The instructions for filing and serving a claim with the court pursuant to Section 9.30.060 and time limits for filing a claim. 
(Ord. 818 § 2 (part), 2003)  
9.30.060 - Claim opposing forfeiture and court proceedings. 
A.  A person claiming an interest in the vehicle seized pursuant to this chapter must within ten (10) calendar days from the date of the notice of intended forfeiture or within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of first publication of the notice of seizure, file with the Superior Court of the County, a Claim Opposing Forfeiture, verified in accordance with Section 446 of the Code of Civil Procedure, stating his or her interest in the property. An endorsed copy of the claim shall be served upon the district attorney within ten (10) calendar days of the filing of the claim. 
B.  If a verified claim is filed in accordance with this section, the forfeiture proceeding shall be set for hearing within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the claim is filed. 
C.  The hearing shall be before the Superior Court of Los Angeles County. The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure shall apply to proceedings under this section unless otherwise inconsistent with the provisions or procedures set forth in this section. However, in proceedings under this section, there shall be no joinder of actions, coordination of actions, except for forfeiture proceedings, or cross-complaints, and the issues shall be limited strictly to the questions related to this section. 
D.  With respect to vehicles described in this chapter for which forfeiture is sought and as to which forfeiture is contested, the district attorney shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was used as set forth in this chapter. 
E.  Upon proof that the property was used for any of the purposes set forth in this chapter, the court shall declare the property a nuisance and order that the property be forfeited, sold, and the proceeds distributed as set forth in Section 9.30.070. 
F.  If no claims are timely filed, the district attorney shall prepare a written declaration of forfeiture of the vehicle to the city. A written declaration of forfeiture signed by the district attorney under this section shall be deemed to provide good and sufficient title to the forfeited property. The proceeds from the disposal of the vehicle declared forfeited by the district attorney shall be distributed in accordance with Section 9.30.080. The district attorney ordering forfeiture pursuant to this section shall provide a copy of the declaration of forfeiture to any person who received notice of the forfeiture proceedings. 
(Ord. 818 § 2 (part), 2003)  
9.30.070 - Disposal of vehicle and distribution of proceeds. 
In all cases where vehicles seized pursuant to this section are forfeited to the city, the vehicles shall be sold, or if cash is paid as settlement in lieu of forfeiture of the vehicle, the proceeds of sale or settlement shall be distributed and appropriated as follows: 
A.  To the bona fide or innocent purchaser, conditional sales vendor, mortgagee or lien holder of the property, if any, up to the amount of his or her interest in the property, when the court or city attorney or district attorney declaring the forfeiture orders a distribution to that person. 
B.  To the district attorney for all expenditures made or incurred by the office in connection with the enforcement of this section, including but not limited to, costs for equipment, investigation, supplies, litigation, insurance and liability resulting from enforcement of this section and costs of publication of the notices set forth in Section 9.30.050 and to local law enforcement for costs related to the sale of the vehicle, including expenditures for any necessary repairs, storage, or transportation of any vehicle seized under this section. 
C.  The remaining funds shall be distributed to the city. 
D.  The funds distributed to the city pursuant to this section shall not supplant any funds that would, in the absence of this subsection, be made available to support the law enforcement and prosecutorial efforts of these agencies. 
(Ord. 818 § 2 (part), 2003)  
Chapter 9.32 - CRIME FREE ZONES 
 
9.32.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a procedure for the designation of crime free zones within the city. 
(Ord. 817 § 2 (part), 2003)  
9.32.020 - Definitions. 
"Disperse" means to depart from the designated crime free zone and not to reassemble within the crime free zone with anyone from the group ordered to depart for the duration of the zone. 
"Crime free zone" means an area that is established pursuant to Section 9.32.030. 
"Illegal drug" has the same meaning as the term "controlled substance" in Section 11007 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
For purposes of this chapter, a "public place" means the public way and any other location open to the public, whether publicly or privately owned, including, but not limited to any street, sidewalk, avenue, highway, road, curb area, alley, park, playground or other public ground or public building, any common area of a school, hospital, apartment house, office building, transport facility, shop, privately owned place of business, to which the public is invited, including any place of amusement, entertainment, or eating place. Any "public place" also includes the front yard area, driveway and walkway of any private residence, business or apartment house. 
"Sheriff's department" means the Los Angeles County Sheriff. 
(Ord. 817 § 2 (part), 2003)  
9.32.030 - Procedure for establishing a crime free zone. 
A.  The city council may declare any area a crime free zone by adopting a resolution setting forth the boundaries of such area. 
B.  In determining whether to designate a crime free zone, the city council shall consider the following: 
1.  The occurrence of a disproportionately high number of arrests for the possession or distribution of illegal drug crimes against property and crimes against persons in the proposed crime free zone; 
2.  Objective evidence or verifiable information that shows that illegal drugs are being sold and distributed within the proposed crime free zone; and 
3.  Any other verifiable information from which the city council may ascertain whether the health and safety of residents who live in the proposed crime free zone are endangered by the purchase, sale, or use of illegal drugs or other illegal activity. 
(Ord. 817 § 2 (part), 2003)  
9.32.040 - Notice of a crime free zone. 
Upon the designation of a crime free zone, the sheriff's department or city shall mark each block within the crime free zone by post the following information in the immediate area, of, and on the borders around, the crime free zone: 
A.  A statement that the area has been designated a crime free zone; 
B.  The boundaries of the crime free zone; 
C.  A statement of the effective dates of the crime free zone designation; and 
D.  Any other additional notice to inform the public of the crime free zone. 
(Ord. 817 § 2 (part), 2003)  
9.32.050 - Supplemental procedure. 
The prohibitions set forth in this chapter are supplemental to any similar prohibitions set forth in state law. 
(Ord. 817 § 2 (part), 2003)  
Chapter 9.34 - UNPERMITTED CAMPING, LODGING, AND SLEEPING ON PUBLIC STREETS, PUBLIC-OWNED PROPERTY, AND IN PUBLIC PARKS AND OTHER PROHIBITED PUBLIC PLACES 
 
9.34.010 - Unpermitted camping, lodging and sleeping prohibited. 
A.  No person shall camp, lodge, or sleep on a public street (including in a vehicle parked on a public street), on a publicly-owned property, and in public parks and other prohibited public places, provided that nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit camping in public campgrounds pursuant to a permit or license authorized under federal, state or local statute or ordinance. 
B.  "Camping" means residing in or using any public street, publicly-owned property, public park, or other prohibited public place for living accommodation, lodging, or sleeping purposes, as exemplified by remaining for prolonged or repeated periods of time not associated with ordinary use of the street, property, or public place, with one's possessions or while storing one's possessions (including but not limited to clothing; sleeping bags, bed rolls, blankets, sheets, hammocks, or other sleeping implements; luggage; backpacks; kitchen utensils; cookware; and food or beverages), cooking or consuming meals, or lodging in a parked vehicle. These activities constitute camping when it reasonably appears in light of all the circumstances that a person is using the street, property, or place as a living, lodging, or sleeping accommodation regardless of his or her intent, or the nature of any other activities in which he or she might also be engaged. 
C.  "Prohibited public places" means any public place not designated as a public campground pursuant to federal, state, or local statute or ordinance and shall include the following: 
1.  Public streets, sidewalks, alleyways, passageways, paseos and rights-of-way; 
2.  Publicly-owned property; 
3.  Public parks, except as may be permitted under Lancaster Municipal Code Section 12.04; 
4.  Public parking lots, whether privately-owned or publicly-owned; 
5.  Public landscaped areas, whether public-owned or privately-owned and maintained pursuant to a public landscape easement; 
6.  Private property that is readily accessible to the general public, or is otherwise open to common or general use or view; 
7.  Vacant lots; 
8.  Drainage culverts and basins. 
(Ord. 819 § 1 (part), 2003)  
9.34.020 - Enforcement and penalties. 
A.  This chapter may be enforced by peace officer and by city of Lancaster employees in accordance with Chapter 1.08 of this Code. 
B.  Violations of this chapter may be punished as set forth in Chapter 1.12 of this Code. 
(Ord. 819 § 1 (part), 2003)  
9.34.030 - Construction with other laws. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect, supersede, or otherwise prevent private causes of action for trespass, or other public civil, penal, or administrative prosecution for trespass or maintaining a nuisance under state or local law. 
(Ord. 819 § 1 (part), 2003)  
Chapter 9.36 - PROHIBITION AGAINST CERTAIN FORMS OF AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION. 
 
9.36.010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this section: 
"Aggressive manner" means any of the following: 
1.  Approaching or speaking to a person, or following a person before, during or after soliciting, asking or begging, if that conduct is intended or is likely to cause a reasonable person to (i) fear bodily harm to oneself or to another, damage to or loss of property, or (ii) otherwise be intimidated into giving money or other thing of value; 
2.  Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another person or an occupied vehicle without that person's consent in the course of soliciting, asking or begging; 
3.  Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of a pedestrian or vehicle by any means, including unreasonably causing a pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical contact; 
4.  Using violent or threatening gestures toward a person solicited either before, during, or after soliciting, asking or begging; 
5.  Persisting in closely following or approaching a person, after the person solicited has been solicited and informed the solicitor by words or conduct that such person does not want to be solicited or does not want to give money or any other thing of value to the solicitor; or 
6.  Using profane, offensive or abusive language which is inherently likely to provoke an immediate violent reaction, either before, during, or after solicitation. 
"Automated teller machine" means any electronic information processing device which accepts or dispenses cash in connection with a credit, deposit, or convenience account. 
"Automated teller machine facility" means the area comprised of one or more automated teller machines, and any adjacent space which is made available to banking customers after regular banking hours. 
"Bank" means any member bank of the Federal Reserve System, and any bank, banking association, trust company, savings bank, or other banking institution organized or operated under the laws of the United States, and any bank the deposits of which are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. 
"Check cashing business" means any person duly licensed as a check seller, bill payer, or pro-rater pursuant to Division 3 of the California Financial Code, commencing with section 12000. 
"Credit union" means any federal credit union and any state-chartered credit union the accounts of which are insured by the Administrator of the National Credit Union Administration. 
"Public place" means a place to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, and includes, but is not limited to, any street, highway, sidewalk, parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, school, place of amusement, park, playground, and any doorway, entrance, hallway, lobby and other portion of any business establishment, an apartment house or hotel not constituting a room or apartment designed for actual residence. 
"Public transportation vehicle" means any vehicle, including a trailer bus, designed, used or maintained for carrying ten (10) or more persons, including the driver; or a passenger vehicle designed for carrying fewer than ten (10) persons, including the driver, and used to carry passengers for hire. 
"Savings and loan bank" means any federal savings and loan bank and any "insured institution" as defined in Section 401 of the National Housing Act, as amended, and any federal credit union as defined in Section 2 of the Federal Credit Union Act. 
"Solicit, ask or beg" includes using the spoken, written, or printed word, or bodily gestures, signs or other means with the purpose of obtaining an immediate donation of money or other thing of value or soliciting the sale of goods or services. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2006)  
9.36.020 - Aggressive solicitation prohibited. 
A.  No person shall solicit, ask or beg in an aggressive manner in any public place. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2006)  
9.36.030 - All solicitation prohibited at specified locations. 
A.  Banks and ATMs. 
1.  No person shall solicit, ask or beg within 30 feet of any entrance or exit of any bank, savings and loan bank, credit union, or check cashing business during its business hours or within thirty (30) feet of any automated teller machine during the time it is available for customers' use. Provided, however, that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility. Provided further that no person shall solicit, ask or beg within an automated teller machine facility where a reasonable person would or should know that he or she does not have the permission to do so from the owner or other person lawfully in possession of such facility. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to prohibit the lawful vending of goods and services within such areas. 
2.  Exemptions. The provisions of Section 9.36.030(A)(1) shall not apply to any unenclosed automated teller machine located within any building, structure or space whose primary purpose or function is unrelated to banking activities, including but not limited to supermarkets, airports and school buildings, provided that such automated teller machine shall be available for use only during the regular hours of operation of the building, structure or space in which such machine is located. 
B.  Motor vehicles and parking lots. 
1.  Motor vehicles. No person shall approach an operator or occupant of a motor vehicle for the purpose of soliciting, asking or begging while such vehicle is located in any public place. 
2.  Parking lots. No person shall solicit, ask or beg in any public Parking lot or structure any time after dark. "After dark" means any time from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise. 
3.  Exemptions. Section 9.36.030(B) shall not apply to any of the following: 
a.  To solicitations related to business which is being conducted on the subject premises by the owner or lawful tenants; 
b.  To solicitations related to the lawful towing of a vehicle; or 
c.  To solicitations related to emergency repairs requested by the operator or other occupant of a vehicle. 
C.  Public transportation vehicles and stops. 
1.  Any person who solicits, asks or begs in any public transportation vehicle, or within twenty (20) feet of any designated or posted public transportation vehicle stop, is guilty of a violation of this section if: 
a.  He or she remains there after being asked to leave by the owner, driver, or operator of a public transportation vehicle; the agent of the owner, driver or operator of a public transportation vehicle; the owner or manager of a public transportation facility; the agent of the owner or manager of a public transportation facility; a member of a security force employed by the public transportation facility; or by a peace officer, as defined in Chapter 4.5 of Title 3 of the California Penal Code (commencing with Pen. Code, § 830); or 
b.  Within the immediately preceding 30 days, he or she engaged in a solicitation at that location and had been asked to leave by a person specified in Section 9.36.030(C)(1)(a) above. 
c.  Section 9.36.030(C)(1)(b) is not violated if a person who has been requested to leave enters the property within the designated period and solicits, asks, or begs with the express authorization of a person specified in Section 9.36.030(C)(1)(a). 
D.  Restaurants. Any person who solicits, asks, or begs in any outdoor or indoor dining area of a restaurant or other establishment serving food for immediate consumption is guilty of a violation of this section if: 
1.  He or she remains there after being asked to leave by the owner, manager or supervisor of the restaurant or other food establishment; the agent of the owner, manager or supervisor of the restaurant; a member of a security force employed by the restaurant; or by a peace officer, as defined in Chapter 4.5 of Title 3 of the California Penal Code (commencing with Pen. Code, § 830), acting at the request of any of the persons specified in this subdivision; or 
2.  Within the immediately preceding thirty (30) days, he or she engaged in a solicitation at that location and had been asked to leave by a person specified in Section 9.36.030(B)(1) above. 
3.  Section 9.36.030(D)(2) is not violated if a person who has been requested to leave enters the property within the designated period and solicits, asks, or begs with the express authorization of a person specified in Section 9.36.030(B)(1). 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2006)  
9.36.040 - Penalty. 
A violation of this section is punishable as a misdemeanor or chargeable at the district attorney's or city prosecutor's discretion. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2006)  
9.36.050 - Severability. 
The provisions of this ordinance are declared to be separate and severable. The invalidity of any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section or portion of this ordinance, or the invalidity of the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this ordinance, or the validity of its application to other persons or circumstances. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2006)  
9.36.060 - Non-exclusivity. 
Nothing in this chapter shall limit or preclude the enforcement of other applicable laws. 
(Ord. 861 § 1 (part), 2006)  
Chapter 9.40 - SPECIAL EVENTS 
 
9.40.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Lancaster Special Events Ordinance." 
(Ord. 889 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.40.020 - Intent and purpose. 
The intent of this chapter is to provide a regulatory framework for permitting special events. Special events shall be conducted so as not to cause any detrimental effects to surrounding properties and the community, and shall not violate any other ordinance or regulation of the city. It is the intent of this chapter to ensure that special events, when conducted are done so in a manner that does not unduly impede, obstruct, impair or interfere with the free use of the public streets, sidewalks, or other public property of the city, and to ensure that there is a mechanism in place to regulate the competing use of public forums. It is also the intent of this chapter to provide a mechanism to meet the expenses incident to the administration of this chapter. The provisions set forth in this chapter shall establish criteria for characterizing events as "special events" and standards and conditions for approving and permitting such special events. 
(Ord. 889 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.40.030 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
"Admission charge" means a tangible benefit, monetary or otherwise, which is expressly or impliedly required as a condition of admittance to a party. Customary courtesies and clearly noncommercial activity such as gifts by guests and voluntary sharing of expenses for meals shall not be considered to be an "admission charge." "Admission charge" shall not include donations for political, community service, charitable or religious purposes. 
"Applicant" means any person, firm, association, corporation, organization, club or ad hoc committee who or which seeks a special event permit from the city, through the director of planning, to conduct or sponsor a special event governed by this chapter. An applicant must be eighteen (18) years of age or older. The applicant shall be the individual who is directly responsible for organizing and/or conducting the event and/or the facility manager. 
"Director of planning" means the director of planning of the city of Lancaster. 
"Entertainment" means providing to the public food and/or beverages; live or recorded music; dancing; mechanical, animal or carnival rides; games of chance; performances and/or plays; audiovisual presentations; amplified sound; competitive or sporting events; and/or promotional events. 
"Extraordinary law enforcement services" means responsive law enforcement services by the Los Angeles County sheriff's department which are in addition to and in excess of the normal law enforcement services provided to the facility or off-site as a direct result of the event at the facility. 
"Facility" means the building, room or place where the special event is to take place. 
"Loud" means any noise caused by the use or operation of any radio, musical instrument, phonograph, television receiver, or other machine or device for the producing, reproducing or amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound, in such a manner, as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of neighbor occupants or any reasonable person residing or working in the area and which produces a noise level which is audible to the human ear at a distance in excess of two hundred (200) feet from the property line of a noise source, which is within any residential area or zone of the city or within five hundred (500) feet of any residential zone. 
"Open to the public" means an event not limited to invitees and otherwise open to any member of the public with or without an admission fee or charge. 
"Permit application fee" means the nonrefundable fee to be paid by the permit applicant at the time the application is filed with the director of planning. A fee schedule shall be set by the city council and shall cover the actual costs of processing and investigating special event applications, and administering the special events permit program. 
"Responsible party" means, for purposes of determining liability for damages to city or public facilities as a result of a special event, any event sponsor(s), promoter(s), facility operator(s), or facility owner(s). 
"Security officer" means a person who possesses a valid state guard permit and is employed by any party associated with an event that would be governed by this chapter. 
"Special event" means, for the purposes of this chapter, an event sponsored by any person, entity, business or group, and at any event venue within the city and open to the public: 
1.  Which is held in any public park or facility or on any public or private property or facility open to the public or not; 
2.  At which fifty (50) or more participants (including sponsors and guests) are present; and 
3.  At which entertainment is provided by or for any person, or made available to any person; or 
4.  For-profit entertainment activities of persons, entities and businesses who or which are currently licensed to regularly provide specified entertainment activities at fixed locations in the city but which holds an event that will foreseeably result in impacts on public safety, health, welfare, and law enforcement resources. 
"Special event," as defined in this section, shall not include: 
1.  An event held in a private residence where no admission is charged, the event is not open or advertised to the public, and no extraordinary law enforcement services are required; 
2.  An event held in a member-only facility at which the only participants are the members (and their invited nonpaying guests) and no extraordinary law enforcement services are required; 
3.  Events sponsored by religious entities held in the religious entity's facility or in the religious entity's property attended by members or their guests and for which no extraordinary law enforcement services are required; 
4.  For-profit entertainment activities of persons, entities and businesses who or which are currently licensed to regularly provide specified entertainment activities at fixed locations in the city and no extraordinary law enforcement services are required; 
5.  Events conducted by nonprofit or political organizations for the purpose of raising funds for such organization at which no extraordinary law enforcement services are required; 
6.  Any entertainment for which other special permits have previously been obtained, such as, but not limited to, parade permits, short-term encroachment permits and city-sponsored events otherwise permitted when the director of planning determines such other permits are more appropriate for the particular event; or 
7.  Any event, series of events or specific type of event may be exempted at the discretion of the director of planning, based upon evidence that the event or events will not impact law enforcement services and will not affect public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. 889 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.40.040 - Permit required. 
No person or entity shall conduct, maintain or advertise a special event, or permit their premises to be used for a special event, without first applying for and obtaining a permit, and timely fulfilling any and all conditions of approval imposed upon the issuance of the permit. Any special event conducted by the city will follow the same review process for approval, but will not require the submittal of a special event application or issuance of a permit. 
(Ord. 889 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.40.050 - Application for special event permit. 
A.  An application for a permit for a special event shall be filed with the director of planning not less than sixty (60) nor more than three hundred sixty-five (365) days before the date proposed for holding a special event. Such application shall be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable processing fee payable to the city of Lancaster in an amount established by resolution of the city council. 
B.  The director of planning, in his or her discretion, may accept for filing an application submitting less than sixty (60) days before the proposed special event and may waive the processing fee. 
(Ord. 889 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.40.060 - Content of application. 
Application for a permit to hold a special event shall be made on forms provided by the city and approved by the director of planning. The application shall include a detailed description of the proposed special event, including but not limited to the following: 
A.  The name and address of the applicant, and if the applicant is a corporation, the names of its principal officers, or if the applicant is a partnership, association, organization or fictitious company, the names of the partners or persons comprising the association, organization or company with the address and telephone number of each; 
B.  The number of persons anticipated to be participating in the event; 
C.  The purpose of the event; 
D.  The date, hours and precise location where the event is to be held; 
E.  The amount of any spectator, participant, entry or other fee, if any, to be charged in connection with the event; 
F.  Type and nature of any vehicles, equipment, or other apparatus to be used in connection with the event; 
G.  Type of goods, wares, merchandise, food, or beverages to be sold or otherwise provided to persons at the event; 
H.  The name and business address of any vendors who will be participating in the event; 
I.  A description of any sound amplification equipment which will be used at the event; 
J.  Whether any alcoholic beverages will be sold at the event; 
K.  A description of the security and medical services that will be provided at the event; 
L.  Whether security will be provided by a person or entity other than the applicant, and, if so, the name, address and telephone number of the person or entity providing such security services; 
M.  A description of the parking contingencies planned for the event; and 
N.  Any additional information the director of planning finds reasonably necessary to determine whether to approve or conditionally approve the permit. 
The application shall be signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury and shall contain an agreement whereby the applicant agrees to fully compensate the city for any damage to public property, as well as to clean and otherwise restore any public event site or other impacted public property to the condition in which it was found prior to the event. 
(Ord. 889 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.40.070 - Action on application for special event permit. 
A.  The director of planning shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application based on the grounds specified in Section 9.40.110. Such action shall be taken not later than fifteen (15) calendar days after the filing of a complete application. The applicant shall be notified of any conditions of approval pursuant to Section 9.40.100 at the time the action on the application is taken. 
B.  If the application is denied or conditionally approved, at the time of taking action on the application, the director of planning shall inform the applicant in writing of the grounds for denial, or of the reason for the imposition of conditions. 
C.  If the director of planning relied upon information regarding the event other than that which was contained in the application, he or she shall inform the applicant of the additional information considered. 
(Ord. 889 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.40.080 - Liability and property damage insurance. 
Prior to the issuance of the special event permit, the applicant shall submit to the director of planning a certificate and endorsement of insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state of California and having a policyholder's rating of "A" (excellent) or better, and a financial rate of "X" or better in "Best's Insurance Reports—Fire and Casualty," or by a company approved in writing by the director of planning, which shall evidence the fact that the applicant has in full force and effect a comprehensive general liability and property damage insurance policy covering every activity of the proposed special event in amounts to be determined by the director of planning, based on the nature and liability potential of the event. Said documents shall name the city, its officers, agents, employees and volunteers as additional insureds and shall indicate that the insurance is primary and any insurance which may be carried by the city shall be considered as excess thereto. The certificate and endorsement shall also indicate that the policy of the insurance cannot be modified or canceled by the insurance carrier without at least thirty (30) days prior written notice to the city. Any certificates and endorsements shall be subject to approval by the city as to form, content, and financial ability of the insurer. The requirements of this section may be waived by the director of planning upon a showing of good cause. Good cause shall include, but not be limited to, a determination that the application of this section would violate the constitutional rights of any individual. 
(Ord. 889 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.40.090 - Hold-harmless agreement. 
Prior to the issuance of a special event permit, the applicant shall provide the city with an executed hold-harmless agreement on a form provided by the director of planning, which shall substantially state that the applicant agrees to indemnify, defend and hold the city of Lancaster and its officers, employees, and agents harmless and free from any liability, penalty, expense or loss of any nature, including, but not limited to, liability for damage or injury to any persons or property caused by any participant to the special event. The agreement shall also state that the applicant agrees to reimburse the city for costs of any extraordinary law enforcement services. 
(Ord. 889 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.40.100 - Conditional approval of special event permit. 
The director of planning may impose additional conditions to a permit in the exercise of his or her reasonable discretion when conditionally granting a permit, including but not limited to: 
A.  Requiring the applicant to retain or hire one or more security officers to provide security at and during the event, said security officers being present and on duty at all times during the event; 
B.  Requiring the applicant to be personally present at all times during the event; 
C.  Requiring the applicant to provide a working telephone where he or she can be reached directly at all times during the event; 
D.  Requiring the posting of the special event permit at the event facility; and/or 
E.  Requiring a refundable security deposit before issuance of the permit toward the costs of city services and/or cost of damages to public facilities that may be associated with such event. 
(Ord. 889 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.40.110 - Grounds for denial of application. 
Permits for special events will be granted at the discretion of the director of planning. A special event permit application may be denied upon evidence that: 
A.  Information contained in the application, or supplementary information requested from the applicant, is false in any material detail; 
B.  The applicant has failed to provide a complete application form after having been notified of the requirement of producing additional information or documents; 
C.  The applicant has not submitted a completed application form in the time provided pursuant to Section 9.40.050; 
D.  The applicant has previously had a permit revoked, in Lancaster or in another jurisdiction, for violation of permit conditions or for unlawful conduct relating thereto and it is reasonably believed that similar violations or unlawful conduct will again occur; 
E.  The granting of the permit will have a substantial adverse impact upon the public health, safety, or order; 
F.  The granting of the permit will result in substantial adverse impacts (including, but not limited to, noise, litter, traffic and congestion) upon the surrounding neighborhood or the community in general; 
G.  Another complete special event application has been previously filed for a different event at the same time and place requested by the applicant, or so close in time and place as to cause traffic congestion or a demand for law enforcement services that the city is unable to meet; 
H.  The time or size of the event will substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic in the immediate vicinity of the event, or disrupt the use of a street at a time when it is usually subject to great traffic congestion; 
I.  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at the site of the event will prevent proper law enforcement, fire, ambulance, or other essential public services to areas contiguous to the event; 
J.  The size or duration of the event will require diversion of so great an amount of law enforcement services that providing for the minimum level of law enforcement services to other areas of the city is jeopardized; 
K.  The event will substantially interfere with construction or maintenance work scheduled to take place upon or along the city streets or a previously granted encroachment permit; 
L.  The event will occur at a time and place where the noise created by the activities of the event will substantially disturb or disrupt the activities of such institutions as schools and hospitals; 
M.  Sponsors have failed to pay the city for previous special events or parade fees and costs; 
N.  The granting of the permit is likely to result in substantial negative impacts upon the delivery of citywide law enforcement services and therefore poses a threat to the public health, safety and order due to the likelihood of the special event resulting in a call for a law enforcement response. 
The director of planning shall state, in writing, the reasons for any denial of the event permit. Any applicant whose application is denied shall have the right to request reconsideration of the denial. Reconsideration must be submitted to the director of planning within five days of issuance of the denial. Said request for reconsideration shall be in writing and shall state any and all reasons of any nature why the director of planning's stated reasons for denial are in error. Within five days of receipt of said request for reconsideration, the director of planning shall send written notice of his or her decision on the reconsideration request to the applicant. 
(Ord. 889 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.40.120 - Revocation of special event permit. 
A special event permit may be revoked at any time if the city finds that one or more of the following conditions exists: 
A.  Circumstances have changed to such a degree that one or more of the findings contained within this chapter can no longer be made; 
B.  The special event permit was obtained in a fraudulent manner; 
C.  The applicant fails, neglects or refuses to fulfill any of the conditions imposed upon the granting of the permit; 
D.  The applicant violates or attempts to violate any law of the state of California, or the provisions of this chapter, or any other law, ordinance or policy of the city. 
Such revocation shall become effective immediately upon order by the director of planning. 
(Ord. 889 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.40.130 - Admission charge parties prohibited. 
No person shall require, impliedly or expressly, any admission charge to any party conducted in a residential zone. 
(Ord. 889 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.40.140 - Imposition of fees for extraordinary law enforcement services. 
A.  When any loud or unruly special event occurs or is held, and it is determined that there is a disruption to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, the person in charge of the premises and the person responsible for the special event or if either of those persons is a minor, then the parents or guardians of the minor, will be held jointly and severally liable for the cost of providing extraordinary law enforcement services and the same may be given a written warning notice of the provisions of this section. 
Sheriff personnel utilized during a second response to the same location within seventeen (17) days after a first warning is issued, to control the disturbance to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, shall be deemed to be a special event providing extraordinary law enforcement services. Furthermore, those persons deemed liable for the cost of law enforcement services shall be deemed to have consented to such liability by failing to immediately take all steps necessary to avoid the need for the second sheriff response. The disturbance causing the second response shall be deemed to be a continuation of the disturbance causing the first response. 
B.  The costs of such extraordinary law enforcement services may include costs of personnel, damages to city property, and injuries to city and sheriff personnel. The charges assessed will be the actual cost of services for controlling the disturbance and restoring the public peace, health, safety or general welfare at the location of the disturbance. Such charges shall be consistent with the current rate being charged to the city by the county of Los Angeles. 
C.  In addition, charges for damage to public property shall be determined and set forth in an official written estimate from the department of public works. The city reserves the right to elect any other legal remedies when deemed necessary. 
D.  When a second sheriff's response to a special event following issuance of a warning occurs, the sheriff's department shall provide the city with a copy of the first response warning issued at the disturbance and with all city-required information. This information shall include the number and type of sheriff personnel and units used, and time spent to control the disturbance. The city will bill the responsible party or parties for costs of providing the extraordinary law enforcement services plus an additional twenty-five (25) percent of said costs of administration to process the bill and collect the charges. Failure to pay the charge, as billed by the city, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. Such costs shall be deemed to be a personal debt of those liable for payment, and may be collected as a debt on a contract. 
(Ord. 889 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.40.150 - Appeals. 
Either the denial of an application for a special event permit or the imposition of conditions not acceptable to the applicant may be appealed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 2.44. 
(Ord. 889 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.40.160 - Violations. 
Any person who willfully fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter, or of any conditions attached hereunder, or who falsifies any information on any application hereunder is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as set forth by state law. Any special event operating in violation of this chapter shall be a public nuisance which may be enjoined or abated as allowed by law. 
(Ord. 889 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.40.170 - Severability. 
In any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council hereby declares it would have passed the ordinance codified in this chapter and adopted this chapter and each section, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases by declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. 889 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 9.46 - CARNIVALS AND OTHER OUTDOOR ENTERTAINMENT EVENTS 
 
9.46.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the city's carnival ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 999, § 2, 8-26-2014)  
9.46.020 - Findings and purpose. 
The city council finds and declares as follows: 
A.  Carnivals and other temporary entertainment events held outdoors or in temporary structures may result in noise, dust, traffic problems and other issues that have a detrimental effect on public health, safety and general welfare. 
B.  It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to mitigate the detrimental effect of carnivals by limiting the operation and location of carnivals and other temporary outdoor entertainment events, and by authorizing the immediate abatement of unlawful carnivals by law enforcement personnel. 
(Ord. No. 999, § 2, 8-26-2014)  
9.46.030 - Definitions. 
"Carnival," for purposes of this chapter, means an event open to the public, including a circus or festival, that offers entertainment rides, midway attractions, games of skill, food booths, animal acts, performances, exhibits, concessions and similar activities. 
A.  For purposes of this chapter, "carnival" also means and includes temporary educational, spiritual, motivational or entertainment events involving the large assemblage of people within a tent or other temporary structure or in the open air. 
B.  For purposes of this chapter, "carnival" does not include a pumpkin patch, Christmas tree lot or other seasonal event or promotional sales/display event that may have incidental rides, food booths or concession stands that are accessory to the main purpose of the event. 
"City" means the city of Lancaster. 
"Code" means the Lancaster Municipal Code, and laws incorporated therein by reference, as well as any adopted and uncodified ordinances. 
"Director" means the city planning director and/or his or her authorized designee(s). 
"Owner" means and includes any person having legal title to any real property in the city, including all persons shown as owners on the last equalized assessment roll of the county assessor's office. Owner also includes any person with powers of attorney, or who is an executor of an estate, trustee, or court appointed administrator, conservator, guardian or receiver. 
"Person," for purposes of this chapter, means and includes any individual, partnership of any kind, corporation, limited liability company, association, joint venture or other organization or entity, however formed, as well as trustees, heirs, executors, administrators, assigns and any public entity or agency that acts as an owner in the city. 
"Responsible person" means any person, whether an owner as defined in this chapter, or a person who leases, rents, occupies or has charge, control or possession of property in the city. The actions or inactions of a responsible person's agent, employee, representative or contractor may be attributed to that responsible person. 
(Ord. No. 999, § 2, 8-26-2014)  
9.46.040 - Carnivals prohibited; exemptions. 
A.  It is unlawful for any owner or other responsible person to conduct, manage, carry on or operate a carnival in the city, or to directly or indirectly allow, maintain, suffer or permit the operation of a carnival on his or her property. 
B.  The prohibition against carnivals does not apply to the following: 
1.  A carnival, as defined herein, that is sponsored, co-sponsored and/or operated, in whole or in part, by the city or any city-affiliated authority, foundation or other city-affiliated entity or organization. 
2.  A carnival that is conducted on property owned by the city or any affiliated authority, foundation or other city-affiliated entity or organization, subject to director's review and approval pursuant to Chapter 17.32. 
3.  A carnival that is conducted on the premises of the Antelope Valley Fairgrounds. 
4.  A carnival that is conducted by a public or private elementary or secondary school or community college when held on the school's premises, subject to director's review and approval pursuant to Chapter 17.32. The school is solely responsible for taking all steps necessary to ensure the safety and security of carnival patrons. The city assumes no liability or responsibility for any damage or injury to persons or property that may result from the carnival. 
5.  A carnival that is conducted by a religious institution when held on the institution's premises, subject to director's review and approval pursuant to Chapter 17.32. The institution is solely responsible for taking all steps necessary to ensure the safety and security of carnival patrons. The city assumes no liability or responsibility for any damage or injury to persons or property that may result from the carnival. 
6.  A carnival that is conducted by a person who has applied for, and been granted, a special exemption by the planning commission, in accordance with Section 9.46.050. 
(Ord. No. 999, § 2, 8-26-2014)  
9.46.050 - Appeal to planning commission for exemption. 
A.  Any person who wishes to seek a special exemption from the general prohibition against carnivals may request a noticed public hearing before the planning commission by filing an appeal form with the city clerk and paying the requisite fee. Upon receipt of the completed form and fee, the director will give notice of the hearing in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 17.36.020. 
B.  The decision of the planning commission is final and conclusive. judicial review of the planning commission's decision is subject to the time limits set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure, Section 1094.6. 
(Ord. No. 999, § 2, 8-26-2014)  
9.46.060 - Public nuisance; violation; penalty. 
A.  The city council finds and declares that an unlawful carnival constitutes a public nuisance subject to abatement by law enforcement by all reasonable means, including, but not limited to, an order requiring the carnival to be disbanded and the citation and/or arrest of any responsible person under any applicable law. 
B.  Any person violating the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
C.  Any person violating the provisions of this chapter is subject to assessment of civil penalties pursuant to Chapter 1.16. 
(Ord. No. 999, § 2, 8-26-2014)  
9.46.080 - Remedies not exclusive. 
The abatement of an unlawful carnival or the assessment of civil penalties against a responsible person shall not prejudice or adversely affect any other civil, administrative or criminal action that may be brought to abate an unlawful carnival or to seek compensation for damages suffered. A civil or criminal action may be brought concurrently with any other process regarding the same violation. 
(Ord. No. 999, § 2, 8-26-2014)  
9.46.090 - Exclusive regulation. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of the code, carnivals are exclusively regulated pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 999, § 2, 8-26-2014)  
9.46.100 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council declares that it would have adopted this chapter, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, phrases, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 999, § 2, 8-26-2014)  
Chapter 9.48 - ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES FOR STATE OFFENSES 
 
9.48.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the City of Lancaster's Administrative Penalties for State Offenses ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 2, 2-10-2015)  
9.48.020 - Findings and purpose. 
The city council finds and declares as follows: 
A.  Pursuant to state law, certain criminal offenses must always be charged as misdemeanors, unless the defendant has a prior conviction for one (1) of a very limited number of extremely violent and/or serious crimes. 
B.  The removal of potentially significant legal consequences resulting from recent changes in state law, as well as the implementation of various state- and county-wide diversion and deferral programs, is likely to embolden certain persons to repeatedly commit these crimes. 
C.  Local businesses may be particularly at risk of suffering significant financial losses through repeated, recurring incidents of shoplifting and burglary. 
D.  It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to protect public health, safety and welfare by implementing an administrative program that will utilize financial disincentives to dissuade persons from committing these offenses in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 2, 2-10-2015)  
9.48.030 - Definitions. 
A.  "City" means the City of Lancaster. 
B.  "Code" means the Lancaster Municipal Code, and laws incorporated therein by reference, as well as any adopted and uncodified ordinances. 
C.  "City manager" means the Lancaster city manager and/or his or her authorized designee(s). 
D.  "Director" means the Lancaster public safety director or his or her authorized designee. 
E.  "Property" or "premises" means any privately- or publicly-owned real property in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 2, 2-10-2015)  
9.48.040 - Enforcement. 
Any county sheriff's deputy, city public safety officer, city community services officer, and any other public officer or employee designated by the city manager shall be authorized to issue administrative citations in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 2, 2-10-2015)  
9.48.050 - Offenses subject to administrative penalties. 
A person who commits any of the following misdemeanor offenses in the city may be issued an administrative citation as provided in this chapter: 
A.  Shoplifting, as set forth in Section 459.5 of the Penal Code; 
B.  Forgery, as set forth in Chapter 4 of Title 13 of Part 1 of the Penal Code; 
C.  Theft, as set forth in Chapter 5 of Title 13 of Part 1 of the Penal Code; 
D.  Buying, receiving or concealing stolen property, as set forth in Section 496 of the Penal Code; 
E.  Unlawful dumping of waste matter, as set forth in Section 374.3 of the Penal Code; 
F.  Disturbing the peace, as set forth in Section 415 of the Penal Code; 
G.  Vandalism, as set forth in Section 594 of the Penal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 2, 2-10-2015)  
9.48.060 - Administrative citations. 
A.  As an alternative to pursuing misdemeanor criminal proceedings, any officer, as defined in this chapter, may issue an administrative citation to a person when the officer has determined, through personal observation or after undertaking standard law enforcement investigatory actions, that the person has committed one (1) of the offenses enumerated in Section 9.48.050. A separate citation will be issued for the commission of each separate or subsequent enumerated offense. 
B.  Within five (5) days after issuance of a citation, an officer shall submit a copy of the citation and a written incident report or statement of facts to the director. Alternatively, the officer may elect to submit the written incident report or statement of facts to the director, who may then issue the citation. 
C.  An administrative citation may be personally given to the offender, or the offender may be served by first class mail to an address which is either: (i) indicated on any form of identification presented to the officer, or (ii) discovered by the officer during the course of his or her standard law enforcement investigatory actions. The date a citation is placed in a U.S. Postal Service mail receptacle shall be the date of service. A declaration of service shall be made by the person mailing the administrative citation showing the date and manner of service by mail and reciting the name and address of the citation addressee. Failure of any responsible person to receive an administrative citation by mail shall not invalidate any citation issued pursuant to this chapter. 
D.  The citation shall be in a city-approved format, and shall include the following information: 
1.  A brief description of the offense committed; 
2.  The date, location and approximate time the offense was committed; 
3.  The Penal Code section of the offense committed, as set forth in Section 9.48.050; 
4.  A statement describing the right to appeal the citation; 
5.  A statement advising that the fine shall be paid to the city within thirty (30) days from the date of the administrative citation, procedure for payment, and the consequences of failure to pay. 
E.  The penalty amounts of administrative citations issued pursuant to this chapter shall be as follows, which city council may periodically adjust by resolution: 
1.  For the first administrative citation, the penalty shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00); 
2.  For the second and any subsequent administrative citation, the penalty shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 2, 2-10-2015)  
9.48.070 - Right of appeal from an administrative citation. 
A.  A person who has been issued an administrative citation pursuant to this chapter may contest the citation by filing a written appeal on a city-approved form to the city clerk within ten (10) calendar days from the date of the citation. The basis for the appeal must be specified in detail on the appeal form. There shall be no filing fee for the appeal, however, a deposit in the amount of the citation must be paid at the time the appeal is filed. If the citation is dismissed as a result of the appeal hearing, the deposit shall be returned to the appellant within thirty (30) days from the date of the written appeal decision. 
B.  Failure of the city clerk to receive a timely appeal constitutes a waiver of the right to contest a citation; in this event, the citation is final and binding. 
C.  As soon as practicable after a timely appeal is filed, the director shall fix a date, time and place for a hearing. The hearing shall be conducted by an independent and impartial hearing officer. Written notice of the time and place for the hearing shall be served by first class mail, at the return address indicated on the appeal form, at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. 
D.  An appellant may request, in writing, that the director reschedule the hearing if the request is made at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the hearing. The director shall grant one (1) continuance of the hearing date. 
E.  Failure of an appellant to appear at the scheduled hearing shall constitute the appellant's waiver of the right to appeal and a forfeiture of the citation amount deposited at the time the appeal was filed. 
F.  Appeal hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. The city bears the burden of proof to establish, by a preponderance of evidence, that the appellant committed the offense that was the basis for the citation. The officer issuing the administrative citation and/or submitting the written incident report or statement of facts shall not be required to appear at the hearing. The hearing officer shall accept testimony by declaration under penalty of perjury relating to the commission of the offense, as set forth in the issuing officer's incident report or statement of facts, and shall consider any other relevant evidence concerning the commission of the offense that the director may present at the hearing. The hearing officer shall also take the testimony of the appellant, and/or his or her witnesses, will consider any other credible relevant rebuttal evidence the appellant may wish to present. The appellant may represent himself or herself or be represented by anyone of his or her choice, including counsel, at his or her sole expense. The appellant may bring an interpreter to the hearing at his or her sole expense. 
G.  The hearing officer shall make findings based on the record of the hearing, and shall prepare a written decision, based on those findings, to either uphold or dismiss the citation. A copy of the written decision shall be served on the appellant by first class mail within ten (10) days after the hearing. If the citation is dismissed, the city shall refund the amount of the citation deposit to the appellant within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision. 
H.  The decision of the hearing officer is final and conclusive, subject only to review by the superior court in accordance with the time limits set forth in Government Code Section 53069.4 and/or Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 2, 2-10-2015)  
9.48.080 - Collection of unpaid administrative citations. 
The city may collect an unpaid administrative citation in any manner authorized by law, including, but not limited to, the following: 
A.  Causing a special assessment to be made upon real property owned by the person to whom the citation was issued; 
B.  Recording a lien upon real property owned by the person to whom the citation was issued; 
C.  Collecting the moneys through the franchise tax board, from personal income tax refunds, unclaimed property claim payments, and/or state lottery winnings. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 2, 2-10-2015)  
9.48.090 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council declares that it would have adopted this chapter, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more sections, subsections, phrases, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 2, 2-10-2015)  
Chapter 9.50 - HUMAN TRAFFICKING AND NUISANCE MOTELS 
 
9.50.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the city's human trafficking and nuisance motels ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1056 , § 1, 3-12-2019)  
9.50.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
"City" means the City of Lancaster. 
"Code" means the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
"City manager" means the city manager of the City of Lancaster and his or her designee(s). 
"Enforcing officer" means and includes any Los Angeles County Sheriff's deputy, Lancaster public safety officer, Lancaster community services officer, Lancaster code enforcement officer, and any other public officer or employee designated by the city manager who shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to issue administrative citations in accordance with this chapter. 
"Guest room" means one or more habitable rooms with facilities for sleeping and sanitation and which may or may not contain a kitchen, kitchenette, cooking facilities or cooking appliances. 
"Human trafficking" means the deprivation or violation of the personal liberty of another, as more particularly described in Section 236.1(h)(3) of the California Penal Code, and includes the act of causing, inducing or persuading a minor to engage in any sex act, as more particularly described in Section 236.1(c) of the California Penal Code. For purposes of this chapter, "sex trafficking" and "human trafficking" may be used interchangeably. 
"Motel" means and includes any structure, or any portion of a structure, containing one or more furnished guest rooms, as defined herein, which are rented, occupied, designed, intended to be used, or used as temporary sleeping or lodging accommodations for one or more persons. For purposes of this chapter, "motel" also includes a hotel, inn, motor lodge, hostel, bed and breakfast, and other similar structures. 
"Operator" means a person who is proprietor of a motel, as defined herein, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sub-lessee, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through an on-site or off-site manager, the manager shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter, and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. 
"Owner" means and includes any person, as defined herein, having legal title to a motel in the city, including all persons shown as owners on the last equalized assessment roll of the Los Angeles County Assessor's Office. Owners include persons with powers of attorney, executors of estates, trustees, or who are court appointed administrators, conservators, guardians or receivers. 
"Person" as used in this chapter, means and includes any individual, partnership of any kind, corporation, limited liability company, association, joint venture or other organization or entity, however formed, as well as trustees, heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns, or any combination of such persons. 
"Responsible person" for purposes of this chapter, means any motel owner, operator and/or manager. The actions or inactions of a responsible person's employee, agent, or representative may be attributed to that responsible person. 
(Ord. No. 1056 , § 1, 3-12-2019)  
9.50.030 - Human trafficking; drug activity; public nuisance. 
A.  The city council finds and declares that it constitutes an unlawful public nuisance for any person to: 
1.  Directly or indirectly maintain or permit the use of a motel for the purpose of human trafficking, sex trafficking, prostitution, lewdness or illegal gambling, as set forth in California Penal Code Sections 11225 et seq.; 
2.  Directly or indirectly maintain or permit the use of a motel for the purpose of selling, storing, serving, manufacturing, cultivating, or giving away any controlled substance, precursor, or analog, as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Sections 11570 et seq.; 
3.  Allow, cause, create, maintain or permit any other public nuisance, as set forth in Lancaster Municipal Code chapter 8.28. 
B.  Any motel at which a nuisance occurs or is present, as set forth in subsection A. of this section, constitutes a nuisance motel, subject to abatement. 
(Ord. No. 1056 , § 1, 3-12-2019)  
9.50.040 - Prevention of use of motel for human trafficking, drug activity or other illegal activity. 
A.  Every owner, operator, manager and/or employee shall be responsible for preventing the use of the motel for human trafficking, drug activity or other illegal activities. Evidence of a person or persons using or intending to use the motel or motel room for human trafficking or drug activity depends on the totality of the circumstances, however, indicators of such illegal activity may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Attempting to rent a room for less than twelve (12) hours, or leaving after only a few hours; 
2.  Paying with cash to avoid a paper trail; 
3.  Attempting to rent a room without presenting valid identification; 
4.  Reserving multiple rooms at once; 
5.  Reserving a room for extended periods of time, but bringing few or no possessions; 
6.  A guest who appears malnourished or physically abused; 
7.  A guest who is dressed inappropriately for his/her age; 
8.  Frequent guests coming and going; 
9.  Frequent vehicles coming and going; 
10.  The smell of marijuana, chemicals and/or other unusual odors coming from a room or rooms. 
B.  An owner, operator, manager and/or employee who suspects human trafficking, drug activity or other illegal activity may be intended or occurring shall notify the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department, Lancaster Station, and the Lancaster Public Safety Department. 
(Ord. No. 1056 , § 1, 3-12-2019)  
9.50.050 - Prohibition against hourly room rental. 
No person shall rent or permit to rent any motel room on an hourly basis. A motel room shall not be rented more than once within a calendar day. 
(Ord. No. 1056 , § 1, 3-12-2019)  
9.50.060 - Registration requirements. 
A.  Every owner, operator, manager and/or employee of any motel shall keep a register containing the name and address of each guest. No owner, operator, manager and/or employee of any motel shall rent or assign a motel room to any person without verifying that the guest has valid photo identification and has accurately and legibly completed the register with the information that corresponds to the identification presented by the guest. The register shall also include the date and time of arrival of each guest and the number or other identifying symbol of the room assigned or rented, and the date and time the guest departs. All registers shall be maintained for a period of three (3) years from the date of entry. No person shall alter, deface or erase any entry in a register so as to make the information illegible or unintelligible. 
B.  No person shall provide any false information, register under a fictitious name, or show or use a forged, altered or counterfeit identification when procuring a motel room. The owner, operator, manager and/or employee shall be responsible for verifying the authenticity of the identification used by the person renting the motel room. 
C.  Inspection of motels and motel registers may be made at any reasonable hour by any enforcing officer for the purpose of confirming compliance with the provisions of this chapter. If permission to inspect is refused or cannot be obtained, the city manager or his/her designee shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure lawful entry and inspect the premises and register, including but not limited to securing an inspection warrant pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1822.50 through 1822.57; provided, however, that if the city manager or his/her designee has reasonable cause to believe that a motel or any room or portion thereof is so hazardous, unsafe or dangerous as to require immediate inspection to safeguard the public health or safety, the city manager or his/her designee shall have the right to immediately enter and inspect said motel or room or portion thereof and may use any reasonable means required to effect the entry and make an inspection. 
(Ord. No. 1056 , § 1, 3-12-2019)  
9.50.070 - Violation; penalty. 
It is unlawful for any responsible person, as defined in this chapter, to violate any provision of this chapter. Any responsible person violating a provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1056 , § 1, 3-12-2019)  
9.50.080 - Administrative citations. 
A.  Any enforcing officer, as defined in this chapter, may issue an administrative citation to a person when the officer has determined, through personal observation or after undertaking standard law enforcement investigatory actions, that the person is a responsible person, as defined in this chapter, who directly or indirectly allowed or maintained a nuisance motel. 
B.  Within five (5) days after issuance of a citation, an officer shall submit a copy of the citation and a written statement of facts to the city manager. Alternatively, the officer may elect to submit the written statement of facts to the city manager, who may then issue the citation. 
C.  An administrative citation may be personally given to the responsible person, or the responsible person may be served by first class mail to an address which is either: (i) indicated on any form of identification presented to the officer, or (ii) discovered by the officer during the course of his or her standard law enforcement investigatory actions. The date a citation is placed in a U.S. Postal Service mail receptacle shall be the date of service. A declaration of service shall be made by the person mailing the administrative citation showing the date and manner of service by mail and reciting the name and address of the citation addressee. Failure of any responsible person to receive an administrative citation by mail shall not invalidate any citation issued pursuant to this chapter. 
D.  The citation shall be in a city-approved format, and shall include the following information: 
1.  The date, location and approximate time of the activity or condition that caused the motel to be a nuisance motel; 
2.  A brief description of the activity, conduct, or condition at the location that constituted an unlawful nuisance as set forth in section 9.50.030 of this chapter; 
3.  A statement describing the right to appeal the citation; 
4.  A statement advising that the fine shall be paid to the city within thirty (30) days from the date of the administrative citation, procedure for payment, and the consequences of failure to pay. 
E.  The penalty amounts of administrative citations issued pursuant to this chapter shall be as follows: 
1.  For the first administrative citation, the penalty shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); 
2.  For the second and any subsequent administrative citation, the penalty shall be five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
F.  The failure of any person to pay a penalty assessed by administrative citation within the time specified on the citation constitutes a debt to the city, which may be collected in accordance with chapter 1.16 of this Code or in any other manner allowable by law. 
(Ord. No. 1056 , § 1, 3-12-2019)  
9.50.090 - Right of appeal from an administrative citation. 
A.  A person who has been issued an administrative citation pursuant to this chapter may contest the citation by filing a written appeal on a city-approved form with the city manager within ten (10) calendar days from the date of the citation. The basis for the appeal must be specified in detail on the appeal form. There shall be no filing fee for the appeal, however, a deposit in the amount of the citation must be paid at the time the appeal is filed. If the citation is dismissed as a result of the appeal hearing, the deposit shall be returned to the appellant within thirty (30) days from the date of the written appeal decision. 
B.  Failure of the city manager to receive a timely appeal constitutes a waiver of the right to contest a citation; in this event, the citation is final and binding. 
C.  As soon as practicable after a timely appeal is filed, the City Manager shall fix a date, time and place for a hearing. The hearing shall be conducted by an independent and impartial hearing officer. Written notice of the time and place for the hearing shall be served by first class mail, at the return address indicated on the appeal form, at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. 
D.  An appellant may request, in writing, that the city manager reschedule the hearing if the request is made at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the hearing. The city manager shall grant one continuance of the hearing date. 
E.  Failure of an appellant to appear at the scheduled hearing shall constitute the appellant's waiver of the right to appeal and a forfeiture of the citation amount deposited at the time the appeal was filed. 
F.  Appeal hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. The city bears the burden of proof to establish, by a preponderance of evidence, that the appellant allowed or maintained a nuisance motel. The officer issuing the administrative citation and/or submitting the written statement of facts shall not be required to appear at the hearing. The hearing officer shall accept testimony by declaration under penalty of perjury relating to the commission of the offense, as set forth in the issuing officer's statement of facts, and shall consider any other relevant evidence concerning the commission of the offense that the city manager may present at the hearing. The hearing officer shall also take the testimony of the appellant, and/or his or her witnesses, and will consider any other credible relevant rebuttal evidence the appellant may wish to present. The appellant may represent himself or herself or be represented by anyone of his or her choice, including counsel, at his or her sole expense. The appellant may bring an interpreter to the hearing at his or her sole expense. 
G.  The hearing officer shall make findings based on the record of the hearing, and shall prepare a written decision, based on those findings, to either uphold or dismiss the citation. A copy of the written decision shall be served on the appellant by first class mail within ten (10) days after the hearing. If the citation is dismissed, the city shall refund the amount of the citation deposit to the appellant within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision. 
H.  The decision of the hearing officer is final and conclusive, subject only to review by the superior court in accordance with the time limits set forth in Government Code Section 53069.4 and/or Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
(Ord. No. 1056 , § 1, 3-12-2019)  
9.50.100 - Remedies not exclusive. 
A.  Any administrative citation pursuant to this chapter shall not prejudice or adversely affect any other civil, administrative or criminal action that may be brought to abate a nuisance motel or to seek compensation for damages suffered. A criminal or civil action may be brought concurrently with any other process regarding the same violation. 
B.  A nuisance motel may be abated in accordance with the provisions set forth in California Penal Code Sections 11225 et seq., California Health and Safety Code Sections 11570 et seq., or utilizing any other civil, judicial or equitable remedy available to the city. 
C.  A nuisance motel may be abated through the revocation or suspension of the owner's or operator's business license, in accordance with the provisions set forth in sections 5.04.070 through 5.04.110 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1056 , § 1, 3-12-2019)  
9.50.110 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council declares that it would have adopted this chapter, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, phrases, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 1056 , § 1, 3-12-2019)  
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC  
Chapter 10.04 - TRAFFIC CODE 
 
10.04.010 - City traffic ordinance. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the traffic ordinance for the city. 
(Ord. 726 § 1, 1997: prior code § 3-2.1)  
10.04.020 - Traffic-control devices. 
A.  Except as set forth in subsection B of this section and in Section 10.04.070 regarding road closures, or as otherwise required by law, the city manager, or his designee, shall have the authority to (i) operate and maintain traffic signals, and modify or install phasing of traffic signals; and (ii) determine the need for, and to install, remove, and maintain, or cause to be installed, removed, and maintained, all traffic-control devices and pavement markings in the city, in accordance with applicable statutes, including without limitation, traffic-control devices to accommodate construction, minimize traffic hazards, or otherwise provide for public safety. Traffic control devices include, without limitation, stop signs, yield right-of-way signs, speed restriction signs, railroad warning approach signs, street name signs, lines and markings on the roadway, and stock crossing signs. 
B.  Approval of the city council shall be required in connection with any of the following activities: 
1.  The installation and removal of traffic signals; 
2.  The creation of one-way streets; 
3.  Causing a street which was previously designated as one way to be open to traffic in both directions; and 
4.  The establishment and amendment of speed limits. 
C.  Traffic-control devices in existence as of the effective date of this section are deemed to comply with the provisions hereof. 
D.  Speed Limits. 
1.  The speed limits, as recommended in the Engineering and Traffic Survey Report, dated October 30, 2003, incorporated herein by reference, is hereby repealed. 
2.  The speed limits, as recommended in the Engineering and Traffic Survey Report, dated August 11, 2005, incorporated herein by reference, is hereby repealed. 
3.  The speed limits, as recommended in the Engineering and Traffic Survey Reports, dated November 1 and 29, 2005, incorporated herein by reference, are hereby repealed. 
4.  The speed limits, as recommended in Section 5.0 and Table 2 of the 2006 Engineering and Traffic Surveys Report, incorporated herein by reference, are hereby repealed. 
5.  The speed limits, as recommended in No.'s 8-11 of the Findings and Recommendations and Table 4 of the Engineering and Traffic Survey Report dated January 2009, incorporated herein by reference, are hereby repealed. 
6.  The speed limits, as recommended in the Engineering and Traffic Survey Report dated August 10, 2010, incorporated herein by reference, are hereby repealed. 
7.  The speed limits, as recommended in the Engineering and Traffic Survey Report dated July 7, 2011, incorporated herein by reference, are hereby repealed. 
8.  The speed limits, as recommended in the Engineering and Traffic Survey Report dated March 2017 and the Addendum dated May 2017, incorporated herein by reference, are hereby established. 
(Ord. 872, § 1, 2007; Ord. 853, § 1, 2006; Ord. 851, § 1, 2006; Ord. 836, § 1, 2004; Ord. 828, § 1, 2004; Ord. 820, § 1, 2003; Ord. 806, § 1, 2002; Ord. 800, § 1, 2001; Ord. 786, § 1(B), 2000; Ord. 726, § 2, 1997; prior code § 3-2.2) 
(Ord. No. 919, § 1, 3-10-2009; Ord. No. 951, § 1, 9-14-2010; Ord. No. 969, § 1, 8-23-2011; Ord. No. 1023, § 1, 6-27-2017 )  
10.04.030 - Signs. 
All traffic markings, stop signs and traffic signs which existed in this city on the date of incorporation thereof, which were erected and placed by the officers and officials of the county of Los Angeles, are declared to be the official traffic signs and regulations of the city and all matters pertaining thereto are hereby ratified and confirmed by this city council. 
(Prior code § 3-2.3)  
10.04.035 - Vehicular cruising. 
A.  No person shall be a driver or passenger of a motor vehicle driven past a traffic-control point in traffic which is congested at or near the traffic control point, within four hours after the vehicle operator has been given an adequate written notice that further driving past the traffic-control point within the time frame is prohibited. 
B.  This section shall not apply to drivers, operators or passengers of the following vehicles: 
1.  Any authorized emergency vehicle as defined in Section 165 of the California Vehicle Code; 
2.  Any publicly owned vehicle of any city, county, district, state or federal agency; 
3.  Any vehicle licensed for public transportation or vehicles which are normally used for business purposes and are engaged in such business use. 
C.  The ranking peace officer on duty within the affected area shall have the authority to establish a traffic-control point for the purpose of regulating vehicular cruising. 
D.  No person shall be in violation of this section unless: 
1.  That person has been given the written notice on a previous driving trip past the traffic-control point and then again passes the control point within the prohibited time frame; and 
2.  The beginning and end of the portion of the street subject to vehicular cruising controls are clearly identified by signs that briefly and clearly state the appropriate provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 726 § 3, 1997)  
10.04.040 - Penalty for vehicular cruising. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of the code, any person who commits a first violation of Section 10.04.035, such violation shall constitute an infraction and upon conviction thereof such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Every person, having been convicted of a violation of Section 10.04.035, who is subsequently convicted of a violation of Section 10.04.035 is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding six months, or by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or both. 
(Ord. 726 § 4, 1997: prior code § 3-2.5)  
10.04.050 - Parking restrictions. 
A.  Parking Trucks in Residential and Commercial Zones. 
1.  It is unlawful for any person, without a permit therefor, to park or store any commercial motor truck truck-trailer, and/or trailer having an unladen weight of eight thousand (8,000) pounds or more, or any commercial truck-trailer and/or trailer, irrespective of weight, upon any public street or on public or private property within the following zones: R (general residential zone), MHP (mobilehome park zone), MDR (moderate-density residential zone), HDR (high-density residential zone) for more than two hours; the C (general commercial zone), CBD (central business district zone), CPD (commercial planned development zone), and the H (hospital zone) for more than four hours. Except in the case of all residential areas, commercial motor trucks will be allowed legally to park on major highways. 
2.  The chief of police, or his designee, shall have the power to issue to any person a parking permit to park vehicles in the areas indicated in subsection (A)(l) of this section, upon application, whenever he finds that conditions are such that it appears the neighborhood or persons therein would not be adversely affected thereby. Such permit shall be issued for a stated period only if one of the following findings can be met: 
a.  That the vehicle is immobile due to accident or mechanical breakdown; 
b.  That the nature of the particular service to be performed or material or equipment to be delivered requires a longer period of time than the limit described in subsection (A)(1) of this section. 
3.  Excluded from the provisions of this section shall be a vehicle operated and parked by a registered transient guest of a motel or hotel if such vehicle is parked within approved designated truck parking areas upon the business premises; and vehicles owned or operated by the commercial use on the private property upon which it is to be parked. Truck parking areas shall be submitted to and approved by the city planning department. 
4.  The chief of police, or his designee, may revoke any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of subsection (A)(2) of this section, whenever any of the terms or conditions thereof have been wilfully violated or when it appears that the neighborhood or persons therein are being adversely affected thereby. Such revocation shall be effective two hours after posting notice thereof on the vehicle in question. 
5.  Any person who feels he is aggrieved by refusal of a permit or revocation of a permit may appeal to the city council for relief and hearing. The decision of the city council upon the appeal shall be final after a hearing thereon. 
6.  Any person who has good cause for being exempted from the operation of provisions of subsection (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section may make a written request, submitted to the city clerk, and shall state the grounds therefor for such exemption. The city clerk shall therewith transmit one copy of the request to the chief of police. The city council shall set the matter for hearing and may, by resolution, grant, deny or modify in whole or in part such request. 
7.  Penalties. If any person shall violate any of the provisions of this subsection A, he shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day during such portion of which any violation of this section is committed, continued, or permitted by such, and shall be punishable therefor as provided by the section. 
B.  Time Limited Parking. Parking prohibited on the south side of Avenue J between Elm Avenue and the alley east of Elm Avenue for a period longer than two hours between the hours of eight a.m. and six p.m., Saturdays and Sundays excepted. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on any private property used or zoned for residential purposes in any area other than on a paved driveway or paved parking area. This section shall not be construed to allow the parking of a vehicle on any driveway or other paved area where such parking is otherwise prohibited by law. 
(Ord. 856 § 1, 2006; Prior code § 3-2.6, 3-2.6.1, 3-2.6.2)  
10.04.055 - Restriction of Oversized Vehicle Parking. 
A.  Definitions. 
1.  For purposes of this section, "bus" shall mean and include a bus, school bus, public paratransit vehicle, or a transit bus, as defined in California Vehicle Code sections 233, 545, 462 and 642, respectively. 
2.  For purposes of this section, "oversized vehicle" shall mean any vehicle, as defined in California Vehicle Code section 670, which is twenty-two (22) feet or more in length, seven (7) feet or more in width and/or seven (7) feet or more in height. "Oversized vehicle" includes, without limitation, any motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, camper, boat, trailer, commercial motor truck or truck-trailer which meets or exceeds any of these dimensions, or any combination of connected vehicles, including but not limited to trailers and semi-trailers as defined in Vehicle Code sections 630 and 550, respectively, which collectively meet or exceed any of these dimensions. 
B.  General Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, store or leave an oversized vehicle on any public street, alley, right-of-way or publicly owned lot in the city at any time. To the extent that there is conflict between this subsection and subsection 10.04.050.A.1, this subsection shall apply. 
C.  Exceptions. Subsection B shall not apply to the following: 
1.  An oversized commercial vehicle which is parked for the immediate pickup or delivery of goods, merchandise, wares or other materials at an adjacent business or residence, provided, however, that such activity does not exceed thirty (30) minutes. 
2.  An oversized vehicle belonging to or under contract with federal, state or local government authorities, a public utility, the city's refuse collection and disposal franchisee, or any emergency vehicle as defined in California Vehicle Code section 165. 
3.  A bus, as defined in this section, provided it is not parked or stored for longer than two (2) hours or is located in an area specifically posted to allow bus parking for a prescribed time. 
4.  An oversized vehicle that is parked in a residential zone for the purpose of and while being actively loaded or unloaded by an owner or occupant of a dwelling, for a period not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours. 
5.  An oversized vehicle used in relation to construction activity at an adjacent property (between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekends), provided that there is a current and valid City building permit or other permit or approval for the activity. The vehicle must be associated with a business for which a current and valid city business license has been issued and must display both a copy of the business license and the vehicle-specific city-issued parking permit at all times the vehicle is parked on a public street, alley, right-of-way or lot. 
6.  An oversized vehicle used by a landscaping business at an adjacent property (between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekends). The vehicle must be associated with a business for which a current and valid city business license has been issued and must display both a copy of the business license and the vehicle-specific city-issued parking permit at all times the vehicle is parked on a public street, alley, right-of-way or lot. 
D.  Nuisance; Violation; Remedies. 
1.  An oversized vehicle parked, stored or left on a public street, alley, right-of-way or lot is hereby declared a public nuisance, subject to abatement, including but not limited to removal and impounding at the owner's expense. 
2.  Any person violating the provisions of this section is subject to the penalty provisions set forth in Chapter 1.12 and/or may be issued a parking, administrative or other applicable citation. 
3.  The city's removal and impounding of an oversized vehicle and/or issuance of a citation shall not prejudice or adversely affect any other civil, administrative or criminal action that may be brought to abate an unlawfully parked or stored oversized vehicle or to seek compensation for damages suffered. A civil or criminal action may be brought concurrently with any other process regarding the same violation. 
( Ord. No. 1035, § 1, 10-10-2017 )  
10.04.060 - Regulations for public parking lots. 
A.  The driveways. passageways and circulation routes within a public parking area, serving a shopping center, as defined in Section 17.04.240, whether publicly or privately owned, are designated as traffic and fire access lanes. 
B.  When appropriate signs are posted thereon, no person shall stand or park a vehicle within any such traffic or fire access lane, and all provisions of the Vehicle Code may be enforced with regard thereto. 
C.  The city council finds and determines that it is necessary and appropriate to enact this section pursuant to the provision of Section 21107.6 of the Vehicle Code and the general police power of the city (pursuant to the Constitution, legislation, and case law), in order to provide for the health, safety and welfare of persons using, vehicles transgressing, and ingress and egress for abutting property owners surrounding large parking areas with regard to which there is heavy traffic congestion. In the event the owner of any such parking facility refuses jurisdiction to the city to enforce Section 3331, as above set forth, appropriate public hearings and notices as required by Section 21107.6 of the Vehicle Code shall be processed. 
(Prior code § 3-2.7)  
10.04.070 - Temporarily closing or restricting the use of city roads and highways. 
A.  The public works director may authorize the temporary closure, or restrict the use of, any city road or highway whenever the public works director considers such closure or restriction of use necessary for the protection and safety of the public during storms or other emergencies, or during construction, improvement or maintenance operations thereon. 
B.  Whenever any city road or highway, or portion thereof, shall be closed to travel under the provisions of subsection A of this section, it shall be the duty of the contractor, foreman, engineer or other person in charge of the work of constructing, improving or maintaining said road to post conspicuously at each end of the portion of the highway closed and at all intersections thereof with other public roads, "Road Closed" signs and appropriate warning and detour signage. 
C.  No person shall drive or propel any automobile or other vehicle upon any road or highway, or portion thereof, that is closed to travel under the provisions of subsection A of this section, provided, that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit riding or driving thereon for purposes connected with the improvement thereof, which is in progress; and provided further that no person shall be guilty of a violation of this section who shall go upon the closed portion of any public road or highway at any intersection thereof with another public road, or at either end of such closed portion of such road, unless at such intersection or at such end of the closed portion of such road, as the case may be, the sign required by subsection B of this section is posted, or unless such person has been going upon the closed portion of such road, after having been informed that such road or highway or portion thereof is closed to travel. 
(Ord. No. 935, § 1, 11-10-2009; Ord. 724, § 5, 1996; prior code § 3-2.8)  
10.04.080 - Speed bumps on private streets, easements or fire lanes. 
A.  Declaration of Policy. In the interest of the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare, it is declared to be the policy of the city to prohibit the installation of new speed bumps on private streets, easements or fire lanes as such vehicle speed control devices may obstruct convenient and timely emergency vehicle access or otherwise jeopardize the public health, safety and general welfare. 
B.  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words shall have the meanings herein specified: 
"Existing speed bump" means any speed bump or similar traffic control device serving to limit or otherwise control the flow and/or speed of vehicular traffic in existence as of the effective date of this subsection. 
"Private easement" means any easement or access way reserved for vehicular access which is not dedicated for public use. 
"Private fire lane" means any street or access way which is reserved in recording documents for fire protection access or reserved as a condition of occupancy of a structure or structures and which is not dedicated for public use. 
"Private street" means any street access way or drive, which is not dedicated for public use. 
"Traffic control review committee," hereinafter referred to as the review committee, is comprised of the following individuals or their designees: fire marshall, sheriff and city engineer. 
C.  Existing Speed Bumps. Speed bumps on private streets, easements or fire lanes, existing as of the effective date of this subsection, may not be reconstructed, replaced, or otherwise altered without the express permission of the review committee. 
D.  Permitted Traffic Flow/Vehicle Speed Control Mechanisms. 
1.  Functional project design and sensitive land use planning with respect to internal traffic circulation and street pattern; 
2.  Signs, conforming to the city sign ordinance and approved by the department of community development. 
E.  Removal of Existing Speed Bumps. Existing speed bumps which are determined by the review committee to obstruct convenient and timely emergency vehicle access or in any other manner jeopardize the public health, safety and general welfare may be declared a public nuisance and removed within a period of time determined to be reasonable by the committee. 
F.  Exceptions. The review committee may grant exceptions to provisions of subsection E of this section when: 
1.  The applicant has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the review committee that alternative means for controlling vehicle speed are unwarranted or infeasible. 
2.  A speed bump plan relative to height, width, composition, spacing, and such other information as requested by the city engineer is approved by the review committee. 
G.  Appeal to City Council. Determinations and actions of the review committee shall be subject to appeal to the city council per the uniform appeal procedure. 
(Prior code § 3-2.9)  
10.04.090 - Skateboards, roller skates and bicycles in commercial zones. 
A.  Skateboards. No person shall ride or propel any skateboard on any road located within or adjacent to any property zoned for commercial uses pursuant to the provisions of Sections 251.1 through 262, inclusive, of the Zoning Ordinance of City of Lancaster. 
B.  Roller Skates. No person shall engage in roller skating on a highway, sidewalk or roadway located within or adjacent to any property zoned for commercial uses pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.12 of this code. 
C.  Bicycles. No person shall operate a bicycle on any pedestrian facility located within or adjacent to any property zoned for commercial uses pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.12 of this code. 
(Prior code § 3-2.10)  
10.04.100 - Unauthorized parking of vehicles for purposes of sale or repair. 
A.  Definitions. 
"Vehicle" means a vehicle as defined in Section 670 of the California Vehicle Code as the section now reads or may hereafter be amended. 
"Vessel" means a vessel as defined in Section 9840(a) of the California Vehicle Code as the same now reads or may hereafter be amended. 
B.  Parking for certain purposes prohibited. No person shall park a vehicle, vessel or other personal property: 
1.  Upon any roadway for the principal purpose of painting, greasing or repairing a vehicle or property thereon except repairs necessitated by emergency; 
2.  Upon any roadway for the principal purpose of washing or polishing such vehicle or vessel or any part thereof when a charge is made for such service. 
(Ord. 880 § 2, 2007; Ord. 796 §§ 1, 2, 2001; editorially amended during 2/99 supplement; prior code § 3-3A.l—3-3A.3)  
10.04.120 - Stopping, parking—Compliance with signs or pavement markings. 
Any driver of a motor vehicle shall comply with all signs or pavement markings restricting stopping, parking, duration or use of an area within the roadway or in a parking lot open to public use. 
(Ord. 786 § 1(C) (part), 2000)  
10.04.130 - Compliance with parking space markings. 
Where parking space markings are placed in the roadway or in a parking lot open to the public, no vehicle shall be stopped or left standing other than within a single space unless the size or shape of such vehicle makes compliance impossible. 
(Ord. 786 § 1(C) (part), 2000)  
10.04.140 - Trailer or semi-trailer parking. 
A.  A person shall not park any trailer or semitrailer upon any highway, street, alley, public way or public place unless the trailer or semi-trailer is at all times while so parked attached to a vehicle capable of moving the trailer or semi-trailer in a normal manner upon the highway, street, alley, public way or public place. 
B.  This section shall not apply to trailers or semi-trailers in the process of being loaded or unloaded, nor shall it apply to any trailer or semi-trailer which is disabled in such a manner and to such an extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the disabled trailer or semitrailer on that portion of the highway, street, alley, public way or public place ordinarily used for vehicular parking. 
(Ord. 786 § 1(C) (part), 2000)  
10.04.150 - Parking or stopping in alleys. 
A driver shall not park or stop in any alley for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials, or both. Such driver shall not stop for the loading or unloading of passengers for more than three minutes or for the loading or unloading of materials for more than twenty (20) minutes at any time in any alley. 
(Ord. 786 § 1(C) (part), 2000)  
10.04.160 - Securing vehicle when parked. 
Every driver who parks a motor vehicle upon any highway shall first lock the ignition, remove the key therefrom and take such key with him, unless a licensed driver remains in such motor vehicle, in which case such licensed driver before leaving such vehicle shall first lock the ignition, remove the key therefrom, and take such key with him. 
(Ord. 786 § 1(C) (part), 2000)  
10.04.170 - Parking in driveways. 
A.  A person shall not park any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, in any private driveway or upon any public or private property, except a highway, without the express or implied consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of such driveway or property. 
B.  This action does not prohibit any act, either expressly authorized or expressly prohibited by either Section 602 of the Penal Code, or Section 21113 of the Vehicle Code of the state of California, or by any other state law. 
(Ord. 786 § 1(C) (part), 2000)  
10.04.180 - Parking on highways. 
A person shall not park any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon any highway where the roadway is bordered by adjacent curbs or upon any private street which is open to the public, whether bordered by curbs or not, unless not less than fifteen (15) feet of the width of the paved or improved or main traveled portion of such highway or such private street opposite such parked vehicle is left clear and unobstructed for the free passage of other vehicles, except as provided in Section 10.04.215 - Angle Parking in Downtown Lancaster. 
(Ord. No. 948, § 4, 7-13-2010; Ord. 786 § 1(C) (part), 2000)  
10.04.190 - Assigned parking spaces. 
Whenever any vehicle parking space is assigned for the exclusive use of the occupant of any building, whether residential, commercial or industrial, and at, in or near such parking space there is a legible sign stating either that such space is exclusively assigned, or that parking is prohibited, or both, a person, other than the person to whom such parking space is assigned, shall not park any vehicle in such parking space except with the permission of the person to whom such parking space is assigned. 
(Ord. 786 § 1(C) (part), 2000)  
10.04.200 - Commercial vehicle parking in residential district—Ten thousand pounds or more. 
A person shall not park any commercial vehicle having a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or more on any highway or alley in a residential district. As used herein, the term "residential district" includes any residential zone as defined in Title 17 of this code. It is not a violation of this section to park said vehicles in residential districts when such vehicles are involved in: 
A.  Necessary loading and unloading; 
B.  Performing a service activity on the adjacent lot or parcel of land; 
C.  A lawful commercial use on the adjacent lot or parcel of land; 
D.  The construction of buildings or structures on the adjacent lot or parcel of land; or 
E.  The construction or maintenance of a street, alley, parkway, or highway. 
(Ord. 786 § 1(C) (part), 2000)  
10.04.210 - Commercial vehicle parking in residential district—Six thousand pounds or more. 
A person shall not park any commercial vehicle weighing more than six thousand (6,000) pounds unladen on any highway or alley between two a.m. and six a.m. in a residential district. As used herein, the term "residential district" includes any residential zone as defined in Title 17 of this code. It is not a violation of this section to park said vehicles in residential districts when such vehicles are involved in: 
A.  Necessary loading and unloading; 
B.  Performing a service activity on the adjacent lot or parcel of land; 
C.  A lawful commercial use on the adjacent lot or parcel of land; 
D.  The construction of buildings or structures on the adjacent lot or parcel of land; or 
E.  The construction or maintenance of a highway or alley. 
(Ord. 786 § 1(C) (part), 2000)  
10.04.215 - Angle Parking in Downtown Lancaster. 
A.  Angle parking may be established on Lancaster Boulevard, between 10th Street West and Sierra Highway, and on any other public street within the area defined in the Downtown Lancaster Specific Plan, provided, however, that angle parking shall not be permitted: 
1.  At any place where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon any part of the roadway other than the designated traffic lane; 
2.  Upon any street where angle parking is prohibited by the California Vehicle Code. 
B.  The Director of Public Works shall determine: 
1.  The portions of Lancaster Boulevard and other streets within the Downtown Lancaster Specific Plan area along which the angle parking of vehicles will benefit the public and where the surrounding conditions are such that the free movement of traffic will not be unduly interfered with by such method of parking; 
2.  Whether an angle parking zone shall be along the curb, in the median of the roadway, or both, subject to the conditions stated in Subsection A. of this section; 
3.  The hours and conditions of use for each angle parking zone as deemed appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 948, §§ 1—3, 7-13-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 948, §§ 1—3, adopted July 13, 2010, amended the Code by adding new provisions to be designated as § 10.04.210. In order to avoid duplication of section numbers, the provisions have been designated as § 10.04.215 at the discretiono of the editor.  
10.04.220 - Vehicles parked on highway for more than seventy-two consecutive hours. 
A.  A person shall not leave a vehicle parked on a highway for more than seventy-two (72) consecutive hours. Any such vehicle shall be subject to removal by the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department or a regularly employed and salaried employee of the city of Lancaster who is engaged in directing traffic or enforcing parking laws and regulations. 
B.  For purposes of this section, as well as Section 10.04.230 of this code, a vehicle shall be deemed to have been left parked when it has not been moved more than one block or three hundred (300) feet, whichever is greater, from its original parked or stopped position. Distance in feet shall be measured from either the lot line or boundary of the lot abutting its original stopped position. 
C.  For purposes of this section, as well as Section 10.04.230 of this code, "highway" means a highway as defined in Section 360 of the California Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 786 § 1(C) (part), 2000) 
(Ord. No. 911, § 1, 12-9-08)  
10.04.230 - Vehicles parked on highway for more than seventy-two consecutive hours—Removal. 
A.  The Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department, or a regularly employed and salaried employee of the city of Lancaster who is engaged in directing traffic or enforcing parking laws and regulations, shall remove to a safe place every vehicle which has been parked or left standing upon a highway for more than seventy-two (72) consecutive hours. 
B.  As used in this section, the words "safe place" include, but are not confined to, any garage, parking lot or open space owned by, maintained by or under the jurisdiction of the county of Los Angeles, and also every privately owned garage the owner or proprietor of which will accept such vehicle. 
(Ord. 786 § 1(C) (part), 2000) 
(Ord. No. 911, § 2, 12-9-08)  
10.04.240 - Vehicles transporting hazardous materials—Parking restrictions. 
A.  For purposes of this section: 
1.  A motor vehicle is attended when the person in charge of the vehicle is on the vehicle, awake, and not in a sleeper berth, or is within one hundred (100) feet of the vehicle and has it within his unobstructed field of view. 
2.  A qualified representative of a motor carrier is a person who: 
a.  Has been designated by the carrier to attend the vehicle; 
b.  Is aware of the nature of the hazardous material or substance contained in the vehicle he attends; 
c.  Has been instructed on the procedures he must follow in emergencies concerning hazardous materials or substances; 
d.  Is authorized to move the vehicle and has the means and ability to do so. 
B.  A vehicle transporting a hazardous material or substance as identified in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations must be attended at all times by its driver or a qualified representative of the motor carrier that operates it, and shall not be parked on any highway, highway shoulder, street, alley, public way or public place, or within five feet of the traveled portion thereof, within a residential zone, or within one thousand (1,000) feet of any school, or within three hundred (300) feet of any bridge or tunnel, except for brief periods when mechanical or equipment failure or disablement or malfunction of the vehicle, or the necessities of operation require the vehicle to be parked and make it impractical to park the vehicle in any other place. 
C.  Repair, maintenance, refuse, utility, termite and pesticide vehicles, fuel delivery vehicles, and vehicles delivering life support and health commodities, while servicing residential areas or schools, are exempt from the provisions of subsection B of this section. Additionally, such exempt vehicles need not be attended while the drivers are performing duties that are evident and necessary as the driver of the vehicle or the provider of the service. 
D.  The rules of this section do not relieve a driver from any obligation imposed by federal, state or local laws relating to the transportation of hazardous materials or explosives, motor carrier safety regulations, or the placement of warning signs or devices when a motor vehicle is stopped on a public street or highway. 
(Ord. 786 § 1(C) (part), 2000)  
10.04.250 - Provisions not exclusive. 
The provisions of this chapter are intended to augment, and not replace, the provisions of the California Vehicle Code regarding vehicles and traffic, and the Los Angeles County sheriff's department shall be authorized, to the extent of its authority under the California Vehicle Code and this chapter, to enforce all provisions of the California Vehicle Code and this chapter. If any provision of this chapter is deemed to be inconsistent with any provision of the California Vehicle Code, or to exceed the authority of the city to regulate vehicles and traffic, such provisions shall be deemed superseded by the California Vehicle Code or severed from this chapter, and the invalidity of any such provision of this chapter shall not affect the other provisions of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. 786 § 1(C) (part), 2000)  
10.04.260 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Bus loading zone" means the space adjacent to the curb or edge of a roadway reserved for the exclusive use of buses during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
"Loading zone" means that space marked via signs or paint adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive loading and unloading of passengers or materials. 
"Parkway" means that portion of a highway other than a roadway or a sidewalk. 
"Section" means a section of the ordinance codified in this chapter unless some other ordinance or statute is specifically mentioned. 
Any terms used in this chapter which are not otherwise defined shall have the meaning ascribed to them in the California Vehicle Code, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. 786 § 1(C) (part), 2000)  
10.04.270 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter except Sections 10.04.100 and 10.04.110 shall be guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by: 
1.  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation; 
2.  A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year; 
3.  A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year. 
B.  Each person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of the chapter shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion thereof during which such violation continues and shall be punishable therefor as herein provided. 
(Ord. 786 § 1(A), 2000; Ord. 685 § 1, 1995: prior code § 3-2.4)  
Chapter 10.08 - ABANDONED VEHICLES 
 
10.08.010 - Preamble. 
In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state of California under Section 22660, as amended, of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the city council makes the following findings and declarations; and the accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked,dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property not including highways is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private or public property not including highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3-3.1)  
10.08.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Highway" means way or place of whatever nature publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. Highway includes street. 
"Owner of the land" means the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. 
"Owner of the vehicle" means the last registered owner and legal owner of record. 
"Public property" does not include "highway." 
"Vehicle" means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Prior code § 3-3.2)  
10.08.030 - Exceptions. 
A.  This chapter shall not apply to: 
1.  A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
2.  A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise. 
B.  Nothing in this chapter shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the State Vehicle Code and this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3-3.3)  
10.08.040 - Regulations not exclusive. 
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Prior code § 3-3.4)  
10.08.050 - Enforcement of chapter—Right of entry of enforcing officials. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the city manager or his designee. In the enforcement of this chapter, such officer may obtain a warrant to enter upon private property to examine a vehicle, or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 742 § 1, 1998: prior code § 3-3.5)  
10.08.060 - Right of entry of authorized contractor. 
When the city council has contracted with any person, such person shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3-3.6)  
10.08.070 - Assessment of administrative costs. 
The city council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs, excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or parts thereof, under this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3-3.7)  
10.08.080 - Authority of city manager to abate and remove abandoned vehicles. 
Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property within the city, the city manager or his designee shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this chapter. Neither the city, nor any contractor thereof shall be liable for damage caused to a vehicle or part thereof by removal pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 690 § 1, 1995: prior code § 3-3.8)  
10.08.090 - Notice of intention to abate and remove. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a ten (10) day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered mail to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the property owner and the owner of the vehicle have signed releases authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof. A notice of intention is not required to be mailed to the vehicle owner, if the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE 
AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, 
WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR 
INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS 
THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE 
[Name and address of owner of the land] 
As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at [address], you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to Section 10.08.090 of the Lancaster Municipal Code has determined that there exists upon said land an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle registered to ___________, license number ___________, which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 10.08 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within ten (10) days from the date of mailing of this notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and moved by the City and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed to you as owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located. 
As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within ten (10) days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the City Manager within such ten-day period, the City Manager or his designee shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid without a hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such ten-day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a request for hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle or, in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing. 
Notice Mailed 	_____	s/ _____
	(Date) 	City Manager 
 
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE 
AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, 
WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR 
INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS 
THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE 
[Name and address of last registered and/or 
legal owner of record of vehicle—notice should 
be given to both if different] 
  As last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of [description of vehicle, make, model, license, etc.], you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to Section 10.08.090 et. seq. of the Lancaster Municipal Code, has determined that said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle at [describe location on public or private property] and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 10.08 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
  You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within ten (10) days from the date of mailing of this notice. 
  As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within ten (10) days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a hearing and if such a request is not received by the City Manager within such ten-day period, the City Manager or his designee shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing. 
Notice Mailed 	_____	s/ _____
	(Date) 	City Manager 
 
(Ord. 690 § 2, 1995; prior code § 3-3.9)  
10.08.100 - Hearing. 
Upon request by the owner of vehicle or the owner of the land, received by the city manager within ten (10) days after the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, a hearing shall be held by the city manager, or his duly authorized designee who shall act as hearing officer and who shall herein be referred to as the "hearing officer," on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof against the property on which it is located. 
If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within such ten (10) day period, such statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered mail, at least ten (10) days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not received within such ten (10) days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the city shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance without holding a hearing. 
(Prior code § 3-3.10)  
10.08.110 - Procedure for public hearing. 
All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the hearing officer, who shall hear all facts and testimony deemed pertinent. Such facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on such private property or public property. The hearing officer shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing, or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial. 
The hearing officer may impose such conditions and take such other action as deemed appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. He may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if, in his opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer may find that a vehicle or parts thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinabove provided, and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available, at the site. 
If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the hearing officer shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such owner of the land. 
If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land but does not appear, or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the hearing officer but does not appear, he shall be notified in writing of the decision. 
(Prior code § 3-3.11)  
10.08.120 - Appeal from decision of hearing officer. 
Any interested party may appeal the decision of the hearing officer by filing a written notice of appeal in accordance with the Uniform Appeal Procedure. 
(Prior code § 3-3.12)  
10.08.130 - Time for removal and disposal— Reconstruction of removed vehicles prohibited. 
Five days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance, five days from the date of mailing of notice of the decision if such notice is required by Section 10.08.110, twelve (12) days from the date of mailing of the notice described in Section 10.08.180, or five days after such action of the city council authorizing removal following appeal, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard or automobile dismantler's yard. After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable, unless it is a vehicle that qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates, pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 5004, in which case the vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable. 
(Ord. 742 § 2, 1998: Ord. 690 § 3, 1995: prior code § 3-3.13)  
10.08.140 - Notification of Department of Motor Vehicles. 
Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time, there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including, but not limited to, the registration card, certificates of ownership or license plates. 
(Prior code § 3-3.14)  
10.08.150 - Collection of costs charged to land owner. 
If the administrative costs and cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to Sections 10.08.090 through 10.08.110, inclusive, are not paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the order, or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the State Government Code, and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. Such assessment shall have the same priority as other city taxes. 
(Prior code § 3-3.15)  
10.08.160 - Abandonment of vehicles prohibited—Exceptions. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to abandon, park, store or leave or permit the abandonment, parking, storing or leaving of any licensed or unlicensed vehicle or part thereof which is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative condition upon any private property or public property, not including highways, within the city for a period in excess of five days unless such vehicle or parts thereof is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not plainly visible from the street or other public or private property, or unless such vehicle is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard. 
(Prior code § 3-3.16)  
10.08.170 - Refusal to remove abandoned vehicle on order. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail or refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof or refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this chapter or state law where such state law is applicable. 
(Prior code § 3-3.17)  
10.08.180 - Notice requirements for the removal of low-valued vehicles. 
The notice of intention described in Section 10.08.090 not required where the vehicle or part thereof to be removed is inoperable due to the absence of a motor, transmission or wheels and incapable of being towed, is valued at less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) by a person specified in Vehicle Code Section 22855, and is determined by the city manager or his designee to be a public nuisance presenting an immediate threat to public health or safety, provided that the property owner has signed a release authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof. Prior to final disposition under Section 10.08.130 of such low-valued vehicle or part for which evidence of registration was recovered pursuant to Section 10.08.140, the city manager or his designee shall provide notice to the registered and legal owners of intent to dispose of the vehicle or part, and if the vehicle or part is not claimed and removed within twelve (12) days after the notice is mailed, from a location specified in Vehicle Code Section 22662, final disposition may proceed. This section only applies to inoperable vehicles located upon a parcel that is (A) zoned for agricultural use or (B) not improved with a residential structure containing one or more dwelling units. 
(Ord. 690 § 4, 1995: prior code § 3-3.18)  
Chapter 10.12 - MOBILE SOURCE AIR POLLUTION REDUCTION 
 
10.12.010 - Findings. 
The city finds and declares that: 
A.  The city is committed to improve the public health, safety and welfare, including air quality. 
B.  Mobile sources are a major contributor to air pollution in the South Coast Air Basin. 
C.  Air quality goals for the region established by state law cannot be met without reducing air pollution from mobile sources. 
D.  The South Coast Air Quality Management Plan (AQMP) calls upon cities and counties to reduce emissions from motor vehicles consistent with the requirements of the California Clean Air Act of 1988 by developing and implementing mobile source air pollution reduction programs. 
E.  Such programs place demands upon the city's funds; those programs should be financed by shifting the responsibility for financing from the general fund to the motor vehicles creating the demand, to the greatest extent possible. 
F.  Section 44223, added to the Health and Safety Code by action of the California Legislature on September 30, 1990 (Chapter 90-1705), authorizes the South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) to impose an additional motor vehicle registration fee of two dollars, commencing on April 1, 1991, increasing to four dollars, commencing on April 1, 1992, to finance the implementation of transportation measures embodied in the AQMP and provisions of the California Clean Air Act. 
G.  Forty cents ($.40) of every dollar collected under Section 44223 of the Health and Safety Code shall be distributed to cities and counties located in the South Coast Air Quality Management District that comply with Section 44243 of the Health and Safety Code, based on the jurisdictions' prorated share of population as defined by the State Department of Finance. 
H.  The city is located within the South Coast Air Quality Management District and is eligible to receive a portion of the revenues from the additional motor vehicle registration fees contingent upon adoption of this chapter. 
I.  The prorated share of the fee revenues for cities that fail to adopt an ordinance pursuant to Section 44243(b)(3) of the Health and Safety Code shall be distributed instead to the jurisdictions within the District that have adopted an ordinance. 
J.  The city, after careful consideration, finds and declares that the imposition of the additional motor vehicle registration fee by the SCAQMD to finance mobile source air pollution reduction programs is in the best interest of the city and promotes the general welfare of its residents. 
(Prior code § 7-4.1)  
10.12.020 - Intent. 
This chapter is intended to support the SCAQMD's imposition of the vehicle registration fee and to bring the city into compliance with the requirements set forth in Section 44243 of the Health and Safety Code in order to receive fee revenues for the purpose of implementing programs to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles. 
(Prior code § 7-4.2)  
10.12.030 - Definitions. 
As applied in this chapter, the following words and terms shall be defined as follows: 
"City" means the city of Lancaster. 
"Fee administrator" means the finance director of the city or his designee. 
"Mobile source air pollution reduction programs" means any program or project implemented by the city to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles which it determines will be consistent with the California Clean Air Act of 1988 or the plan proposed pursuant to Article 5 (commencing with Section 40460) of Chapter 5.5 of Part 3 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Prior code § 7-4.3)  
10.12.040 - Administration of vehicle registration fee. 
A.  Receipt of Fee. The additional vehicle registration fees disbursed by the SCAQMD and remitted to the city, pursuant to this chapter, shall be accepted by the fee administrator. 
B.  Establishment of Air Quality Improvement Trust Fund. The fee administrator shall establish a separate interest-bearing trust fund account in a financial institution authorized to receive deposits of city funds. 
C.  Transfer of Funds. Upon receipt of vehicle registration fees, the fee administrator shall deposit such funds into the separate account established pursuant to subsection B of this section. All interest earned by the trust fund account shall be credited only to that account. 
D.  Expenditure of Air Quality Trust Fund Revenues. All revenues received from the SCAQMD and deposited in the trust fund account shall be exclusively expended on mobile source emission reduction programs as defined in Section 10.12.030. Such revenue and any interest earned on the revenues shall be expended within one year of the completion of the programs. 
E.  Audits. The city consents to an audit of all programs and projects funded by vehicle registration fee revenues received from the SCAQMD pursuant to Section 44223 of the Health and Safety Code. The audit shall be conducted by an independent auditor selected by the SCAQMD as provided in Section 44244 and 44244.1(a) of the Health and Safety Code. 
(Prior code § 7-4.4)  
Chapter 10.16 - PARKING CITATION PROCESSING 
 
10.16.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the parking citation processing ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. 643 § 2 (part), 1993: prior code § 3-2A.1)  
10.16.020 - Definitions. 
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions provided in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter: 
"Administrative policy" means a policy which establishes procedures for the implementation of this chapter and is approved by the city manager. 
"City" shall at all times refer to the city of Lancaster. 
"Contestant" means an "operator" or "registered owner" as defined in this section who contests a parking citation. 
"Department" means the California Department of Motor Vehicles. 
"Hearing examiner" means any individual selected by the city manager to adjudicate parking citation contests. 
"Issuing agency" means the city or its authorized agent that issues parking citations or any other agency authorized by law to issue parking citations. 
"Issuing officer" means any officer who is authorized by law to issue parking citations. 
"Operator" means any individual driving or in possession of a vehicle at the time a citation is issued or the registered owner of the vehicle. 
"Parking citation" means a notice that is personally given or mailed to the operator, or attached to the operator's vehicle, informing the operator of a parking, equipment or other vehicle violation and the operator's obligation to pay the parking penalty for the violation or to contest the citation. 
"Parking penalty" means and includes, but is not limited to, the parking penalty for the particular violation, as well as late payment penalties, administrative fees, assessments, costs of collection as provided by law, and other related fees. 
"Processing agency" means the city or an authorized agent of the city that processes parking citations and issues notices of delinquent parking violations on behalf of the city. 
"Registered owner" means the individual or entity whose name is recorded with the California Department of Motor Vehicles as having ownership of a particular vehicle. 
"Vehicle" means any self-propelled vehicle operated or suitable for operation on a highway. 
"Violation" means any parking, equipment or other vehicle violation as established pursuant to state law or local ordinance. 
"Working day" means any business day during which the administrative office of the processing agency is open to the general public for business. 
(Ord. 643 § 2 (part), 1993: prior code § 3-2A.2)  
10.16.030 - Authority to contract with outside agencies. 
The city may issue and process parking citations and notices of delinquent parking violations, or it may enter into a contract with a private parking citation processing agency or with another city, county, or other public issuing or processing agency to do so. 
Any contract entered into pursuant to this section shall provide for monthly distribution of amounts collected between the parties, except those amounts payable to the county pursuant to Chapter 12 (commencing with Section 76000) of Title 8 of the California Government Code, or any successor statutes thereto, and amounts payable to the Department pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 4763, or any successor statute thereto. 
(Ord. 643 § 2 (part), 1993: prior code § 3-2A.3)  
10.16.040 - Authority to conduct administrative review process— Hearing examiner—Procedures. 
The processing agency may review appeals or other objections to a parking citation pursuant to the procedures set forth in this section. 
A.  For a period of twenty-one (21) days from the issuance of a parking citation, or ten (10) days from the mailing of a notice of delinquent parking citation, an operator may request initial review by the processing agency. The request for initial review may be made in writing, by telephone, or in person. 
B.  The initial review by the processing agency shall consist of those procedures outlined in subsection (A)(1) of Section 10.16.130. 
C.  If the operator is dissatisfied with the results of the initial review, the operator may contest the parking citation or notice of delinquent parking violation through an administrative hearing review process as outlined in subsection (B)(1) of Section 10.16.130. 
In order to contest the parking citation, the operator must deposit with the processing agency the full amount of the parking penalty on or before the tenth day following the mailing to that operator of the results of the processing agency's initial review. At the same time the operator must provide a written explanation of the reason or reasons for contesting the parking citation on a form provided by the processing agency. If the operator is unable to deposit the full amount of the parking penalty, the operator must provide verifiable and substantial proof of an inability to deposit the parking penalty. Upon presentation of such proof, the processing agency shall proceed with the contest procedure despite the operator's failure to deposit the full amount of the parking penalty. If it is ultimately determined that the operator is not liable for the parking violation, then the full amount of the parking penalty deposited shall be refunded. 
The contestant may contest the parking citation either by written declaration, on forms provided by the processing agency, or by personal appearance before a hearing examiner. 
D.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection C of this section, if the vehicle has been immobile or impounded for unpaid parking citations, the processing agency shall permit the registered owner of the vehicle to contest the parking citations upon which the seizure was based, without requiring a deposit of the parking penalty, provided that the vehicle remains under the control of the immobilizing or impounding agency. 
E.  The processing agency shall provide, through the administrative policy, procedures for contesting parking citations and notices of delinquent parking violations. The administrative policy shall be approved by the city manager, notice of its approval shall be posted or published, and a copy thereof shall be available to the public in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. 643 § 2 (part), 1993: prior code § 3-2A.4)  
10.16.050 - Process by which parking citations must be issued. 
Parking citations shall be issued in accordance with the following procedures: 
A.  If a vehicle is unattended at the time that the parking citation is issued for a parking violation, the issuing officer shall securely attach to the vehicle the parking citation setting forth the violation, including reference to the section of the California Vehicle Code, the city's municipal code, or other parking regulation violated; the approximate time of the violation, the location of the violation, and the date by which the operator is to deposit the parking penalty or contest the parking citation pursuant to Section 10.16.130. The citation shall state the amount of the parking penalty for the violation, the name and address of the agent authorized to receive deposit of the parking penalty and a statement in bold print that payments of the parking penalty for the violation may be sent through the mail. 
The parking citation shall also set forth the vehicle license number and registration expiration date, if such date is visible; the last four digits of the vehicle identification number, if that number is visible through the windshield; the color of the vehicle; and, if possible, the make of the vehicle. 
B.  The parking citation, or copy thereof, shall be considered a record kept in the ordinary course of business of the issuing agency and processing agency, and shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein. 
C.  Once the parking citation is prepared and attached to the vehicle pursuant to subsection A of this section, the issuing officer shall file notice of the parking violation with the processing agency. 
Any person, including the issuing officer and any member of the officer's department or agency, or any peace officer who alters, conceals, modifies, nullifies or destroys, or causes to be altered, concealed, modified, nullified or destroyed, the face of the remaining original or any copy of a citation that was retained by the officer, for any reason, before it is filed with the processing agency or with a person authorized to receive the deposit of the parking penalty, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
D.  If during issuance of the parking citation, without regard to whether the vehicle was initially attended or unattended, the vehicle is driven away prior to attaching the parking citation to the vehicle, the issuing officer shall file the notice with the processing agency. The processing agency shall mail, within fifteen (15) days of issuance of the parking citation, a copy of the parking citation to the registered owner. 
E.  If after a copy of the parking citation is attached to the vehicle, or personally given to the operator, the issuing agency or the issuing officer determines that the issuing officer was in error in issuing the parking citation, the issuing officer or the issuing agency may recommend, in writing, that the parking citation be canceled. The recommendation shall state the reason or reasons for cancellation and shall be filed with the processing agency. 
Under no circumstance shall a personal relationship with any public official, officer, issuing office, or law enforcement agency be grounds for cancellation. 
F.  If a processing agency makes a finding that there are grounds for cancellation as set forth in the administrative policy, or pursuant to any other basis provided by law, the finding or findings shall be filed with the processing agency, and the parking citation shall be canceled pursuant to subsection (A)(1) of Section 10.16.130. 
(Ord. 643 § 2 (part), 1993: prior code § 3-2A.5)  
10.16.060 - Parking penalties. 
Parking penalties shall be established by the city council. 
(Ord. 643 § 2 (part), 1993: prior code § 3-2A.6)  
10.16.070 - Parking penalties received by date fixed—No contest—Request to contest. 
If the payment of the parking penalty is received by the processing agency and there is no contest by the date fixed on the parking citation, all proceedings as to that parking citation shall terminate. 
If the operator contests the parking citation, the processing agency shall proceed in accordance with Section 10.16.130. 
(Ord. 643 § 2 (part), 1993: prior code § 3-2A.7)  
10.16.080 - Parking penalties not received by date fixed. 
If payment of the parking penalty is not received by the processing agency by the date fixed on the parking citation, the processing agency shall deliver to the registered owner a notice of delinquent parking violation pursuant to Section 10.16.090. 
Delivery of a notice of delinquent parking violation may be made by personal service or by first class mail addressed to the registered owner of the vehicle as shown on the records of the Department. 
(Ord. 643 § 2 (part), 1993: prior code § 3-2A.8)  
10.16.090 - Notice of delinquent parking violation—Contents. 
A notice of delinquent parking violation shall contain the information required to be included in a parking citation pursuant to Section 10.16.050. The notice of delinquent parking violation shall also contain a notice to the registered owner that, unless the registered owner pays the parking penalty or contests the citation within ten (10) days after mailing the notice of delinquent parking violation or completes and files an affidavit of nonliability that complies with Section 10.16.110 or 10.16.120, the vehicle registration will not be renewed until the parking penalties have been paid. In addition, the notice of delinquent parking violation shall contain, or be accompanied by, an affidavit of nonliability and information of what constitutes nonliability, information as to the effect of executing an affidavit, and instructions for returning the affidavit to the issuing agency. 
If the parking penalty is paid within ten (10) days after the mailing of the notice of delinquent parking violation, no late penalty or similar fee shall be charged to the operator. 
(Ord. 643 § 2 (part), 1993: prior code § 3-2A.9)  
10.16.100 - Copy of citation upon request by registered owner. 
A.  Within fifteen (15) days of request, made by mail or in person, the processing agency shall mail or otherwise provide to the registered owner, or the registered owner's agent, who has received a notice of delinquent parking violation, a copy of the original parking citation. The issuing agency may charge a fee sufficient to cover the actual cost of copying and/or locating the original parking citation, not to exceed two dollars. Until the issuing or processing agency complies with a request to provide a copy of the parking citation, the processing agency may not proceed to immobilize the vehicle in question merely because the registered owner has received five or more outstanding parking violations over a period of five or more days. 
B.  If the description of the vehicle on the parking citation does not substantially match the corresponding information on the registered card for that vehicle the processing agency shall, on written request of the operator, cancel the notice of parking violation without the necessity of an appearance by the operator. 
(Ord. 643 § 2 (part), 1993: prior code § 3-2A.10)  
10.16.110 - Affidavit of nonliability—Leased or rented vehicle. 
A registered owner shall be released from liability for a parking citation if the registered owner files with the processing agency an affidavit of nonliability in a form satisfactory to the processing agency and such form is returned within thirty (30) days after the mailing of the notice of delinquent parking violation together with proof of a written lease or rental agreement between a bona fide rental or leasing company and its customer which identifies the renter or lessee and provides the operator's driver's license number, name and address. The processing agency shall serve or mail to the renter or lessee identified in the affidavit of nonliability a notice of delinquent parking violation. 
The processing agency shall inform the renter or lessee that he or she must pay the full amount of the parking penalty or provide notice to the processing agency that he or she intends to contest the parking citation pursuant to Section 10.16.130 within fifteen (15) days of the mailing of the notice of delinquent parking violation. If the processing agency does not receive payment of the parking citation or does not receive notice of an intent to contest within those fifteen (15) days, the processing agency may proceed against the renter or lessee pursuant to Section 10.16.140. 
(Ord. 643 § 2 (part), 1993: prior code § 3-2A.11)  
10.16.120 - Affidavit of nonliability—Sale. 
The registered owner of a vehicle shall be released from liability for a parking citation issued with respect to that vehicle if the registered owner served with a notice of delinquent parking violation files with the processing agency, within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice of delinquent parking violation, an affidavit of nonliability together with proof that the registered owner served with a notice of delinquent parking violation had made a bona fide sale or transfer of the vehicle and had delivered possession thereof to the purchaser prior to the date of the alleged violation. The processing agency shall obtain verification from the department that the former owner has complied with the requirements necessary to release the former owner from liability pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 5602 or any successor statute thereto. 
If the registered owner has complied with California Vehicle Code Section 5602, or any successor statute thereto, the processing agency shall cancel the notice of delinquent parking violation with respect to the registered owner. 
If the registered owner has not complied with the requirements necessary to release the owner from liability pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 5602, or any successor statute thereof, the processing agency shall inform the registered owner that the citation must be paid in full or contested pursuant to Section 10.16.130. If the registered owner does not comply, the processing agency shall proceed pursuant to Section 10.16.140. 
(Ord. 643 § 2 (part), 1993: prior code § 3-2A.12)  
10.16.130 - Contesting parking citation— Procedure. 
A.  If an operator or registered owner contests a parking citation or a notice of delinquent parking violation, the processing agency shall do all of the following: 
1.  First, either investigate with its own records and staff or request that the issuing agency investigate the circumstances of the citation with respect to the contestant's written explanation of the reason or reasons for contesting the parking citation. 
If, based on the results of that investigation, the processing agency is satisfied that the violation did not occur or that the registered owner was not responsible for the violation by virtue of having sold, rented or leased the vehicle, or because legally supportable or mitigating circumstances as set forth in the administrative policy warrant a dismissal, the processing agency shall cancel the parking citation, and make an adequate record of the reason or reasons for canceling the parking citation. The processing agency shall mail the results of the investigation by first class mail to the contestant within fifteen (15) working days of the decision. 
2.  If the contestant is not satisfied with the results of the investigation provided for in subsection (A)(1) of this section, the contestant may, within fifteen (15) days of the mailing of the results of the initial investigation, deposit the amount of the parking penalty and other related fees or provide proof of inability to deposit the parking penalty, and request an administrative review. 
3.  If the contestant prevails at the administrative hearing, then the full amount of the parking penalty deposited shall be refunded. 
B.  The administrative review procedure shall consist of the following: 
1.  The contestant shall make a written request for administrative review on a form and in a manner satisfactory to the processing agency and may request to contest the parking citation either in person or by written declaration. 
2.  If the contestant is a minor, that person shall be permitted to appear at a hearing or admit responsibility for a parking citation without the necessity of the appointment of a guardian. The processing agency may proceed against the minor in the same manner as if the minor were an adult. 
3.  The administrative review shall be conducted before a hearing examiner. 
C.  The issuing officer shall not be required to participate in an administrative review. The issuing agency shall not be required to produce any evidence other than the parking citation or copy thereof, and information received from the department identifying the registered owner of the vehicle. 
This documentation in proper form shall be considered prima facie evidence of the violation. 
D.  The processing agency's final decision shall be in writing and delivered personally to the contestant or the contestant's agent, or delivered by first class mail within fifteen (15) working days following the hearing. 
E.  If the contestant is not the registered owner of the vehicle, all notices to the contestant required under this section shall also be given to the registered owner by first class mail. 
F.  Within twenty (20) days after the mailing of the final decision, the contestant may seek review by filing an appeal to the justice or municipal court, as provided by California Vehicle Code Section 40230. 
The fee for filing the notice of appeal shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or such amount as required pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 40203b, or any successor statute thereto. If the appellant prevails, this fee, together with any deposit of parking penalty, shall be promptly refunded by the processing agency in accordance with the judgment of the court. 
(Ord. 643 § 2 (part), 1993: prior code § 3-2A.13)  
10.16.140 - Collection of unpaid parking penalties. 
Except as otherwise provided below, the processing agency shall proceed under subsection A or subsection B, but not both, in order to collect an unpaid parking penalty: 
A.  File an itemization of unpaid parking penalties and administrative and service fees with the Department for collection pursuant to the California Vehicle Code Section 4760 or any successor statute thereto. 
B.  If more than four hundred dollars ($400.00) in unpaid parking penalties and other related fees have been accrued by any one registered owner or the registered owner's renter, lessee or sales transferee, proof thereof may be filed with the court with the same effect as civil judgment. Execution may be levied and such other measures may be taken for the collection of the judgment as are authorized for the collection of unpaid civil judgments entered against a defendant in an action on a debtor. The court may assess costs against a judgment debtor to be paid upon satisfaction of the judgment. 
The processing agency shall send notice by first class mail to the registered owner or renter, lessee, or sales transferee indicating that a civil judgment for unpaid penalties, fees and costs has been filed and that, after thirty (30) days from the date of the mailing of the notice, the judgment shall become effective. The notice shall also indicate that: execution may be levied against that person's assets, that liens may be placed against that person's property, that the person's wages may be garnished, and that other steps may be taken to satisfy the judgment. The notice shall also state that the processing agency will terminate the commencement of a civil judgment proceeding if all parking penalties and other related fees are paid prior to the date set for hearing. If judgment is entered, then the city may file a writ of execution or an abstract with the court clerk's office identifying the means by which the civil judgment is to be satisfied. 
If a judgment is rendered for the processing agency, that agency may contract with a collection agency licensed pursuant to Chapter 8 (commencing with Section 6850) of Division 3 of the California Business and Professions Code, or any successor statutes thereto, to collect the judgment. 
C.  If the registration of the vehicle has not been renewed for sixty (60) days beyond the renewal date, and the citation has not been collected by the Department pursuant to the California Vehicle Code Section 4760, or any successor statute thereto, then the processing agency may file proof of unpaid penalties and fees with the court with the same effect as a civil judgment as provided above in subsection B of this section. 
D.  The processing agency shall not file a civil judgment with the court relating to a parking citation filed with the Department unless the processing agency has determined that the registration of the vehicle has not been renewed for sixty (60) days beyond the renewal date and the citation has not been collected by the Department pursuant to the California Vehicle Code Section 4760 or any successor statute thereto. 
E.  The processing agency shall terminate proceedings on the notice of delinquent parking violation in any of the following cases: 
1.  Upon receipt of collected penalties and administrative fees remitted by the Department under California Vehicle Code Section 4762 for that notice of delinquent parking violation. The termination under this subdivision is by satisfaction of the parking penalty; 
2.  If the notice of delinquent parking violation was returned to the processing agency pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 4764 and five years have elapsed since the date of the violation. The termination under this subdivision is by the running of a statute of limitation of proceedings; 
3.  The processing agency receives information, which it shall verify with the Department, that the penalty has been paid to the Department pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 4762. 
F.  If the notice of delinquent parking violation is filed with the Department under subsection B of this section and the Department returns the notice of delinquent parking violation by notice of noncollection pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 4760, the processing agency may elect to do either of the following: 
1.  Except as provided by subsection E of this section, file a complaint with the court, together with supporting documents and other evidence, pursuant to subsection F of Section 10.16.130; 
2.  Cancel the notice of delinquent parking violation, in which case no further proceedings shall occur. 
(Ord. 643 § 2 (part), 1993: prior code § 3-2A.14)  
10.16.150 - Obligation of processing agency once parking penalty paid. 
A.  If the operator or registered owner served with notice of delinquent parking violation, or any other person who presents the parking citation or notice of delinquent parking violation, deposits the penalty with the person authorized to receive it, the processing agency shall do both of the following: 
1.  Provide the operator, registered owner, or the registered owner's agent with a copy of the citation information presented in the notice of delinquent parking violation. The processing agency shall, in turn, obtain and record in its records the name, address and driver's license number of the person actually given the copy of the citation information; 
2.  Determine whether the notice of delinquent parking violation has been filed with the Department or a civil judgment has been entered pursuant to Section 10.16.140. 
B.  If the processing agency receives full payment of all parking penalties and other related fees and the processing agency has neither filed a notice of delinquent parking violation nor entered a civil judgment, then all proceedings for that citation shall cease. 
C.  If the notice of delinquent parking violation has been filed with the Department and has been returned by the Department pursuant to the provisions of the California Vehicle Code and payment of the parking penalty has been made, along with any other related fees, then the proceedings for that citation shall cease. 
D.  If the notice of delinquent parking violation has been filed with the Department and has not been returned by the Department, and payment of the parking penalty along with any other applicable fees or assessments has been made, the processing agency shall do all of the following: 
1.  Deliver a certificate of payment to the operator, or other person making payment; 
2.  Within five working days transmit the payment information to the Department in the manner prescribed by the Department; 
3.  Terminate proceedings on the notice of delinquent parking violation; and 
4.  Deposit all parking penalties and other fees as required by law. 
(Ord. 643 § 2 (part), 1993: prior code § 3-2A.15)  
10.16.160 - Deposit of parking penalties with the city. 
All parking penalties collected, including process service fees and costs related to civil debt collection, shall be deposited to the account of the processing agency, and then remitted to the city if the city is not also the processing agency. 
If the city is not the processing agency, then the city shall enter into an agreement with the processing agency for monthly distribution of parking citation receipts to the city along with a report setting forth the number of cases processed. 
(Ord. 643 § 2 (part), 1993: prior code § 3-2A.16)  
10.16.170 - Filing of annual reports. 
The processing agency shall prepare an audited report at the end of each fiscal year setting forth the number of cases processed, and all sums received and distributed, together with any other information that may be specified by the city or its authorized issuing agency or the State Controller. The report is a public record and shall be delivered to the city and its authorized issuing agency. 
(Ord. 643 § 2 (part), 1993: prior code § 3-2A.17)  
Chapter 10.20 - STREET SWEEPING 
 
10.20.010 - Authority. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by Sections 22507 and 22507.6, as amended, of the California Vehicle Code, the city council restricts parking on city streets or portions thereof for limited periods of time on designated days for street sweeping purposes. 
(Ord. No. 959, § 1, 1-11-2011; Prior code § 3-14.1)  
10.20.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Person" means any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular. 
"Vehicle" means a vehicle as defined in Section 670 of the California Vehicle Code as the section now reads or may hereafter be amended. 
(Prior code § 3-14.2)  
10.20.030 - Parking restricted where posted. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, it is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle during limited periods of time on designated days where authorized signs have been posted on city streets or portions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 959, § 2, 1-11-2011; Prior code § 3-14.3)  
10.20.040 - Application—Exception. 
The provisions of this chapter restricting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles shall apply at all times and places within the city, except as follows: (i) when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a peace officer or traffic control device; (ii) streets adjacent to commercially zoned properties as shown on the general plan of the city; (iii) when a more restrictive parking regulation has been established by the city council; (iv) when a commercial vehicle is making a pickup or delivery of goods, wares, or merchandise from or to any building or structure located on a restricted street; or (v) when a commercial vehicle is delivering materials to be used in the repair, alteration, remodeling, or reconstruction of any building or structure for which a building permit has previously been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 959, § 3, 1-11-2011; Prior code § 3-14.4)  
10.20.050 - Public works director—Authority. 
The public works director is authorized to do the following: (i) determine the times it is necessary to restrict parking on city streets to permit the efficient sweeping and cleaning of said streets; (ii) place and erect signs containing the words "No Parking" on any street or portion thereof on which it is necessary to restrict parking in order to permit city equipment to sweep the streets or portions thereof; and (iii) develop and implement a permit program whereby the public works director may issue a permit that exempts a vehicle from the application of this Chapter. The issuance of a permit pursuant to this Section 10.20.050 shall be based on criteria developed by the public works director, which criteria shall include (but not be limited to) a finding by the public works director that the issuance of the permit will not unreasonably interfere with the purpose of this Chapter, and shall be subject to payment of a permit fee as established and modified from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 959, § 4, 1-11-2011; Prior code § 3-14.5)  
10.20.060 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 959, § 5, adopted January 11, 2011, amended the Code by repealing former § 10.20.060 in its entirety. Former § 10.20.060 pertained to exceptions, and derived from the prior code, § 3-14.6.  
10.20.070 - Violation—Penalty. 
Pursuant to Section 40000, as amended, of the Vehicle Code, state of California, any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punishable by a fine established by a resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 863 § 1, 2006: Prior code § 3-14.7)  
Chapter 10.24 - BICYCLES 
 
10.24.010 - License required. 
A person, firm or corporation shall not operate or permit to be operated on any highway in the city any bicycle propelled wholly or in part by muscular power, the owner of which bicycle is a resident of the city unless and until such bicycle is registered with the sheriff and licensed, and the license is attached to the bicycle as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3-11.1)  
10.24.020 - Application for license. 
The applicant for the registration and licensing of a bicycle shall make application therefor, accompanied by a fee of seventy-five cents ($0.75), upon forms provided for by that officer. Such form shall show: 
A.  The name and address of the applicant; 
B.  A description of the bicycle to be registered and licensed including the serial number of the bicycle, if any, make of the bicycle, type of bicycle, model of bicycle and the color thereof; 
C.  Such other information or description as the sheriff may require. 
(Prior code § 3-11.2)  
10.24.030 - Issuance of registration and license. 
Upon receipt of an application in full compliance with Section 10.24.020 plus the fee of seventy-five cents ($.75), the sheriff shall: 
A.  Register the bicycle in a permanent register maintained by him; 
B.  Issue to the applicant a registration certificate; 
C.  Issue to the applicant a license plate or other indicia in the form designated by the Director of the Department of Motor Vehicles; 
D.  Attach to the frame of the bicycle the license indicia. 
Both the registration certificate and the license bear the registration number assigned. 
(Prior code § 3-11.3)  
10.24.040 - Destruction of license or registration numbers prohibited. 
A person, firm or corporation shall not wilfully remove, destroy, mutilate or alter, or cause or permit to be removed, destroyed, mutilated or altered, the number on any bicycle frame for which any such registration shall have been made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
A person, firm or corporation shall not remove, destroy, mutilate or alter, or cause or permit to be removed, destroyed, mutilated or altered, any license indicia issued pursuant to this chapter for any such bicycle or registration certificate relating to such bicycle during the time in which such license indicia or registration certificate is operative. Provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to prohibit the sheriff from stamping any number on any such bicycle for identification purposes. 
(Prior code § 3-11.4)  
10.24.050 - Tax collector to provide license indicia. 
The tax collector shall provide the sheriff for each bicycle licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, a license indicia distributed to the city by the Department of Motor Vehicles. 
(Prior code § 3-11.5)  
10.24.060 - Transfer of license to another bicycle not permitted. 
A person, firm or corporation shall not cause or permit to be transferred any bicycle license indicia issued pursuant to this chapter to any bicycle for which the same was not issued. 
(Prior code § 3-11.6)  
10.24.070 - Sale of bicycle—Notification of sheriff—License transfer to new owner. 
Any person, firm or corporation who is the owner of a bicycle, whether licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or unlicensed, who sells or otherwise disposes of a bicycle, except a new bicycle or new bicycle frame, whether in the course of business or otherwise, shall within ten (10) days thereafter: 
A.  Notify the sheriff of such disposition and inform him of: 
1.  The name and address of the owner; 
2.  The name and address of the transferee; 
3.  A description of the bicycle including the serial number of the bicycle, make of bicycle, type of bicycle, model of bicycle, color of bicycle and the license number thereof, if any, or if no such license indicia is attached or the number is illegible, a statement of such fact. 
B.  If a registration card has been issued to the owner, he shall return such registration card to the sheriff. Any person who purchases or otherwise acquires possession of a bicycle shall within ten (10) days of taking possession apply for the transfer of license to his name as provided for in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3-11.7)  
10.24.080 - License lost or stolen—Re-registration. 
If the license indicia is lost, stolen or mutilated, the person, firm or corporation owning such bicycle shall make an application to re-register such bicycle. The applicant shall pay a fee of seventy-five cents ($.75) and procure from the sheriff a new license indicia. The sheriff shall cancel the registration of such bicycle in the permanent register, shall re-register such bicycle, and, if necessary, give to such bicycle a new identifying number. 
(Prior code § 3-11.8)  
10.24.090 - Renewal of license and registration. 
Bicycle licenses shall be renewed uniformly at periods designated by the Director of the Department of Motor Vehicles pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 39001. 
(Prior code § 3-11.9)  
10.24.100 - Compliance with Vehicle Code. 
The regulations in this chapter are in addition to those in Division 16.7 (commencing with Section 39000) of the Vehicle Code. This chapter shall be construed consistently with the provision of the Division. 
(Prior code § 3-11.10)  
10.24.110 - Secondhand dealers and wreckers required to report on bicycles. 
Every auctioneer, auto wrecker, foundry, pawn broker, secondhand dealer, junk dealer or bicycle dealer shall notify the sheriff in writing on forms prescribed by the sheriff, not less often than once a week of every bicycle received in the course of business by him since his last report. In such reports he shall describe each such bicycle and give the license number thereof, if any. In addition he shall supply such other information as the sheriff shall require. 
A.  Waiting Time Before Sale of Bicycle. An auctioneer, auto wrecker, foundry, pawn broker, secondhand dealer, junk dealer or bicycle dealer receiving any bicycle in the course of business, shall not sell, transfer, deliver, destroy or alter any such bicycle until fourteen (14) days after its receipt has been reported to the sheriff. 
(Prior code § 3-11.11)  
10.24.120 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by any person, firm or corporation shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five dollars. 
(Prior code § 3-11.12)  
Chapter 10.28 - INTOXICATION CONTROL ROADBLOCKS 
 
10.28.010 - Intoxication control roadblocks (ICR). 
An intoxication control roadblock (hereinafter "ICR") is a roadblock established by the sheriff, with the primary goal of detecting and prosecuting drivers intoxicated by alcohol, controlled substances, or committing similar offenses. ICRs shall be considered in accordance with the provisions established by this chapter. The provisions of this chapter are not required to be applied to roadblocks which do not have as their primary goal detecting and prosecuting the drivers intoxicated by alcohol, controlled substances, or committing similar offenses. 
(Ord. 786 § 1(D) (part), 2000)  
10.28.020 - ICR—Written procedures. 
An ICR shall be implemented pursuant to written procedures promulgated by the sheriff, in conformity with and not more intrusive than the standards and guidelines set forth in this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as preventing the sheriff from establishing additional standards and guidelines, especially those that may be required by decisions of the courts or state statutes. 
(Ord. 786 § 1(D) (part), 2000)  
10.28.030 - Location of ICR. 
The Location where an ICR is to be placed shall be determined in advance by the sheriffs personnel of at least the rank of lieutenant. In determining the location of an ICR, consideration should be given to areas where disproportionately high levels of drunk-driving-related accidents have occurred or are anticipated. 
(Ord. 786 § 1(D) (part), 2000)  
10.28.040 - ICR—Prearranged plan—Requirements. 
An ICR shall be established pursuant to a prearranged plan established by supervisory personnel consistent with the following: 
A.  Selection of Vehicles to be Stopped. The selection procedure for stopping vehicles shall not be arbitrary. It is permissible to stop every vehicle at an ICR, or every vehicle proceeding in a particular direction, or that vehicles be stopped in a numerical sequence such as every fifth vehicle or every tenth vehicle. The prearranged plan may authorize the waiver of certain classes of vehicles around the ICR roadblock which are determined to be exempt from roadblock stops. 
B.  Nondeceptive Manner. An ICR shall be conducted in a nondeceptive manner. All officers involved in an ICR shall be in uniform and shall carry proper identification. Vehicles, if any, used as part of an ICR shall be marked radio cars. An ICR shall be marked by signs, flares, traffic cones or other alternative methods. 
C.  Motorist Safety. An ICR shall be conducted in a manner which is consistent with motorist and pedestrian safety. Provisions should be made, to the extent feasible, for proper illumination and holding areas for vehicles detained. 
D.  Minimization of Motorist Inconvenience. An ICR shall be conducted in a manner which seeks to minimize inconvenience to the motorist. The motorist shall not be delayed unreasonably, and the prearranged plan should have as a goal that the time spent waiting in line as well as inspection by roadblock personnel should be less than five minutes except for vehicles as to which there is a reasonable suspicion that the occupants are in violation of a statute or ordinance. Occupants of a vehicle shall not be asked to step out of the vehicle unless there is a reasonable suspicion to believe the occupants are in violation of a statute or ordinance. 
(Ord. 786 § 1(D) (part), 2000)  
Chapter 10.32 - PRIVATE STREETS 
 
10.32.010 - "Private streets" defined. 
As used in this chapter, the term "private street" refers only to private streets which are generally held open for use by the public for vehicular travel, which streets have been designated by ordinance enacted pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 21107.5 or 21107.7, and listed in Section 10.32.080. If any such street later becomes public, the provisions of this chapter shall no longer apply to such street, but all provisions of Title 10 of this code applicable to public streets shall thereafter apply to such street. 
(Ord. 786 § 1(E), 2000)  
10.32.020 - Applicability of state statutes. 
The provisions of the California Vehicle Code, and this chapter, shall apply to the streets described in Section 10.32.010, except where the owner thereof has erected a notice in compliance with Section 21107.5(b) of the California Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 786 § 1(E), 2000)  
10.32.030 - Reckless driving deemed misdemeanor. 
Any person who drives any vehicle on any private street in willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 786 § 1(E), 2000)  
10.32.040 - Basic speed limit. 
A person shall not drive a vehicle upon any private street at a speed greater than fifty-five (55) miles per hour, nor at a speed greater than is reasonable or prudent, having due regard for the traffic on and the surface and width of such private street, and in no event at a speed which endangers the safety of persons or property. 
(Ord. 786 § 1(E), 2000)  
10.32.050 - Reduced speed required in designated areas. 
A.  The speed of any vehicle upon a private street not in excess of the limits specified in this section shall be deemed lawful unless clearly proved to be in violation of the basic speed declared in Section 10.32.020. 
B.  The speed of any vehicle upon a private street in excess of the limits specified in this section shall be deemed unlawful unless not greater than sixty-five (65) miles per hour and the defendant establishes by competent evidence that any said speed in excess of said limits did not constitute a violation of the basic rule declared in Section 10.32.020 at the time, place and under the conditions so existing. 
C.  Fifteen (15) Miles Per Hour. 
1.  When traversing a grade crossing of a steam, electric or street railway, if during the last one hundred (100) feet of the approach to such crossing the driver does not have a clear and unobstructed view of such crossing and of any traffic on such railway for a distance of four hundred (400) feet in both directions along such railway. This subdivision shall not apply in the case of any railway grade crossing where a human flagman is on duty or a clearly visible electrical or mechanical railway-crossing signal device is installed but does not then indicate the immediate approach of a railway train or car; 
2.  When traversing any intersection of the private street with one or more highways or other private streets, or both, if during the last one hundred (100) feet of his approach to such intersection the driver does not have a clear and unobstructed view of such intersection and of any traffic upon all the highways and private streets entering such intersection for a distance of one hundred (100) feet along all such highways and private streets except at a traffic-controlled intersection; 
3.  This paragraph shall not be deemed to attempt to modify, in any way, the provisions of Section 21804 of the State Vehicle Code. 
D.  Twenty-five (25) Miles Per Hour. 
1.  When passing a school building or the grounds thereof contiguous to the private street while children are going to or leaving such school during opening or closing hours or during the noon recess period. This limit also applies when passing any school grounds which are not separated from the private street by a fence, gate or other physical barrier while such grounds are in use by children; 
2.  In any business or residential district as defined in the State Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 786 § 1(E), 2000)  
10.32.060 - Saving clause. 
If either or both subsections A or B of Section 10.32.050 should be held invalid, then, in that event a person shall not drive any vehicle on a private street at speeds greater than specified in subsections C and D of Section 10.32.050. 
(Ord. 786 § 1(E), 2000)  
10.32.070 - Blocking driveways or intersections on private streets. 
A.  A person shall not park any vehicle in front of a driveway or in an intersection on a private street which is open to the public. 
B.  This section does not prohibit any action prohibited by Section 22500 of the Vehicle Code or by any other state law. 
(Ord. 786 § 1(E), 2000)  
10.32.080 - List of private streets. (Reserved) 
(Ord. 786 § 1(E), 2000)  
Title 11 - MOBILEHOMES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 11.06 - MOBILEHOME PARKS ACT 
Sections: 
 
11.06.010 - Assumption of responsibility. 
The city of Lancaster ("city") assume responsibility for the enforcement of the Mobilehome Parks Act (the "Act") set forth in Division 13, Part 2.1 of the California Health and Safety Code (commencing with Section 18200) and related administrative regulations (the "Regulations") which are set forth in Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations, Section 1000 et seq. 
(Ord. 881 § 1 (part), 2007)  
11.06.020 - Delegation of authority. 
Responsibility for enforcing the Act is delegated to the city's division of code enforcement of the department of housing and neighborhood revitalization (the "division"). 
(Ord. 881 § 1 (part), 2007)  
11.06.030 - Enforcement personnel. 
The division shall provide qualified personnel to enforce the Act. The city's housing and neighborhood revitalization director shall initially hire the following personnel to the enforcement program: one code enforcement officer and one administrative clerk. Additional personnel shall be assigned to the enforcement program as needed. 
(Ord. 881 § 1 (part), 2007)  
11.06.040 - Schedule of fees. 
The schedule of fees contained in the act and regulations is adopted by the city. 
(Ord. 881 § 1 (part), 2007)  
11.06.050 - Statement of objectives. 
The state program and objectives contained in the act and regulations are adopted by the city. 
(Ord. 881 § 1 (part), 2007)  
11.06.060 - Description of existing mobilehome parks. 
The existing mobilehome parks in the city are described in Exhibit A attached hereto and incorporated herein by this reference. The occupancy and condition of mobilehome parks cannot be substantiated until after the city has been granted approval by the department of housing and community development (the "HCD") to assume responsibility for enforcing the Act. 
(Ord. 881 § 1 (part), 2007)  
11.06.070 - Local objectives and program plan. 
The specific objectives of the city in assuming responsibility from the HCD are to: (1) provide timely and reliable enforcement of the act and regulations, (2) maintain the condition of mobilehome parks currently in compliance with the Act and upgrade the condition of mobilehome parks which are not presently in compliance with the Act, and (3) promote the general health, safety, and welfare of the entire community. To achieve the foregoing objective, the following program plan shall be implemented within the time periods set forth below: 
A.  Review all relevant records maintained by HCD mobilehome parks in the city and compare same with city's records within thirty (30) days of the effective date of assumption of enforcement by city; 
B.  Ascertain the status of all permits issued pursuant to the Act within thirty (30) days of the effective date of assumption of enforcement by city; 
C.  Contact appropriate parties to inspect all mobilehome parks in the city and the mobilehomes located thereon within one year of the effective date of assumption of enforcement by city; 
D.  Issue notices of violation and obtain compliance with the act and regulations within two years of the effective date of assumption of enforcement by city; 
E.  Initiate an annual inspection program within one year of the effective date of assumption of enforcement by city; 
F.  Investigate and resolve complaints filed with the administrative clerk on a continuous basis. 
(Ord. 881 § 1 (part), 2007)  
11.06.080 - Effective date of assumption of enforcement. 
The effective date of assumption of enforcement responsibilities by the city shall be July 12, 2007. 
(Ord. 881 § 1 (part), 2007)  
11.06.090 - Transmittal of ordinance. 
The city clerk is authorized and directed to transmit two certified copies of the ordinance codified in this chapter to the administrative office of the division of codes and standards immediately upon adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 881 § 1 (part), 2007)  
11.06.100 - Inspection capability. 
The capability of the division to perform mobilehome installation inspections to the satisfaction of the HCD is demonstrated as follows: 
A.  The division has established and operated code enforcement programs since 1978 including, but not limited to, enforcement of this code, building enforcement programs including, but not limited to, enforcement of the State Uniform Building Code, Uniform Housing Code, Uniform Plumbing Code, Uniform Mechanical Code and the National Electrical Code; 
B.  The city of Lancaster has effectively assumed responsibility for the enforcement of the Mobilehome Parks Act for a total of nine years, establishing and operating code enforcement programs including, but not limited to, enforcement of this code, building enforcement programs including, but not limited to, enforcement of the State Uniform Building Code, Uniform Housing Code, Uniform Plumbing Code, Uniform Mechanical Code and the National Electrical Code. 
(Ord. 881 § 1 (part), 2007)  
11.06.110 - Forms. 
The city shall use the following forms provided by HCD to enforce the Act: (1) the application for permit to operate, (2) the permit to operate, and (3) the statement of acceptance. 
(Ord. 881 § 1 (part), 2007)  
11.06.120 - Permits to operate. 
The city agrees to send a copy of all permits to operate to the administrative office of the division of codes and standards not later than the fifteenth of the month following the city's issuance of such permits. 
(Ord. 881 § 1 (part), 2007)  
11.06.130 - Appeals procedure. 
Decisions of the division made pursuant to this chapter may be appealed by any applicant in accordance with the Uniform Appeal Procedure set forth in Chapter 2.44 of this code. Failure of the city clerk to receive a timely appeal constitutes a waiver of the right to contest the decision. 
(Ord. 881 § 1 (part), 2007)  
11.06.140 - Fair housing. 
Mobile home operators shall comply with federal fair housing laws and grant persons with disabilities the ability to make reasonable accommodation requests for equal opportunity use and enjoyment of a dwelling. The mobile home operator shall not refuse residency to persons with disabilities, or place conditions on their residency, on the basis of those persons requiring reasonable accommodation. 
(Ord. No. 971, § 3, 10-25-2011)  
Chapter 11.08 - MOBILEHOME PARK RENT STABILIZATION 
Sections: 
 
11.08.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to protect homeowners in mobilehome parks from unreasonable rent increases by establishing a process to stabilize rents in mobilehome parks and to provide park owners a just and reasonable return on their investment. 
(Ord. No. 927, § 1, 8-11-09; Ord. 881 § 1 (part), 2007)  
11.08.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter: 
"Annual period" means that year commencing on the first day of October. 
"Annual rental increase" means that rental increase established by the city council pursuant to Section 11.08.060, to be effective for the annual period which may be implemented by park owners unless the park owner is otherwise prohibited from doing so pursuant to this chapter. 
"Camping trailer" means a vehicular portable unit mounted on wheels and constructed with collapsible partial sidewalls which fold for towing by another vehicle and unfold at the campsite and designed for human habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy. 
"Commercial coach" means a structure transportable in one or more sections, designed and equipped for human occupancy for industrial, professional or commercial purposes, which is required to be moved under permit as defined in Section 18001.8 of the Health and Safety Code, and shall include a trailer coach as defined in Section 635 of the Vehicle Code. 
"Director" means the director of housing and community revitalization or designee. 
"Homeowner" means a person who has a tenancy in a mobilehome park under a rental agreement. 
"Homeowner petition period" means that period of time of at least sixty (60) days commencing on the date of the receipt of the first written notice to homeowners of a park owner's intent to implement the annual rental increase and ending on the date on which the annual rental increase implemented by the park owner for the tenants' mobilehome park is effective. 
"Homeowner rental adjustment" means that adjustment in implementation of the annual rental increase required pursuant to Section 11.08.080. 
"Manufactured home" means a structure, as defined in Section 18007 of the Health and Safety Code as it currently exists and as may be amended, which is transportable in one or more sections, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling when connected to utilities; and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. 
"Mobilehome." 
1.  "Mobilehome" means a structure designed for human habitation and for being moved on a street or highway under permit pursuant to Section 35790 of the California Vehicle Code, as it currently exists and as may be amended. "Mobilehome" includes a manufactured home as further defined in Section 18007 of the Health and Safety Code and a mobilehome as defined in Section 18008 of the Health and Safety Code, as those sections currently exist or as they may be amended. 
2.  "Mobilehome" does not include a recreational vehicle or a commercial coach except as provided in subsection 3 of this definition. 
3.  "Mobilehome" also means trailers and other recreational vehicles of all types defined in Section 18010 of the Health and Safety Code, other than motor homes, truck campers and camping trailers, which are used for human habitation if: 
a.  The trailer or recreational vehicle occupied a mobilehome space in a mobilehome park on November 15, 1992 under a rental agreement with a term of one month or longer and the trailer or recreational vehicle occupied a mobilehome space in the mobilehome park prior to January 1, 1992; or 
b.  The trailer or recreational vehicle occupies a mobilehome space in a mobilehome park for at least nine continuous months commencing on or after November 15, 1992. 
4.  "Mobilehome" does not include a trailer or recreational vehicle located in a recreational vehicle park subject to Chapter 2.6 of the California Civil Code. 
"Mobilehome park" means any area of land within the city of Lancaster where two or more mobilehome spaces are rented or held out for rent, to accommodate mobilehomes used for human habitation. 
"Mobilehome space" means the site within a mobilehome park intended, designed or used for the location of a mobilehome. 
"Motor home" means a vehicular unit built on, or permanently attached to, a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis, chassis cab or van, which becomes an integral part of the completed vehicle, designated for human habitation for recreational, emergency, or other occupancy. 
"Park owner" means the owner of a mobilehome park or the park owner's designated agent. 
"Park trailer" means a trailer coach, designed for human habitation for recreational or seasonal use only, which meets all of the following criteria: 
1.  It contains four hundred (400) square feet or less of gross floor area measured at the maximum horizontal projections. However, it may not exceed twelve (12) feet in width or forty (40) feet in length in the traveling mode. 
2.  It is built on a single chassis. 
3.  It may only be transported upon the public highways with a permit. 
4.  It is constructed in accordance with Standard No. A119.5 of the American National Standards Institute as it may be amended. 
"Permissive rental adjustment" means that increase in rent permitted pursuant to Section 11.08.070. 
"Recreational vehicle" means a motor home, slide-in camper, travel trailer, truck camper, park trailer or camping trailer, with or without motive power, designed for human habitation for recreational, emergency, or other occupancy as further defined in Section 799.24 of the Civil Code and Section 18010 of the Health and Safety Code as those Sections currently exist or as they may be amended. 
"Rent" means the consideration paid by the homeowner to the park owner for a tenancy in a mobilehome park. If the park owner elects to bill the homeowner separately for utility service fees assessed by a utility for services provided to or for mobilehome spaces in a mobilehome park, such separately billed utility service fees shall not be deemed to be included in the rent charged for a tenancy in the mobilehome park; provided that, at the time of the initial separate billing of such utility service fees, the rent charged by the park owner for a tenancy in the mobilehome park is simultaneously reduced by an amount equal to the amount of the utility service fees separately billed; provided further, that the initial separate billing for such utility service fees shall be equal to the average amount charged to the park management for that utility service for that space during the twelve (12) months preceding notice of the commencement of the separate billing for that utility service; provided further, that the park owner may not initially bill any utility service fees separately until a rental agreement is either renewed, extended or initially executed. In a mobilehome park in which the utility service fee to be separately billed is billed to the park owner on the basis of a master meter or single bill encompassing all mobilehome spaces in the mobilehome park, such separate billing for the utility service fee shall be divided proportionately among all of the mobilehome spaces in the mobilehome park; provided that at the time such utility service fee is initially separately billed, the park owner shall post in a conspicuous location in the mobilehome park copies of the bills for the last twelve (12) months' utility service fee and the calculations done in establishing the initial separate billing. Whenever a park owner is the provider of the utility service to be separately billed, such park owner shall consider all relevant cost factors in establishing the initial separate billing, including, but not limited to, operations and maintenance expenses. To the extent any factors are not considered in the initial separate billing, such factors shall not be considered when adjusting the utility service fee billing in the future. The amount of the initial separate utility service fee billing shall be consistent with the determination of whether such fee is "reasonable" using the operating ratio method rate of return as adopted and utilized by the California Public Utilities Commission (PUC) in determining whether the utility service fee is reasonable. The park owner must itemize each cost factor associated with the utility service when first separately billing, and shall post in a conspicuous location in the mobilehome park the calculations done in establishing the initial separate billing. 
"Rental agreement" means an agreement between the park owner and the homeowner establishing the terms and conditions of a tenancy. A lease is a rental agreement. 
"Slide-in camper" means a portable unit, consisting of a roof, floor and sides, designed to be loaded onto and unloaded from a truck, and designed for human habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy. A "slide-in camper" means a truck camper. 
"Tenancy" means the right of a homeowner to the use of a mobilehome space on which to locate, maintain and occupy a mobilehome, site improvements and accessory structures for human habitation including use of mobilehome park services and facilities. 
"Trailer coach" means a vehicle, other than a motor vehicle, designed for human habitation or occupancy for industrial, professional or commercial purposes, for carrying property on its own structure, and for being drawn by a motor vehicle. 
"Travel trailer" means a portable unit, mounted on wheels of such size and weight as not to require special highway movement permits when drawn by a motor vehicle and for human habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy. 
"Utility service fees" means fees or charges assessed by utilities for natural gas or liquid propane gas, electricity, water, cable television, garbage or refuse service and sewer service to the extent that such services are separately metered or billable for each mobilehome space. 
(Ord. No. 927, § 1, 8-11-09; Ord. 666 § 1, 1994; Ord. 642 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 11-2.2)  
11.08.030 - Exemptions. 
A.  Sections 11.08.060, 11.08.070, 11.08.080 and 11.08.090 of this chapter shall not apply to: 
1.  Tenancies covered by a rental agreement in excess of twelve (12) months' duration in which the homeowner will use the mobilehome space as his personal and primary residence; 
2.  Newly constructed mobilehome spaces initially held out for rent after January 1, 1990; 
3.  Recreational vehicles and commercial coaches, provided the recreational vehicle or commercial coach is not otherwise defined as a mobilehome pursuant to Section 11.08.020. 
B.  Notwithstanding the above, all other portions of this chapter shall apply to all mobilehomes, mobilehome spaces and mobilehome parks within the city. 
(Ord. No. 927, § 1, 8-11-09; Ord. 642 § 1 (part), 1993; prior code § 11-2.3)  
11.08.040 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 927, § 1, adopted August 11, 2009, amended the Code by repealing former § 11.08.040. Former § 11.08.040 pertained to the mobilehome park rent arbitration board, and derived from Ord. 642 of 1993, and prior code § 11-2.4.  
11.08.050 - Registration. 
A.  Within sixty (60) calendar days after the effective date of this chapter, park owners are required to register their mobilehome parks and mobilehome spaces within such mobilehome parks with the city. 
B.  The initial registration and all subsequent quarterly updates shall include: 
1.  The name(s), address(es), telephone number(s) of each person or legal entity possessing an ownership interest in the mobilehome park and the nature of such interest; 
2.  The number of mobilehome spaces within the mobilehome park; 
3.  Identification of all mobilehome spaces within the mobilehome park which are occupied by a recreational vehicle, commercial coach or other vehicle which are exempt from this chapter pursuant to Section 11.08.03; 
4.  Identification of all newly constructed mobilehome spaces initially held out for rent after January 1, 1990 which are exempt from this chapter pursuant to Section 11.08.030; 
5.  A rent schedule reflecting rents within the mobilehome park on the effective date of this chapter and current rents; 
6.  A listing of all other charges, including utilities, paid by homeowners within the mobilehome park and the approximate amount of each such charge; 
7.  The name and address of each homeowner in the mobilehome park; and 
8.  The term of the lease for each homeowner in the mobilehome park and the date on which each lease will terminate. 
C.  To provide the city with current registration information, park owners shall be required on a quarterly basis, to report to the director the information required for registration pursuant to subsection B of this section, including all changes in the prior three months. Four quarterly registration update forms will be mailed to each park owner prior to January 1 of each year for submission to the director. Park owners shall return the forms to the director, postmarked no later than the due date printed on each form (March 31, June 30, September 30, December 31). 
D.  Park owners shall not be entitled to an annual rental increase or to petition for a permissive rental adjustment pursuant to Sections 11.08.060 and 11.08.070, respectively, unless and until the park owner has filed current quarterly registration update forms with the city. 
E.  A copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be and shall remain posted in the office of every mobilehome park and in the recreation building or clubhouse of every mobilehome park and if no recreation building or clubhouse, placed in a conspicuous place in the park. 
F.  Park owners shall pay a fee for initial registration of each mobilehome park as established by resolution of the city council to cover the costs incurred by the city associated with registration. 
(Ord. No. 927, § 1, 8-11-09; Ord. 642 § 1 (part), 1993; prior code § 11-2.5)  
11.08.060 - Annual rental increase. 
A.  Beginning in 1993, and each year thereafter, the annual rental increase to be effective for the annual period commencing October 1 of each year which may be implemented by park owners pursuant to this section shall be established automatically. The annual rental increase shall be determined by multiplying the June, All Items Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, Los Angeles Area as provided by the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics for the preceding twelve-month period by sixty (60) percent. Park owners shall be advised of the annual rental increase amount by the city of Lancaster (for that annual period commencing on October 1, 1992, the city council has set the annual rental increase at 2.3 percent). 
B.  Park owners shall be entitled to increase the rent for a mobilehome space once during each annual period by the annual rental increase for that annual period unless prohibited from increasing rent pursuant to Section 11.08.050.D, 11.08.120 or 11.08.080. The city shall advise those park owners who shall not be entitled to the annual rental increase or who shall not be entitled to petition for a permissive rental adjustment pursuant to Sections 11.08.050.D and 11.08.120, respectively. 
C.  The annual rental increase for a mobilehome space may become effective at any time during the annual period provided that the annual rental increase for a mobilehome space in a mobilehome park shall not become effective until the rental agreement is either renewed, extended or initially executed. 
(Ord. No. 927, § 1, 8-11-09; Ord. 666 §§ 2, 3, 1994: Ord. 642 § 1 (part), 1994: prior code § 11-2.6)  
11.08.070 - Permissive rental adjustments—Park owner petition. 
A.  Petition. A park owner who seeks an increase in rent for mobilehome spaces located in one mobilehome park in addition to the annual rental increase must petition the director for a permissive rental adjustment by submitting the application required by subsection B of this section to the city clerk. A filing fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council shall be charged to cover a portion of the costs of processing the requested adjustment. Applications shall be available at Lancaster City Hall. 
Park owners shall be entitled to apply for one permissive rental adjustment during every annual period for all mobilehome spaces in a mobilehome park unless prohibited from increasing rent pursuant to Section 11.08.050.D or 11.08.120. The permissive rental adjustment shall apply to every mobilehome space in the mobilehome park which is the subject of the application, except for mobilehome spaces exempt from this section pursuant to Section 11.08.030. 
B.  Contents of Application. The application shall specify: 
1.  The address of the mobilehome park; 
2.  The number of mobilehome spaces for which rent would be increased; 
3.  The amount of the requested increase; and 
4.  The reasons for the requested permissive rental adjustment. 
C.  Completed Application. Within fifteen (15) days of receiving an application for a permissive rental adjustment, the director shall determine if the application is complete. If the application is not complete the director shall notify the applicant in writing that additional information is required to complete the application. Following receipt of a completed application and up to three days prior to the date of the hearing described in subsection E of this section, the director may request that the applicant produce relevant records, receipts and papers necessary for the director to rule on the petition. 
D.  Notice of Petition to Homeowner(s). Within fifteen (15) days of determining that a completed application has been submitted, the director shall mail a notice to each homeowner residing at the mobilehome spaces designated in the application. The notice shall specify: 
1.  That an application to increase the homeowner's rent has been submitted; 
2.  The amount of the requested increase; 
3.  A summary of the reasons given by the park owner for the requested increase; 
4.  That the homeowner may inspect documents submitted by the park owner in support of his request; 
5.  That the homeowners may submit to the director any papers, records or other written information relevant to the petition; and 
6.  How to contact the director for further information. 
E.  Permissive Rental Adjustment Hearing. 
1.  Within sixty (60) days of receiving a completed application, the director shall conduct a hearing to rule upon the petition. At least ten (10) days prior to the hearing, notice of the time, date and location of the hearing shall be mailed to the park owner and affected homeowner(s) designated in the application. The director shall render a final decision no later than fifteen (15) days after the hearing. 
2.  The director shall approve such rent increases to the extent that the director determines the rent increase to be fair, just and reasonable. In reviewing an application for a permissive rental adjustment, the director shall consider relevant factors that provide the park owner with a just and reasonable return on his investment, including but not limited to: 
a.  Changes in property taxes or other taxes related to the mobilehome park; 
b.  Changes in maintenance and operating expenses; 
c.  The cost of any capital improvements to the mobilehome park as distinguished from ordinary repair, replacement and maintenance; 
d.  The need for repairs, caused by circumstances other than ordinary wear and tear; 
e.  Failure of the park owner to perform repairs and maintenance or to provide adequate mobilehome park services to affected homeowners designated in the application, or to comply with applicable mobilehome park laws, local housing and health and safety codes; 
f.  The pattern of rent increases or decreases for the affected mobilehome space; 
g.  The rent lawfully charged for comparable mobilehome spaces in the city; 
h.  Changes in rent paid by the applicant for the lease of the land where the mobilehome park is located; 
i.  Changes in the utility charges or utility service fees for the mobilehome park paid by the applicant to the extent that such charges have not already been excluded from the definition of "rent" pursuant to Section 11.08.020; and 
j.  Existing written leases between the applicant and homeowners. 
To the extent that these factors are not components of the Consumer Price Index, these factors shall be considered by the director to ensure that the park owner receives a just and reasonable return on his investment. 
3.  At the hearing, the park owner and the affected homeowners may offer oral testimony relevant to the petition. Papers, records, and other documentation which were not submitted prior to the hearing shall not be offered unless good cause is shown why such documentation was not submitted prior to the hearing. 
4.  If the director cannot conduct a hearing within sixty (60) days after receiving a completed application, the director may postpone the date for conducting the hearing by thirty (30) days. A hearing may be continued for fifteen (15) days based upon a finding of good cause made by the director. 
5.  The decision of the director shall be appealable to the city council in accordance with the Uniform Appeals Procedure set forth in Chapter 2.44 of this Code. Notice of the director's determination shall be mailed to the park owner and to the homeowners designated in the application. 
(Ord. No. 927, § 1, 8-11-09; Ord. 642 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 11-2.7)  
11.08.080 - Homeowner rental adjustments—Homeowner petitions. 
A.  Petition. Homeowners may petition the director to prohibit the implementation of the annual rental increase by their park owner. A majority of the homeowners who reside in mobilehome spaces in one mobilehome park may petition the director for a homeowner rental adjustment by submitting the application required by subsection B of this section to the city clerk. For purposes of this section, there shall exist one homeowner for each mobilehome space in the mobilehome park for which rent is collected and "homeowner" shall mean a homeowner with a rental agreement with a term of twelve (12) months or less in duration. A filing fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council shall be charged to cover a portion of the costs of processing the requested adjustment. Applications shall be available at Lancaster City Hall. 
Homeowners shall be entitled to apply for one homeowner rental adjustment during every annual period provided that the application required by Subsection B of this section is submitted to the city clerk prior to the expiration of the homeowner petition period as set forth in Section 11.08.020. 
B.  Contents of Application. The application shall specify: (1) the address of the mobilehome park; (2) the number of mobilehome spaces for which rent is collected; (3) the names, addresses and telephone numbers of all of the petitioners; (4) the reasons for the requested homeowner rental adjustment; and (5) the names of at least two spokespersons for the petitioners who shall thereafter be authorized by the petitioners to respond to any requests from the city for additional information. A petition requesting a homeowner rental adjustment shall be attached to the application; the petition must be signed by a majority of the homeowners who reside in mobile-home spaces for which rent is collected in the mobilehome park. All petition pages must clearly and uniformly state the reasons for the requested homeowner rental adjustment. Such language must match the language used on the application for mobilehome space rental decrease, which is completed and filed with the director along with the homeowner's petition page(s). 
C.  Completed Application. Within fifteen (15) days of receiving an application for a homeowner rental adjustment, the director shall determine if the application is complete. If the application is not complete, the director shall notify the petitioning homeowners through the homeowners' spokespersons in writing that additional information is required to complete the application. 
D.  Notice of Petition. Within fifteen (15) days of determining that a completed application has been submitted, the director shall notify the park owner and each homeowner by mail that: 
1.  An application to prohibit the implementation of the annual rental adjustment has been submitted; 
2.  A summary of the reasons given for the requested homeowner rental adjustment; 
3.  The director shall presume that the homeowner rental adjustment is warranted; 
4.  The park owner may submit to the director any papers, records or other written information relevant to rebut the presumption that the homeowner rental adjustment is warranted; and 
5.  How to contact the director for further information. 
E.  Presumption Favoring Homeowners. The director shall presume that the homeowner rental adjustment is warranted and in the absence of any further evidence shall so find. However, a park owner may rebut the presumption set forth in this subsection D of this section with any relevant information. 
F.  Homeowner Rental Adjustment Hearing. The director shall conduct a hearing to rule upon the petition in the same manner that the director conducts permissive rental adjustment hearings pursuant to Section 11.08.070.E. For purposes of this subsection, "permissive rental adjustment" in Section 11.08.070.F shall mean homeowner rental adjustment. The director shall approve prohibitions in the implementation of the annual rental increase to the extent that the director determines the prohibition to be fair, just and reasonable. 
G.  Implementation of Annual Rental Increase Prior to Hearing. In the event that the homeowner rental adjustment hearing is conducted after the expiration of the sixty (60) day notice period of the park owner's intent to implement the annual rental increase, a park owner may implement the annual rental increase. However, the director may order at the homeowner rental adjustment hearing that the park owner rebate to the homeowners that portion of the annual rental increase that the director determines that the park owner is prohibited from implementing pursuant to subsection F of this section. 
(Ord. No. 927, § 1, 8-11-09; Ord. 660 § 1, 1994; Ord. 642 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 11-2.8)  
11.08.090 - No vacancy increases. 
When a mobilehome located upon that mobile-home space is sold, the park owner may not increase the rent for any such mobilehome space except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or when the mobilehome is removed from the mobilehome space and that mobilehome space is vacant. 
(Ord. No. 927, § 1, 8-11-09; Ord. 642 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 11-2.9)  
11.08.100 Notice - of rent increase. 
Park owners shall give homeowners written notice of any increase in their rent at least ninety (90) days prior to the effective date of the increase. A copy of all rent increase notices shall be forwarded to the director. 
(Ord. No. 927, § 1, 8-11-09; Ord. 660 § 2, 1994: Ord. 642 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 11-2.10)  
11.08.110 - Rental agreements in general. 
A homeowner shall be offered a rental agreement for (A) a term of twelve (12) months; or (B) a lesser period as the homeowner may request pursuant to the provisions of Civil Code Section 798.18; or (C) a longer period as mutually agreed upon by both the homeowner and the park owner. No such agreement shall contain any terms or conditions with respect to charges for rent, utilities or incidental reasonable service charges that would be different during the first twelve (12) months of the agreement from corresponding terms or conditions that would be offered to the homeowners on a month-to-month basis. All rental agreements shall comply in every respect with the requirements of the California Civil Code as they relate to rental of mobilehome spaces. 
(Ord. No. 927, § 1, 8-11-09; Ord. 642 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 11-2.11)  
11.08.120 Rent - disputes—homeowner complaints. 
A.  A homeowner who desires to register a complaint with the city must submit the complaint form required by subsection B of this section to the city clerk. Complaint forms shall be available at Lancaster City Hall. 
B.  The complaint form shall specify: 
1.  The name and address of the mobilehome park; 
2.  The name, address (including mobilehome space number) and telephone number of the person filing the complaint; and 
3.  The nature of the complaint. 
A copy of the lease agreement currently in effect for the mobilehome space which is the subject of the complaint must be attached to the complaint form in order for the city to process the complaint. The city may additionally request that the person filing the complaint submit other relevant documents in their possession to the city. Complaints will not be processed until all relevant documents have been submitted to the city. 
C.  The city may request that park owners submit additional relevant documents. Park owners shall honor all reasonable city requests. Failure of a park owner to honor a reasonable request for submission of documents may be grounds for the city council's determination that a park owner shall not be permitted to implement the annual rental increase nor petition the director for a permissive rental adjustment pursuant to Section 11.08.070. 
(Ord. No. 927, § 1, 8-11-09; Ord. 642 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 11-2.12)  
11.08.130 - Remedies. 
A.  Civil. A park owner who demands or accepts payment of rent in violation of this chapter, shall be liable in a civil action to the homeowner from whom such payment is demanded or accepted for reasonable attorneys fees and costs, plus damages in an amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or three (3) times the amount of the payment demanded or accepted in excess of the rent which could be lawfully charged pursuant to this chapter, whichever is the greater. 
B.  Criminal. Any park owner violating this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or both fine and imprisonment. 
C.  The city may issue an administrative citation for each violation of this chapter pursuant to the procedures set forth in chapter 9.48; provided, however, that notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 9.48.060(E), the penalty amounts of administrative citations issued for violations of this chapter shall be as follows, which amounts the city council may periodically adjust by resolution: 
1.  For the first administrative citation, the penalty shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) per month during which the park owner demands or accepts payments of rent in violation of this chapter; 
2.  For the second and any subsequent administrative citation, the penalty shall be one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per month during which the park owner demands or accepts payments of rent in violation of this chapter. 
D.  The remedies provided herein are not to be construed as exclusive remedies, and in the event of violation, the city may pursue any proceedings or remedies otherwise provided by law. Any administrative citation issued pursuant to this chapter shall not prejudice or adversely affect any other civil, administrative or criminal action that may be brought to correct or abate any violation caused by a park owner under this chapter. A civil or criminal action may be brought concurrently with any other process regarding the same violation. 
(Ord. No. 1055 , § 1, 2-26-2019; Ord. No. 927, § 1, 8-11-09; Ord. 642 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 11-2.13)  
11.08.140 - Amendments. 
This chapter may be amended at any time, by ordinance, adopted by a majority vote of the city council after a duly noticed public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 927, § 1, 8-11-09; Ord. 642 § 1 (part), 1993: prior code § 11-2.14)  
Chapter 11.12 - MOBILEHOME PARK CONVERSION 
Sections: 
 
11.12.010 - Findings and declaration of purpose. 
Mobilehome owners make considerable investments in purchasing, maintaining, and improving their mobilehomes, but must rent a space for the home in a mobilehome park and cannot easily move the mobilehome due to the high cost and risk of damage involved in moving a mobilehome. Further, park owners prefer to rent any vacant spaces to new homes and frequently refuse to rent a space to a homeowner wishing to relocate a home that is not new. In recognition of the unique situation and vulnerability of mobilehome owners created by these facts, the State Mobilehome Residency Law, Civil Code Section 798, et seq. and Government Code Sections 65863.7 and 66427.4, limit the grounds on which mobilehome owners may be evicted from a mobilehome park, protect their right to sell their mobilehomes in place in a mobilehome park and authorizes local jurisdictions to impose reasonable measures to mitigate the adverse impacts on displaced mobilehome owners when a mobilehome park closes or converts to another use. Pursuant to these state laws, this chapter provides a procedure and standards for reviewing applications for change of use and closure of mobilehome parks, determining reasonable mitigation measures and protecting residents from tactics such as intimidation, designed to pressure mobilehome owners to relocate without receiving assistance pursuant to this chapter. Without such assistance mobilehome owners may lose the investment in their homes, which may be their only asset, and may not be able to relocate to decent, affordable housing. 
(Ord. 879 § 1 (part), 2007)  
11.12.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
"Applicant" means a person or entity who has filed an application for change of use of a mobilehome park. 
"Change of use" means and includes all activities specified in Section 798.10 of the California Civil Code and amendments to the general plan or any applicable specific plan, rezoning of property, land use permits, such as a conditional use permit or a variance, tentative parcel or tentative tract maps, and building permits when they involve changing the use of or closing a mobilehome park or part thereof. "Change of use" includes closure of a park when no new use is planned. 
"Comparable housing" means housing which is comparable in floor area, number of bedrooms, and amenities, proximity to public transportation, shopping, schools, employment opportunities and medical services and other relevant facts to the mobilehome to which comparison is being made. 
"Comparable mobilehome park" means a mobilehome park substantially equal in terms of park condition, amenities, and other relevant factors, including, but not limited to, proximity to public transportation, shopping, medical services, employment opportunities and schools. 
"Director" means the director of planning of the city. 
"Eligible mobilehome resident" or "eligible resident" means a mobilehome resident whose mobilehome was located in a mobilehome park on the date of an application for change of use. Eligible resident includes the spouse, parents, children and grandchildren of the eligible resident when those persons resided in the mobilehome on the date of the application. 
"Handicapped mobilehome resident" means a mobilehome resident with any medically determinable physical or mental impairment as demonstrated by a finding of a state or federal agency of a medical certificate, or who requires special care facilities in the mobilehome or special care equipment, such as, but not limited to, a wheelchair. 
"Legal owner" means any person or entity having an ownership interest in a mobilehome other than the registered owner, such as a lender or mortgagor. 
"Low income" means an income of eighty percent or less of current median income as established annually by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development ("HUD") for the Los Angeles Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area ("SMSA") as adjusted for household size. 
"Mobilehome" has the same meaning set forth in Section 798.3 of the California Civil Code. 
"Mobilehome owner" means the registered owner or registered owners of a mobilehome, regardless of the number if such owners or the form of such ownership. 
"Mobilehome park" or "park" has the same meaning set forth in Section 11.08.020 of this code. 
"Mobilehome park owner" or "park owner" means the person, persons or entity that owns a mobilehome park and includes any person authorized by the park owner to seek approval of an application for change of use or respond to a rent review petition filed pursuant to this chapter. 
"Mobilehome resident" or "resident" means a mobilehome owner who resides in the mobilehome he or she owns. Resident includes the mobilehome owner's spouse, parents, children and grandchildren who reside in the mobilehome. 
"Mobilehome tenant" or "tenant" means a person who occupies a mobilehome within a mobilehome park pursuant to a bona fide lease or rental agreement and who, during his or her tenancy, was not the owner of that mobilehome. 
(Ord. 879 § 1 (part), 2007)  
11.12.030 - Application and relocation impact report—Data on mobilehome owners and park residents—Duty to file. 
A.  Prior to a change of use of a mobilehome park, an application therefore and a relocation impact report ("RIR") complying with the requirements of this chapter must be filed with the director. No application shall be deemed complete or processed for consideration and approval until an application and RIR meeting all the requirements of this chapter have been filed. No oral or written announcement or notice that a mobilehome park is closing or changing the use of a mobilehome park, or will be applying to do so, may be made by any mobilehome park owner, or any person or entity acting on behalf of a mobilehome park or mobilehome park owner, before an application for change of use has been filed pursuant to this chapter. The city council, by resolution, may impose a fee for review of the application and RIR. 
B.  The RIR shall contain the following information: 
1.  A description of any proposed new use; 
2.  A timetable for conversion of the park; 
3.  A legal description of the park; 
4.  The number of spaces in the park, length of occupancy by the current occupant of each space, and the current rental rate for each space; 
5.  The date of manufacture and size of each mobilehome by space; 
6.  Appraisals of the on-site value, depreciated replacement value and removal value of the mobilehome of each eligible resident in the park. A qualified appraiser shall be selected by the city and the cost of appraisals shall be borne by the applicant. The appraisals shall identify those mobilehomes which cannot be moved due to type, age or other considerations; 
7.  The total number of mobilehome residents, broken down space by space to identify owner or renter occupancy, principal or second home occupancy, residents under sixteen (16) years of age, residents sixty (60) years of age or over, residents who are handicapped, any remaining mortgage and its terms, the purchase date and price paid by the mobilehome owner, the cost incurred by the mobilehome owner in improving the home and the amount and terms of any remaining mortgage. This information shall be provided on a questionnaire developed by the director and sent to the residents by the director who shall use the information in evaluating the application and any appropriate relocation assistance, provided, however, that the questionnaires shall remain confidential and that, to the extent possible, the director shall maintain the confidentiality of the personal financial information contained in the questionnaire; 
8.  The name and mailing address of each eligible resident, mobilehome tenant, mobilehome resident, resident mobilehome owner and legal owner of a mobilehome in the park; 
9.  The purchase price of condominiums similar in size to the mobilehomes within a reasonable distance, and the rental rates and moving costs involved in moving to an apartment or other rental unit within a reasonable distance, including but not limited to, fees charged by moving companies and any requirement for payment of the first and last month's rent and security deposits; 
10.  A list of comparable mobilehome parks within a fifty (50) mile radius of the applicant's mobilehome park. For each comparable park, the list shall state the criteria of that park for accepting relocated mobilehomes, rental rates and the name, address and telephone number of the park representative having authority to accept relocated homes, including any written commitments from mobilehome park owners willing to accept displaced mobilehomes; 
11.  Estimates from two moving companies as to the minimum and per mile cost of moving each mobilehome, including tear-down and setup of mobilehomes and moving improvements such as porches, carports, patios, and other movable amenities installed by the residents. Said moving companies shall be approved by the director prior to inclusion in the final RIR; 
12.  Proposed measures to mitigate the adverse impacts of the conversion upon the mobilehome park residents; 
13.  Identification of a relocation specialist to assist residents in finding relocation spaces and alternate housing. The specialist shall be selected by the applicant, subject to the city's approval, and shall be paid for by the applicant. 
(Ord. 879 § 1 (part), 2007)  
11.12.040 - Notice to existing and prospective occupants regarding pending change in status of park—Relocation assistance. 
When an application for change of use of a mobilehome park has been filed with the director, the applicant shall give notice to all existing tenants of the subject park, and all prospective mobilehome purchasers and prospective mobilehome tenants within the park, prior to commencement of escrow to purchase the home and execution of any rental agreement, that the application for change of use has been filed and that they may not be entitled to relocation assistance pursuant to this chapter. The park owner shall obtain a signed acknowledgment of receipt of such notice from each tenant and prospective purchaser or tenant and file it with the director. Provided all requirements of Section 798.80 of the California Civil Code or successor statute have been complied with, tenants of the mobilehome park shall have the right of first refusal to purchase the mobilehome park prior to its sale to some other individual or entity. 
(Ord. 879 § 1 (part), 2007)  
11.12.050 - Application for change of use—Public hearing—Findings. 
A.  Upon the filing of an application for change of use and RIR, or for exemption from the requirements of Government Code Section 65863.7, the director shall examine the same and advise the applicant in writing within thirty (30) days after receipt thereof whether it is complete. The application for a change of use and RIR shall be accepted for filing without the appraisals and confidential tenant information required by Section 11.12.030(B)(6) of this chapter, but the application shall not be deemed complete until that information has been supplied by the applicant. If the applicant fails to provide the information required by Section 11.12.030(B)(6) of this chapter within one hundred twenty (120) days of filing the application, the application shall be deemed withdrawn. 
B.  An application for exemption from the requirements of Section 65863.7 of the California Government Code shall specify whether it is for a partial or complete exemption and shall provide documentary evidence of the qualification for any exemption allowed by Section 65863.7 of the California Government Code. The application shall contain the information required in Section 11.12.030(B) of this chapter except that it need not provide the information required by Sections 11.12.030(B)(6), 11.12.030(B)(9), and/or 11.12.030(B)(12). Further, while the applicant must identify a qualified relocation specialist, the requirement that the services of the specialist be paid for by the applicant may be waived. 
C.  Not less than thirty (30) days prior to the scheduled public hearing before the planning commission, the park owner shall, by certified mail or personal delivery, transmit to the registered land legal owner of each mobilehome occupying a site within a mobilehome park and to each resident a copy of the RIR and notice of the date, time and place of the public hearing on the application. 
D.  Not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the scheduled public hearing before the planning commission on the RIR, the park owner shall file with the director a verification that he has complied with the requirements of this section pertaining to notices and transmittal of copies of the RIR and with all notice requirements in California Government Code Section 65863.7, et seq. The form and manner of such verification shall be subject to approval by the city attorney. 
E.  Planning Commission Hearing, Findings and Advisory Decision. Upon review of an application for change of use or exemption and the RIR and consideration of the written and oral evidence received at the hearing, the planning commission shall render its findings and recommendation to the city council by resolution within ninety-five (95) days of the date the application and RIR were accepted as complete. In rendering its advisory decision, the planning commission shall recommend reasonable measures not exceeding the reasonable costs of relocation to mitigate the adverse impacts on eligible residents displaced by the change of use, which may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Payment of the cost of physically moving the mobilehome to a new site, including tear-down and setup of mobilehomes, including, but not limited to, movable improvements such as patios, carports and porches; 
2.  Payment of a lump sum based on consideration of the fair market value of any permanent improvement, fixture or any other improvement that is not capable of being moved to a new site; 
3.  Payment of a lump sum based on consideration of the first and last month's rent and any security deposit at the new mobilehome park; 
4.  Payment of a lump sum based on consideration of any differential between rental rates at the closing mobilehome park and the new mobilehome park during the first year of the new tenancy; 
5.  For residents whose mobilehome cannot be relocated to a comparable park within a fifty (50) mile radius of the closing mobilehome park, payment of a lump sum based upon consideration of the value of the mobilehome, including resident improvements (i.e., landscaping, porches, carports, etc.), any mortgage obligations of the resident on the mobilehome, and the costs of purchasing a mobilehome on-site in a comparable park or acquiring other comparable replacement housing; 
6.  Provision of a replacement space within a reasonable distance of the closing mobilehome park; 
7.  Provision, at no cost to each eligible resident, of a reasonably complete and current list of vacant and available mobilehome park spaces or mobilehomes, as the case may be, within a thirty (30) mile radius of the park; 
8.  A reasonable and good faith effort to assure that qualified residents without cars are driven, at no cost to the qualified resident, and residents with cars are assisted, in order to inspect replacement spaces or homes, as the case may be; 
9.  Provision of an ambulance or similar vehicle, at no cost to the qualified resident, to assists any disabled or handicapped mobilehome resident with relocation-related activity; 
10.  Any other payment, provision or measure that the planning commission finds will mitigate the adverse impacts on eligible residents displaced by the change of use; 
11.  Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, the total of the mitigation measures required shall be subject to and shall not exceed the limitation in Section 65863.7 of the California Government Code, which provides: "the steps taken to mitigate shall not exceed the reasonable costs of relocation"; 
12.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, if the mobilehome park closure or cessation in use is the result of an adjudication of bankruptcy, the park owner shall not be required to pay relocation assistance. (See California Government Code Section 65863.7(f)). 
F.  City Council Hearing, Findings and Decision. 
1.  The application for change of use and any application for exemption shall be set for hearing before the city council within forty-five (45) days of the date of the planning commission resolution recommending the mitigation measures to be imposed on the change of use of a park or exemption from the provision of relocation assistance. 
2.  The city council, after review and consideration of the application, the RIR and the written and oral evidence received at the hearing, shall by resolution render its findings and decision within eighty (80) days of the date of the planning commission resolution. 
3.  The city council shall impose reasonable measures not exceeding the reasonable costs of relocation to mitigate the adverse impacts of the change in use on eligible mobilehome residents pursuant to subsection E of this section. The decision of the city council shall be final. Pursuant to Section 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil Procedure, the statute of limitations for bringing a judicial challenge to any decision concerning a change of use of a mobilehome park shall be ninety (90) days and notice of the city's decision to the applicant, park owner, and affected residents shall include notice that the ninety (90) day statute of limitations in Section 1094.6 is applicable. 
(Ord. 879 § 1 (part), 2007)  
11.12.060 - Measures to prevent avoidance of relocation assistance obligations. 
A.  No notice or other announcement that a park is closing, or converting to another use, or may close or convert to another use, may be made before the park owner has filed an application for change of use with the city. No signs may be posted on or adjacent to the park property indicating that the park is closed or converted to another use until the application and RIR has been approved and the park owner has executed and filed with the director a written acceptance of the mitigation requirements imposed on the change in use pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  Any eligible resident who relocates after an application for a change of use is filed shall be entitled to the relocation assistance imposed as a condition of the change of use even if that resident relocates before the final decision of the city council determining the required relocation assistance pursuant to this chapter. 
C.  Each park owner shall send a copy of this chapter to each existing and new resident of the park by certified mail or personal delivery. Each park owner shall maintain records and/or evidence demonstrating compliance with this subsection and shall surrender such records and/or evidence to the city of Lancaster upon written request. 
D.  No prospective mobilehome resident who enters escrow to purchase a mobilehome in a park prior to the date an application for change of use is filed and no existing mobilehome resident may be required to sign a waiver, or a lease or rental agreement which includes a waiver, of their rights in this chapter. Any waiver of rights under this chapter by such a mobilehome resident shall be deemed invalid unless the resident or prospective resident and the park owner obtain the prior approval of the waiver from the director, who may grant such approval only upon a finding that the waiver is voluntary and was made after being fully informed of the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. 879 § 1 (part), 2007)  
11.12.070 - Compliance with relocation assistance required as a condition of approval of a change of use. 
A.  The applicant shall execute and record a certificate, and file proof thereof with the director, accepting the mitigation measures imposed on the approval of a change of use within ninety (90) days of the final resolution approving the change of use and shall give the six-month notice of the "Termination of Tenancy" and closure of the park required by the California Civil Code within one hundred twenty (120) days of the adoption of that resolution. A resolution approving a change of use shall automatically become null and void if the certificate accepting the conditions is not filed and executed within ninety (90) days of the date of the final resolution approving the change of use and the notice of "Termination of Tenancy" has not been given within one hundred twenty (120) days of that resolution. All mitigation measures imposed on the approval of a change of use shall be fully performed as to each resident prior to that resident's required vacation of the mobilehome park, unless otherwise provided in the mitigation measure. No eligible resident shall be required to vacate a mobilehome space unless the applicant is in full compliance with all mitigation measures imposed pertaining to such resident, and has otherwise fulfilled the notice requirements of the California Mobilehome Residency Law relating to "Termination of Tenancy." 
B.  No building permit shall be issued for the development of any real property which has been, or is being, converted from a mobilehome park pursuant to this chapter unless and until the city has adopted a resolution approving the change of use and the park owner has fully complied with the reasonable mitigation measures required by that resolution. 
(Ord. 879 § 1 (part), 2007)  
11.12.080 - Modification and revocation of approved change of use. 
A.  Modification. 
1.  After a change of use has been approved and after the applicant has executed and recorded a certificate of acceptance of the conditions of the resolution approving it, modification of the mitigation measures imposed, including additions and deletions, may be considered upon the filing of a written application by the applicant. Modification may be granted on the grounds that there has been a change in circumstances or new information, which could not reasonably have been known or considered at the time of the hearings on the application, has become available. Examples of such new information or changed circumstances include, but are not limited to, revised plans by the applicant and a change in the availability of relocation spaces. Modification shall not be granted when it would unreasonably prejudice the ability of the residents to relocate to comparable spaces or comparable alternate housing. 
2.  Any application for modification shall be subject to the notice and hearing procedures set forth in Sections 11.12.050 and 11.12.060. The decision in connection with a modification request shall take place as with the initial approval. 
B.  Revocation. 
1.  The city council may by resolution initiate revocation proceedings on the grounds that the park owner or applicant has violated the provisions of this chapter or the terms of the resolution approving the change of use. The resolution shall specify the grounds asserted for revocation of the approval of the change of use by the park and shall set a hearing before the city council to consider the revocation not sooner than forty-five (45) and not later than sixty (60) days after the date of the resolution. 
2.  A copy of the resolution shall be sent to the park owner by certified mail or personal delivery together with notice that any response by the park must be filed at least twenty (20) days prior to the date set for the revocation hearing. 
3.  The city council shall render its findings and decision concerning revocation by resolution within ninety (90) days after the initiating revocation proceedings. 
(Ord. 879 § 1 (part), 2007)  
11.12.090 - Expiration and extension of approval. 
A.  Approval of a change of use shall become null and void if the notice of "Termination of Tenancy" has not been given within the time provided in Section 11.12.070 and relocation pursuant to the conditions of approval has not occurred within twelve (12) months of the effective date of the resolution approving the change of use, unless otherwise extended as provided in subsection B of this section or unless otherwise provided in the resolution approving it. 
B.  Upon application by the park owner filed with the director on or before the time provided for giving the notice of termination or the expiration of the approval of the change of use, the date for giving notice and the approval may be extended by the city council upon a showing of good cause. The request may be denied if the city council finds that the park owner has unreasonably delayed implementation of the mitigation measures or that further delay will result in prejudice or further adverse impacts upon eligible residents remaining in the park. Approval of an extension may be conditioned on reasonable measures designed to mitigate the adverse impacts resulting from the delay. The application for extension shall be subject to the notice and hearing procedures set forth in Section 11.12.080(B). 
(Ord. 879 § 1 (part), 2007)  
11.12.100 - Enforcement. 
A.  The city council may bring a civil action to enforce the terms of this chapter or the terms of a resolution approving a change of use. 
B.  A violation of this chapter or of the terms of a resolution approving a change of use shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each violation of a section or subsection of this chapter shall be a separate violation, each violation of each term of such resolution as to a particular eligible resident shall be a separate violation and each continued day of violation after notice of violation has been given shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. 879 § 1 (part), 2007)  
11.12.110 - Conflicts. 
In the event the provisions of this chapter conflict with any code, ordinance or regulation of the city, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. In the event any provisions of this chapter conflict with a provision of state law, this chapter shall be interpreted and applied in conformity with state law. 
(Ord. 879 § 1 (part), 2007)  
11.12.120 - Severability. 
If any part of this chapter is held invalid, or the application of such to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter, including the application of such part or provision to other persons or circumstanced, shall not be effected and shall continue in full force and effect. To this end, the provisions of this chapter are severable. 
(Ord. 879 § 1 (part), 2007) 

Title 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
Chapter 12.04 - PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS RULES AND REGULATIONS 

12.04.010 - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as defined in this section: 
    "Alcoholic beverage" means alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every liquid or solid containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or combined with other substances. 
    "Amplified sound" means sound projected and transmitted by electronic equipment, including amplifiers. 
    "Amplified speech" means speech projected and transmitted by electronic means. 
    "Buildings" means those structures or any portion thereof under the management of the city and made available for the use of permittees, including parking areas. 
    "City" means the city of Lancaster. 
    "City manager" means the city manager of the city of Lancaster, or a designated representative to act in his/her place. 
    "Designated representative" means a person appointed by the city manager or the city council to act as a representative. 
    "Director" means the director of the city of Lancaster parks, recreation and arts department or a designated representative to act in his/her place. 
    "Facilities" or "area" means city-owned or leased property, improved or unimproved city park and park amenities. 
    "Parks" means all grounds, roadways and lands acquired by the city or any area thereof which is controlled by the city. 
    "Permit" means a document that authorizes use of parks, equipment or building as provided for and defined within city ordinances. 
    "Persons" means individuals, groups, organizations, associations, partnerships, firms and corporations. 
    "Section" means a section of this part unless some other statute or policy is specifically identified. 
    "Shall" means mandatory; "may" means permissive. 
(Prior code § 4-1.68) 
12.04.020 - Authority and enforcement. 
    The elected city council authorizes the city manager to implement and administer the policies, ordinances and regulations contained therein. Whenever a power is granted to or a duty imposed on the city manager, the powers may be exercised or the duty performed by a designated representative of the city manager, unless this policy expressly provides otherwise. The city manager shall enforce the provisions of this part. 
(Prior code § 4-1.69) 
12.04.030 - Peace officer. 
    City and Los Angeles County employees who are certified peace officers shall have the authority to warn, evict, arrest and cite persons who violate any provisions of the city ordinance. City and county peace officers shall carry proper identification. 
(Prior code § 4-1.70) 
12.04.040 - Entry to activities. 
    The city manager, or a duly authorized representative, may enter any park area or recreation facility at any time to inspect the premises for safety, compliance of use, hazards, or other reasons deemed necessary by the city. 
(Prior code § 4-1.71) 
12.04.050 - Powers of use and park closure. 
A.  Hours. The use of all public parks and recreation areas within the city limits is prohibited without a permit from the hours of ten (10) p.m. to six (6) a.m. 
B.  Park Closure. The city manager, or a duly authorized representative, may close a park area or recreation facility at any time there is an apparent danger to the persons using the property itself, or for any cause which would provide for the safety and protection of the public. This section may be enforced without concurrence of those individuals or groups involved in the use of the parks. Remaining in an area closed by the city manager or authorized representative is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 990, § 1, 5-14-2013; Prior code § 4-1.72) 
12.04.060 - Use of city equipment by noncity groups. 
    City equipment is provided for the express purpose of carrying out the city functions. Requests received from noncity local groups or organizations for the use of city equipment shall be made in writing to the city. Such requests may be granted by the city manager provided that such use does not interfere with city operations. Appropriate fees may be charged. 
(Ord. 724 § 6, 1996; prior code § 4-1.73) 
12.04.070 - Exclusion from city areas or facilities. 
    When in the interest of public health, safety or welfare, it is determined that it is in the best public interest to exclude persons or groups from any city area and/or facility, such action may be taken by the city manager, or his designated representative, subject to appeal to the city council. 
(Prior code § 4-1.74) 
12.04.080 - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the operation of city-owned or operated vehicles or personnel who engage in official city business. 
(Prior code § 4-1.75) 
12.04.090 - Liability. 
    All persons to whom a use permit is granted must agree in writing to hold the city harmless and indemnify city from any and all liability for injury to persons or property occurring as the result of the activity sponsored by permittee, and said persons shall be liable to the city for any and all damages to parks, equipment and buildings owned or controlled by city which result from the activity or permittee or is caused by any participant in said activity. A person exercising any of the privileges authorized by this policy does so at his own risk without liability on the part of the city for any injury to persons or property resulting therefrom. 
    When an association or organization which carries public liability insurance requests the use of city facilities, or when the city is involved with scheduling and/or coordinating their activities, a certificate of co-insurance naming the city as an additional insured must be filed with the city five days prior to the first day of use of facilities involved. The city may require proof of liability insurance with limit of bodily injury and property damage of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) and a certificate of co-insurance for any group when it is determined that the planned activity is judged to be other than a low risk activity. 
(Prior code § 4-1.76) 
12.04.100 - Damage to buildings, facilities and equipment. 
    Individuals or groups causing damage to any building, grounds, fixtures, furniture or appurtenance shall be required to reimburse the city for all costs involved to restore the building, grounds, fixtures, furniture or appurtenance to its original condition. Such individuals or groups shall be subject to refusal of use in the future. 
(Prior code § 4-1.77) 
12.04.110 - Vandalism. 
    Persons causing vandalism, or parents of persons under the age of eighteen (18), will be held financially responsible for the full amount of damages, or the maximum allowed under the California Civil Code, Sections 1714.1 and 1714.3 or subsequent sections. All provisions of the California Penal Code, Section 594, referring to malicious mischief, are applicable. 
(Prior code § 4-1.78) 
12.04.120 - Security. 
    To ensure proper use and control of facilities and equipment, a security guard may be required when an event is the major use of a facility. Additional security measures may be required to protect the general public and city property. 
(Prior code § 4-1.79) 
12.04.130 - Disturbing the peace (as defined in the California Penal Code, Section 415). 
    It is unlawful for a person to do any of the following within a park: 
A.  Fight or challenge another person to fight; 
B.  Use offensive words which are likely to incite imminent lawless action; 
C.  Maliciously and wilfully disturb another person by loud and unreasonable noise, provided however, where the noise is a result of communications made in a loud manner, the communication shall be unlawful only where it is likely to incite imminent lawless action, or where the communication is not intended as such but is merely a guise to disturb persons. 
(Ord. 699 § 1, 1995: prior code § 4-1.80) 
12.04.140 - Application for use. 
A.  The city manager shall reserve the right to grant or deny all applications for the use of parks or buildings within the city. Unless waived by the city manager, all applications for use of city parks or buildings shall be signed by an adult twenty-one (21) years of age or over who shall be responsible for compliance with the terms of the permit. 
B.  Requests for use shall be made a minimum of fourteen (14) days and a maximum of six months prior to the date of requested use. Exception: Alcoholic beverage permits must be made in person a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to the event. 
C.  Denial of an application shall be based on the following criteria: 
1.  When a building or a park with the required capacity for the proposed activity is not available; 
2.  Refusal by an applicant to agree in writing to conditions of the permit; 
3.  Failure of an applicant to file an application in sufficient time for administrative review; 
4.  The failure to provide the required number of personnel to properly police and protect the activity and other users of the facility or area due to the size or nature of proposed activity; 
5.  The filing of more than one application for the same facility at the same time. Under these circumstances, the city manager will give consideration to the application first received and the schedule of priority classification; 
6.  When usage of facility may damage, destroy or detract from the city property and/or cause harm, injury, discomfort or displeasure to the other persons in or near the park; 
7.  Record of applicant or event not complying with regulations of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 4-1.81) 
12.04.150 - Priority of use. 
A.  Use of facilities is based on priority ranking. Groups ranked at a low priority may be subject to rescheduling with thirty (30) days' written notice; in that event, the city will attempt to relocate the group to another city facility. 
B.  Group priority rating shall be as follows: 
1.  City of Lancaster and city parks, recreation and arts department sponsored activities; 
2.  Other governmental agency meetings open to the public; 
3.  Youth, family or adult community recreation activities open to the general public, sponsored or conducted by recognized community organizations; 
4.  Groups conducting recreation activities open to only their own members (closed meetings); 
5.  Nonrecreation use, service organizational meetings, or restricted activities not open to the general public; 
6.  Religious, sectarian or political groups; 
7.  Commercial use for financial gain; 
8.  Out-of-city groups (fifty-one (51) percent of participants do not reside or work within the city limits). 
(Prior code § 4-1.82) 
12.04.160 - Revocation of permit. 
    Permit may be revoked if any terms or conditions of the permit are violated by the permittee or any agent or employee of the permittee. Said permit may be revoked by the city manager with or without notice to the persons to whom the permit was issued. 
(Prior code § 4-1.83) 
12.04.170 - Right of appeal. 
    An applicant may appeal the decision of a city representative regarding park and building permits. The applicant must file such appeal through the following appeal process: first, appeal through the director; second, appeal through the city manager; third and final appeal is made to the city council following the uniform appeal procedure. 
(Prior code § 4-1.84) 
12.04.180 - Permit. 
    The application for a permit shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
A.  Name of the applicant, the sponsoring organization(s), and name of the person in charge of the proposed activity; 
B.  Address and telephone number of applicant(s); 
C.  Park or building being applied for and the area involved; 
D.  Starting time of the proposed activity; 
E.  Finishing time of the proposed activity; 
F.  Number of persons expected; 
G.  Additional city personnel or items requested, such as tables, chairs, and associated equipment; 
H.  Nature of the proposed activity or activities, including equipment and vehicles to be brought into the park, duration and nature of the use of any amplified sound whether sound, or speech; 
I.  Fees charged and moneys collected; 
J.  Individual(s) who will receive moneys collected and purpose for money; 
K.  Notice of requirement of certificate of co-insurance for public liability, in the form of attachment to application, if required. 
(Prior code § 4-1.85) 
12.04.190 - Extended usage. 
    Facility usage may be granted for a maximum of six months. Requests for facility usage exceeding six months are subject to administrative approval and will be reviewed each six months for compliance to the city priority schedule. Scheduled groups may be subject to cancellation upon thirty (30) days' notice. When cancellation is necessary, the city will attempt to relocate the activity. 
(Prior code § 4-1.86) 
12.04.200 - Fees and deposits. 
    Fees and deposits may be levied to offset city expenses incurred in providing services. Basic rates for use of facilities are established by resolution adopted by the city council and are subject to change by the city council. 
(Prior code § 4-1.87) 
12.04.210 - Use of parks. 
    The city's reservable areas may be made available for the use of persons and groups subject to the issuance of a permit and the payment of fees therefor. Use of any park for pre-advertised assemblies may not be made without the issuance of a permit. All applications for use of any park must be signed by an adult twenty-one (21) years of age or over who shall agree to be responsible for said exclusive use. 
(Prior code § 4-1.88) 
12.04.220 - Use of recreation centers, picnic facilities and athletic fields. 
    Recreation centers, reservable picnic facilities, and athletic fields within the city's parks, are available for the use of persons and groups subject to the issuance of permit and payment of fees thereof. All applications for use must be signed by an adult twenty-one (21) years of age or over who shall agree to be responsible for said use. No use permit shall be granted if there is a conflict with a prior reservation. 
A.  Any request which will place a major impact on a given facility will be subject to the city review process. "Major impact" is defined as any activity that impedes the normal use of more than one area of any city facility. All requests are subject to city priority ranking classification (Section 12.04.150). The city reserves the right to cancel a permit or application for a permit upon one week's notice. 
B.  Applications are immediately revocable if false statements are made in reserving a facility, or if the individual or group wilfully violates any rule or regulation established by the city. Applicants shall be responsible for the condition in which they leave city premises. If city property has been damaged or abused beyond normal wear, applicants shall be responsible for reasonable costs to replace, repair or clean such property. 
C.  Persons or groups may use any designated reservable or nonreservable facility of any part on a first come, first served basis; however, such groups must vacate any reserved facility at the time a permitted group arrives. Individual picnic tables are available on a first come, first served basis in all nonreservable areas. 
D.  No use permit shall be granted for any reservable field before eight a.m. nor beyond one hour before sunset unless the park has appropriate lighting. 
E.  City personnel will open and close buildings and may be on duty to supervise the use of the facility. 
(Prior code § 4-1.89) 
12.04.230 - Rental periods. 
    Minimum building rental periods are based on three-hour increments. The time indicated on the application will reflect the actual facility use time which includes setup, decoration and clean up. Additional time beyond the three-hour block will be charged on an hourly rate. 
(Prior code § 4-1.90) 
12.04.240 - Setup. 
    Setup, breakdown and basic cleanup will be the responsibility of the group utilizing the facility. When city personnel are to be utilized for setup, finalized setup sheets must be submitted ten (10) days prior to the event. Changes after the final setup sheet is submitted shall be the responsibility of the user. 
(Prior code § 4-1.91) 
12.04.250 - Decorations. 
    Decorations of any building or on any structure are prohibited unless approval is obtained by the user from the city representative. 
(Prior code § 4-1.92) 
12.04.260 - Sales for profit and solicitation. 
    No permit shall be issued authorizing the use of any park or building thereof when the activity proposed is to be held for the sole purpose of advertising for sale any product, goods, wares, merchandise, services or event, that is designed to be held purely for private profit; distributing handbills or circulars or posting, placing or erecting any bills, notices, paper or advertising matter of any kind or conducting or soliciting for any trade, occupation, business or profession without first obtaining permission from the city. The city may authorize issuance of such permits on an annual basis for the conduct of such trade, occupation, business or profession when it is compatible with usual park activities and uses, is of convenience or benefit to the park patrons and does not conflict with the business of established concessions. The city manager shall charge a set fee or percentage of sale, fixed by the city council for such permits. A person shall not solicit in any manner or for any purpose, or offer for sale any goods, wares or merchandise, or give or distribute handbills, advertising matter or literature except under the following conditions: 
A.  When a concession is operating under lease or contract authorized by the city council; 
B.  When the park, or any portion thereof is the location for one event which will not in any way detract from the use of the park by the general public and the proceeds are used for charitable purposes, permission may be granted by the city manager; 
C.  When found by the city manager to be consistent with the policies of the city under conditions prescribed by the city; 
D.  When all necessary fees and deposits have been made. 
(Prior code § 4-1.93) 
12.04.270 - Overnight camping. 
    Overnight camping without a permit is prohibited. 
A.  Youth Groups. A permit may be issued to any youth group of a responsible nature allowing the members to camp overnight at a designated location in a park. The members of such group shall be supervised by an adequate number of responsible adults, twenty-one (21) years of age or older. The members of the group and/or adult supervisors in charge of a youth group shall comply with time, location and conditions specified in the permit. Said use shall not interfere with the use of the park or in any way be detrimental to the park. 
B.  Trailers, Campers and Motor Homes. Overnight parking of trailers, campers, or motor homes is prohibited on park property without a city permit. 
(Prior code § 4-1.94) 
12.04.280 - Fire. 
    Open fires in city parks without a permit are prohibited. No permit shall be issued without a fire permit from the fire department. 
(Prior code § 4-1.95) 
12.04.290 - Amplified sound. 
    Amplified sound, whether for speech, music, or otherwise, is prohibited without first obtaining a city permit. 
(Prior code § 4-1.96) 
12.04.300 - Hot air balloons, hang gliders, sky divers. 
    The operation or landing of hot air balloons, hang gliders and sky divers is prohibited in city parks without first obtaining a city permit. 
(Prior code § 4-1.97) 
12.04.310 - Model airplanes, boats, cars or model rockets. 
    The operation of motor-driven airplanes, boats, cars or model rockets is prohibited on park property except in designated areas and without first obtaining a city permit. 
(Prior code § 4-1.98) 
12.04.320 - Golf. 
    The use of golf clubs for playing or practicing is prohibited on park property except in designated areas and without first obtaining a city permit. 
(Prior code § 4-1.99) 
12.04.330 - Dumping. 
    Dumping rocks, soil, grass clippings, branches, leaves, equipment, vehicles, furniture, furnishings or accessories, or any other item or material is prohibited without first obtaining a city permit. 
(Prior code § 4-1.100) 
12.04.340 - Animals. 
    Dogs and cats are prohibited on park property unless kept on a leash at all times and under full control of the owner. The removal of feces of animals who defecate on park property is required of the owner or custodian of said animal. Horses, mules, goats, donkeys, or similar animals are not permitted on park property unless granted by permit of the city manager. No animal shall be allowed to graze or run at large within the boundaries of a city park. No animal shall be killed, harmed or removed from any park unless by a city employee during the performance of official duties. 
(Prior code § 4-1.101) 
12.04.350 - Smoking. 
    Smoking is prohibited in all city buildings where posted "No Smoking." 
(Prior code § 4-1.102) 
12.04.360 - Trespassing. 
    Trespassing into areas designated "No Trespassing" is prohibited. This includes, but is not limited to, rooms in city buildings or structures, swimming pools during specific posted hours, fenced control areas such as storage areas, shop areas, holding areas, construction sites, and all other areas posted for protection of property, health, safety or welfare or where damage to body and limb, equipment, fixtures or accessories or property may occur. 
(Prior code § 4-1.103) 
12.04.370 - Motor vehicles and parking. 
    Motorized vehicles shall not be operated or parked on city property except on designated roadways or within designated markings, without first obtaining a city permit. 
(Prior code § 4-1.104) 
12.04.380 - Posted property. 
    Motor vehicles shall not be operated over roads which are posted against public use or provided with closed gates. Motor vehicles shall not be operated over riding or hiking trails unless permission is posted. 
(Prior code § 4-1.105) 
12.04.390 - Alcoholic beverages. 
    A person shall not enter, be or remain in any park while in possession of, transporting, purchasing, selling, giving away, or consuming any alcoholic beverage except at a concession area duly authorized by the city council and properly licensed. 
(Ord. 699 § 3, 1995: prior code § 4-1.107) 
12.04.400 - Flora and turf. 
    Removing or injuring any form of plant life on park property, including the removal of wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand and gravel is prohibited except by a duly authorized city employee or authorized contractor in the performance of his/her duties or unless specifically authorized by the director. 
(Prior code § 4-1.108) 
12.04.410 - Litter, rubbish and glass containers. 
    Carrying onto any park property any garbage, trash or other refuse is prohibited. Trash generated on the park must be deposited in provided trash receptacles or carried off the park property. Glass containers are prohibited. 
(Prior code § 4-1.109) 
12.04.420 - Throwing missiles. 
    Throwing missiles, mud, sand, or any object that may cause bodily harm to others is prohibited on park property. Objects safely and reasonably used in the course of recreational activities are exempt from this section. 
(Prior code § 4-1.110) 
12.04.430 - Firearms and weapons. 
    Possession or discharging of firearms, airguns, slingshots or bows and arrows is prohibited on park property including any portion of the riding and hiking trails. 
(Prior code § 4-1.111) 
12.04.440 - Hunting. 
    Hunting, shooting, wounding or capturing animals on park property is prohibited. 
(Prior code § 4-1.112) 
12.04.450 - Fireworks and dangerous objects. 
    The possession or firing of firecrackers, rockets, torpedoes or fireworks on park property is prohibited. 
(Prior code § 4-1.113) 
12.04.460 - Interference. 
    No person shall use, attempt to use or interfere with the use of any facility which is reserved for another person or group holding a permit issued from the city. 
(Prior code § 4-1.114) 
12.04.470 - Compliance. 
    No person shall enter, occupy or remain in any park or building of the city unless compliance with the appropriate regulations set forth in this chapter are adhered to. 
(Prior code § 4-1.115) 
12.04.480 - Violation-Penalty. 
    It is a misdemeanor for any person within an area owned or controlled by the city to knowingly and wilfully violate any provision of this chapter, the conditions of any permit issued pursuant hereto, or any rule or regulation relating to parks or buildings. 
(Prior code § 4-1.116) 
Chapter 12.08 - PARADES 

12.08.010 - Definitions. 
    "Parade" means and includes any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, alley, park, or other public place in the city, provided, however, that this chapter shall not apply to funeral processions, students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, provided such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities, or a governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
    "Person" means and includes any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, city, city and county, municipality, district, or other political subdivision. 
(Prior code § 3-7.1) 
12.08.020 - Permit required. 
    A person shall not hold, conduct, manage, carry on, or participate in, any parade in the city, unless a permit for that parade has been obtained from the city manager, or his/her designee, as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 701 § 1, 1995: prior code § 3-7.2) 
12.08.030 - Participants. 
    A person shall not conduct, manage or participate in any way in any parade unless a permit has first been procured therefor and shall not conduct, manage or participate in any parade in violation of or in any manner contrary to the provisions of such permit. 
(Prior code § 3-7.3) 
12.08.040 - Application for permit and contents. 
    Any person desiring to hold, manage or conduct a parade, shall file with the city manager, or his/her designee, a verified application on a form furnished by the city manager, or his/her designee, no less than ten (10) working days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct such a parade. The application shall set forth the following information: 
A.  The name of the person or organization wishing to conduct such parade; 
B.  The address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and the name of the authorized and responsible head of such organization; 
C.  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman and will be responsible for its conduct; 
D.  The name, address and telephone number of the person or organization to whom the permit is desired to be issued; 
E.  The date when such parade is to be conducted; 
F.  The route to be traveled, the starting point, and the termination point; 
G.  The approximate number of persons, animals and vehicles which will constitute such parade, including the type of animals and a description of the vehicles; 
H.  The hours during which such parade will start and terminate; 
I.  A statement whether such parade will occupy all or only one-half of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed; 
J.  A description of assembly and disassembly areas and streets to be used by such parade; 
K.  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area; 
L.  The approximate interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade; 
M.  Any additional information or documents which the city manager shall find reasonably necessary to make a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued; 
N.  If such parade is designed to be held by and on behalf of or for any organization other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the city manager a communication in writing from such organization, authorizing the applicant to apply for such permit on its behalf. 
(Ord. 701 § 2, 1995; prior code § 3-7.4) 
12.08.050 - Issuance of permit. 
    The city manager shall issue a permit for a parade if, from a consideration of the application, or such other information as the city manager may otherwise obtain, or both, the city manager finds that: 
A.  The conduct of such parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; 
B.  The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of deputy sheriffs to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the rest of the city; 
C.  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at the assembly areas of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas; 
D.  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire; 
E.  The conduct of such parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property; 
F.  Such parade will move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without stopping en route; 
G.  The conduct of such parade will not obstruct any construction or maintenance work scheduled to take place upon the public roads; 
H.  The applicant has paid the city an estimate of departmental service charges, as set forth in Section 12.08.110. 
(Ord. 701 § 3, 1995; prior code § 3-7.5) 
12.08.060 - Alternative dates, times and routes. 
    If the conduct of the parade on the proposed date, time and route is found by the city manager to conflict with any of the requirements of this chapter, he may suggest an alternative date, time and route. If the applicant desires to accept the proposed date, time and route, he may within five days, file a notice of acceptance with the city manager, and the city manager shall proceed to issue the permit. 
(Prior code § 3-7.6) 
12.08.070 - Permit contents. 
    The permit shall prescribe the following: 
A.  Starting time; 
B.  Minimum speed; 
C.  Maximum speed; 
D.  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade; 
E.  What portions of the streets to be traversed may be occupied by the parade; and 
F.  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof. 
(Prior code § 3-7.7) 
12.08.080 - Permit rejection-Notice. 
    The city manager, or his/her designee, shall within five working days after the filing of a completed permit application, act thereon. In order to be deemed completed, the permit application must include all of the information set forth in Section 12.08.070. If the city manager, or his/her designee, finds that such a permit should not be issued, he shall mail within five working days after the date on which the completed application is filed a notice to the applicant of his action denying the permit, stating in general terms the reason for denial of such permit. 
(Ord. 701 § 4, 1995: prior code § 3-7.8) 
12.08.090 - Request for hearing. 
    The applicant for such permit may within ten (10) working days after notice of rejection of such application is mailed, file with the city clerk an appeal for hearing upon such application, in accordance with the provisions of the uniform appeal procedure. 
(Prior code § 3-7.9) 
12.08.100 - Notifications. 
    Upon approval of a permit, the city manager shall be responsible for notifying the superintendent of streets, fire chief, police chief and health officer, as well as all public utilities to be affected by the proposed parade. 
(Prior code § 3-7.10) 
12.08.110 - Reimbursement of departmental service charges and property repair costs. 
    A permittee shall reimburse the city for, and pay in advance an estimate of all actual city departmental service charges incurred in connection with or due to the permittee's activities under the parade permit. As used in this section, "departmental service charges" are defined as the expenses of ensuring traffic control occasioned by the parade. In addition, if city property is destroyed or damaged by reason of the permittee's use, event or activity, the permittee shall reimburse the city for the actual replacement or repair cost of the destroyed or damaged property. 
(Ord. 701 § 5, 1995: prior code § 3-7.11) 
12.08.120 - Duties of permittee. 
A.  A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
B.  Possession of Permit. The parade chairman or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade. 
(Prior code § 3-7.12) 
12.08.130 - Public conduct during parades. 
A.  Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a permitted parade. 
B.  Driving through Parades. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
C.  Parking on Parade Route. The chief of police shall have the authority when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The chief of police shall post signs to such effect, and it is unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. 
(Prior code § 3-7.13) 
Chapter 12.10 - ART ON PUBLIC PROPERTY 

12.10.010 - Findings and declaration. 
    The city council finds and declares as follows: 
A.  Public art increases cultural awareness, stimulates imagination and provokes creative dialogue among those in the entire community. Public art pieces become landmarks that uniquely identify, enhance and draw attention to buildings, parks and communities. Residents, business owners and customers, neighbors and visitors will enjoy the quality of life that is provided by interacting with art on a daily basis. 
B.  The city is dedicated to commissioning, preserving and expanding on the inventory of existing public art within the community. 
(Ord. No. 1057 , § 2, 3-26-2019) 
12.10.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases have the meanings set forth below: 
    "Artist" means an individual or team of individual artists whose body of work and professional activities demonstrate serious ongoing commitment to the fine arts. History of professional art exhibitions, auction record, and reputation in the professional art community are some factors that may assist in making a determination that an artist demonstrates such commitment. An applied artist or tradesperson does not constitute an artist as defined herein and for purposes of this chapter. Members of architectural, engineering, design or landscaping firms retained for the design and construction of a development project covered by this chapter shall not be considered artists for the purpose of meeting the requirement to provide public art. 
    "Artwork" or "work of art" means a visual work of art, as distinguished from the performing arts, media art and literary or cultural arts. The works of art may either be permanent or, in some circumstances, temporary, as required by the specific project, and installed in public view. For purposes of this chapter, "artwork" does not include a business-related work, as defined herein. 
    "Business-related work" means a visual representation of which more than twenty (20) percent of the overall image contains lettering or logo that is related to the business or establishment at which the visual representation is located. Business-related works are subject to the applicable sign permitting and approval provisions set forth in title 17 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
    "City" means the City of Lancaster. 
    "Code" means the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
    "Public art" means any permanent display of a work of art that was specifically designed to be located on a site where it would be accessible to public view on private or public property within the city. The work of art may include, but not limited to, murals, mosaics, sculptures, artist-designed landscape features, streetscape features and earthworks. For purposes of this manual, temporary displays of artwork on private property are subject to the procedures and guidelines set forth herein. 
    "Public art allocation" means an amount equal to one percent of the total valuation of capital improvement projects in a given fiscal year that will be allocated by the city to be used for the installation/provision of public artwork on public property. 
    "Public place" means any interior or exterior area on public or private property that is clearly visible to the general public. 
(Ord. No. 1057 , § 2, 3-26-2019) 
12.10.030 - Art in public places program and manual; general guidelines and procedure. 
A.  The city council has approved the art in public places program and the associated manual. The purpose of the program is to provide publicly accessible works of art for the benefit of the city, its citizens and its visitors, and to increase citizens' appreciation of art, improve the quality of life and enhance and identify the Antelope Valley as a unique community for its residents and visitors. 
B.  General guidelines and criteria regarding public art, procedure for selection of artists and public artwork, eligible expenditures related to the installation of public art, and the procedure regarding budgeting, siting and acquiring public artwork are set forth in the art in public places manual, as may be revised from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1057 , § 2, 3-26-2019) 
12.10.040 - Public art allocation. 
    The public art allocation is equal to one percent of the total valuation of capital improvement projects in a given fiscal year; provided, however, that for any projected expenditure in excess of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00), direct notification shall be made separately to the mayor and city councilmembers prior to said expenditure. 
(Ord. No. 1057 , § 2, 3-26-2019) 
Chapter 12.12 - STREETS, CURBS AND SIDEWALKS 

12.12.010 - Declaration of policy. 
    It is declared to be the policy of the city that street improvements be installed along the frontage of any lots or parcels hereafter improved with construction or erection of any new dwelling or building or any dwelling or building expanded in excess of fifty (50) percent of the existing square footage of that dwelling or building, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 7-2.1) 
12.12.020 - Requirements made are minimum. 
    The provisions of this chapter are minimum requirements, and wherever any ordinance or resolution of the city requires additional improvements or improvements of a higher degree or grade, such ordinance, resolution or determination shall control. 
(Prior code § 7-2.2) 
12.12.030 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "Block" means one side of a street between intersecting streets. 
    "Frontage" means and shall be considered any portion of a lot which fronts on any street regardless of the orientation of residential or other structures on such lot. 
    "Local street" means any street not otherwise covered by the definition of major and secondary streets. 
    "Lot" means a unit or contiguous units of real property in common ownership and which is capable of being legally conveyed without any requirement for a subdivision or other division of land approval by the city. 
    "Major street" means any public street which requires a one hundred (100) foot or greater right-of-way as shown on the city master plan of highways. Generally, major streets located within the city are limited to section lines. 
    "Secondary street" means any public street which requires an eighty (80) foot right-of-way as shown on the city master plan of highways. Generally, secondary streets located within the city are limited to quarter-section lines. 
    "Street grade" means the grade of any street as herein defined as established by an official map or plan or by any public agency or by the city engineer of the city. 
    "Street improvements" means vehicular roadway pavement, pedestrian sidewalk, curbs, gutters and streetlights. 
(Prior code § 7-2.3) 
12.12.040 - Establishing street centerlines and grade. 
    The city engineer may, on his own initiative, and shall, within a reasonable period of time after receipt of a written request by any abutting property owner, establish a street line or grade for said abutting property along any street in the city. Such street line or grade shall prevail for all purposes of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 7-2.4) 
12.12.050 - Curbs, gutters, sidewalks, streetlights and paving required. 
    Every person, firm, association, corporation, or other entity constructing or erecting any new dwelling or other building in the city, any dwelling or building expanded in excess of fifty (50) percent of the existing square footage of that dwelling or building shall, prior to occupying such dwelling or other building, or permitting any other person, firm, association, or other entity to occupy the same, construct or cause to be constructed, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and paving along the entire street frontage of the affected property as hereinafter provided, or post the required bond, cash or security therefor, as hereinafter provided. 
A.  All work and improvements shall conform to grades established by the city by order of the city engineer of the city. 
B.  All work and improvements shall conform to standard specifications as adopted by the city. 
C.  Effective July 1, 2007 all new public streetlight plans shall be prepared in accordance with the design standards for LS-3 streetlights and submitted to the city of Lancaster engineering division, subdivisions section for review and approval. The Design Standards for LS-3 streetlights shall be prepared by the engineering division and shall be included in the Engineering Design Standards and Guidelines Manual as periodically updated. All new streetlights on the LS-3 rate schedule, along with all property associated with the development necessitating the installation of streetlights or as a condition of development, shall become a part of and be annexed into the Lancaster lighting maintenance district. Plans for streetlights shall be submitted to the commissioner in accordance with Chapter 12.16. 
(Ord. 882 § 1, 2007; prior code § 7-2.5) 
12.12.060 - Posting guarantee of installation. 
    In lieu of construction of required curbs, gutters or sidewalks, the owner, builder, or other person may, if the city engineer finds that deferring such improvements is in the public interest, post with the city a sufficient bond, or deposit cash or other security, which bond, cash or security is approved as to amount, form and all other matters by the city engineer to guarantee installation of such improvements within such period as the city engineer shall specify. 
    Such guarantee shall not in any case be less than the standards existing at the time and are to be set by the city engineer and the guarantee shall be conditioned to pay or release such sums to the city within one year from the issuance of final approval and acceptance of such dwelling or other building, or at the expiration of any longer or extended period specified by the city engineer for installation of required improvements, if such improvements have not been constructed as required. 
(Prior code § 7-2.6) 
12.12.070 - Building department to deny and withhold final approval. 
    The building department shall deny final approval and acceptance of any such dwelling or building, until the required curbs, gutters, paving and sidewalks have been completed, or, when permitted by Section 12.12.060, a bond, cash or security to guarantee such construction has been posted with the city and approved by the city engineer and no occupancy permit will be granted. 
(Prior code § 7-2.7) 
12.12.080 - Exceptions. 
    Exceptions are as follows: 
A.  Where the street is a private street; 
B.  The city engineer shall, upon request by applicant, refer the matter to an administrative committee consisting of the city manager, director of community development, city engineer, and under appropriate conditions they may waive such improvements as to all or any part of the property; 
C.  Where a lot, by virtue of its zoning classification, exhibits a minimum size of one acre gross and does not front on a major or secondary street; 
D.  Where lots representing frontages totaling at least fifty (50) percent of a block are improved and are without street improvements. 
(Prior code § 7-2.8) 
12.12.090 - Dedication. 
    The owner of any lot proposed to be built or erected upon shall in all instances applicable, prior to obtaining a building permit for, or final approval of, such building or construction, deposit with the city clerk a dedication to the city of an easement for a public road or widening of a public road along the street frontage of such lot, satisfactory in form and area to the city engineer if such road or widening is planned or proposed for future development by the city or its appropriate officers. 
(Prior code § 7-2.9) 
12.12.100 - Appeal to city council. 
    An exercise of discretion by the administrative committee hereunder, not including the fixing of fees or deposits or the amount of any security otherwise required, shall be subject to review by the city council in accordance with the uniform appeal procedure. 
(Prior code § 7-2.10) 
Chapter 12.16 - HIGHWAY PERMIT ORDINANCE 

12.16.010 - Adoption by reference of county highway permit ordinance. 
A.  Except as hereinafter provided, that certain highway permit ordinance known and designated as the Los Angeles County Highway Permit Ordinance No. 3597, as amended from time to time, shall by this reference be and become the highway permit ordinance of the city, providing regulations for the use of city streets and highways. 
B.  Three (3) copies of the county highway permit ordinance have been deposited in the office of the city clerk of the city and shall be at all times maintained by the clerk for use and examination by the public. 
(Prior code § 7-1.1) 
( Ord. No. 1041, § 1, 3-27-2018 ) 
12.16.020 - Definitions. 
    Whenever any of the following names or terms are used in said Los Angeles County highway permit ordinance, each such name or term shall be deemed and construed to have the meaning ascribed to it in the section as follows: 
    "Board of supervisors" means the city council of the city of Lancaster. 
    "Commissioner" means the street superintendent of the city of Lancaster. 
    "County" or "county of Los Angeles" means the city of Lancaster. 
    "Engineer," "county engineer," or "city engineer" means the city engineer of the city of Lancaster. 
(Prior code § 7-1.2) 
12.16.030 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion thereof during which such violation continues and shall be punishable therefor as herein provided. 
(Prior code § 7-1.3) 
12.16.040 - Amendments to said ordinance-Street improvements. 
    Ordinance No. 3597 is amended as follows: 
A.  Section 308 is amended to read as follows: 
  Section 308. The City Engineer shall, if funds are available, provide the necessary engineering, design, and specifications for street improvements when requested by a Person required to or desiring to install street improvements in front of their property. Each Person shall pay to the City the cost of preparing the plans, specifications, and related incidental expenses. The cost to each Person shall be based on the prorated basis determined by dividing the frontage of the Person's property by the total frontage of both sides of the street shown on the plans. 
B.  Delete Section 1201 to Section 1210. 
(Prior code § 7-1.4) 
12.16.050 - Amendments to said ordinance-Driveway widths. 
    Section 706 of Ordinance No. 9349 is amended to read as follows: 
  Section 706. The width of an individual driveway shall be considered as being the net width thereof, exclusive of side slopes and returns, measured along the line of the curb or centerline of the highway. The width of an individual driveway shall be not less than twelve (12) feet and shall not exceed in width: 
  (a) Twenty-seven (27) feet if the driveway serves only residences or apartments; 
  (b) Twenty-seven (27) feet for lots or parcels of land less than one-hundred feet wide; 
  (c) Thirty-six (36) feet or twenty (20) percent of the front frontage of the lot or parcel of land, whichever is greater, but not to exceed sixty (60) feet, when the driveway serves other than residences or apartments on a lot or parcel of land not less than one-hundred (100) feet wide. 
(Ord. 785 § 1, 2000) 
Chapter 12.20 - STREET TREES 

12.20.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "Park" means and includes all public parks having individual names. 
    "Principal thoroughfare" means any street upon which trucks are not prohibited. 
    "Property line" means the outer edge of a street or highway. 
    "Property owner" means the person owning such property as shown by the county auditor's plat of Los Angeles County, state of California. 
    "Public places" means and includes all other grounds owned by the city of Lancaster. 
    "Street" or "highway" means the entire width of every public way or right-of-way when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
    "Treelawn" means that part of a street or highway, not covered by sidewalk or other paving, lying between the property line and that portion of the street or highway usually used for vehicular traffic. 
    Trees, Large. "Large trees" are designated as those attaining a height of forty-five (45) feet or more. 
    Trees, Medium. "Medium trees" are designated as those attaining a height of thirty (30) to forty-five (45) feet. 
    Trees, Public. "Public trees" means and includes all shade and ornamental trees now hereafter growing on any street or any public area where otherwise indicated. 
    Trees, Small. "Small trees" are designated as those attaining a height of twenty (20) to thirty (30) feet. 
(Prior code § 7-3.1) 
12.20.020 - Authority of the superintendent of parks. 
    The superintendent of parks shall have the authority and jurisdiction of regulating all trimming, planting, maintenance and removal of trees on streets and other publicly owned property to insure safety or preserve the aesthetics of such public sites. He shall have the authority and it shall be his duty to supervise or inspect all work done under a permit, and shall have the authority to affix reasonable conditions to the granting of that permit in accordance with the terms of this section. 
(Prior code § 7-3.2) 
12.20.030 - Master street tree plan. 
    The superintendent of parks shall have the authority to formulate a master street tree plan with the advice, a hearing, and approval of the city council. The master street tree plan shall specify the species of trees to be planted on each of the streets or other public sites of the municipality. From and after the effective date of the master street tree plan, or any amendment thereof, all planting shall conform thereto. 
    The superintendent of parks shall consider all existing and future utility and environmental factors when recommending a specific species for each of the streets and other public sites of the municipality. 
    The superintendent of parks, with the approval of the city council, shall have the authority to amend or add to the master street tree plan at any time that circumstances make it advisable. 
(Prior code § 7-3.3) 
12.20.040 - Permits required-Planting, maintenance, removal. 
    No person shall plant, spray, fertilize, preserve, prune, remove, cut above ground, or otherwise disturb any tree on any street or municipal-owned property without first filing an application and procuring a permit from the superintendent of parks or otherwise specified municipal authority. The person receiving the permit shall abide by the arboricultural specifications and standards of practice adopted by the superintendent of parks. 
    Application for permits must be made at the office of the superintendent of parks not less than forty-eight (48) hours in advance of the time the work is to be done. 
    The superintendent of parks shall issue the permit provided for herein if, in his judgment, the proposed work is desirable and the proposed method and workmanship thereof are of a satisfactory nature. He may affix reasonable conditions to the granting of a permit in accordance with the terms of this section. Any permit granted shall contain a definite date of expiration and the work shall be completed in the time allowed on the permit and in the manner as therein described. Any permit shall be void if its terms are violated. 
    Notice of completion shall be given within five days to the superintendent of parks for his inspection. 
A.  Planting. 
1.  Application. The application required herein shall state the number of trees to be set out; the location, grade, species, cultivar or variety of each tree; the method of planting; and such other information as the superintendent of parks shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued. 
2.  Improper Planting. Whenever any tree shall be planted or set out in conflict with the provisions of this section, it shall be lawful for the superintendent of parks to remove or cause removal of the same, and the exact cost thereof shall be assessed to the owner as provided by law in the case of special assessments. 
3.  Street Tree Planting Program. The superintendent of parks shall have the authority to establish a street tree planting program whereby residents may pay to the city the cost of having an approved tree species planted at an approved location. 
B.  Maintenance. 
1.  Application. The application required herein shall state the number and kinds of trees to be sprayed, fertilized, pruned, or otherwise preserved; the kind of treatment to be administered; the composition of the spray material to be applied; and such other information as the superintendent of parks shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued. 
C.  Removal, Replanting and Replacement. 
1.  No person or property owner shall remove a tree from the treelawn for the purpose of construction, or for any other reason, without first filing an application and procuring a permit from the superintendent of parks, and without replacing the removed tree or trees in accordance with the adopted arboricultural specifications. Such replacement shall meet the standard size, species and placement as provided for in a permit issued by the superintendent of parks. The person or property owner shall bear the cost of removal and replacement of all trees removed. 
2.  Treelawns in residential areas shall not be paved with concrete or other materials, but shall be planted with street trees and other suitable plant materials. 
(Prior code § 7-3.4) 
12.20.050 - Obstruction. 
    It shall be the duty of any person or persons owning or occupying real property bordering on any street upon which property there may be trees, to prune such trees in such a manner that they will not obstruct or shade the streetlights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks, obstruct vision of traffic signs, or obstruct view of any street or alley intersection. The minimum clearance of any overhanging portion thereof shall be ten (10) feet over sidewalks, then thirteen and one-half (131/2) feet over streets. 
    Should any person or persons owning real property bordering on any street fail to prune trees as hereinabove provided, the superintendent of parks shall order such person or persons to so prune such trees within three days after receipt of written notice. The order required herein shall be served by mailing a copy of the order to the last known address of the property owner, by certified mail. 
    When a person to whom an order is directed shall fail to comply within the specified time, it shall be lawful for the municipality to prune such trees, and the exact cost thereof shall be assessed to the owner as provided by law in the case of special assignments. 
(Prior code § 7-3.5) 
12.20.060 - Abuse or mutilation of public trees. 
    Unless specifically authorized by the superintendent of parks, no person shall intentionally damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree; attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters, or other contrivance to any tree; allow any gaseous liquid, or solid substance which is harmful to such trees to come in contact with them; or set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree. 
(Prior code § 7-3.6) 
12.20.070 - Interference with superintendent of parks. 
    No person shall hinder, prevent, delay or interfere with the superintendent of parks or any of his assistants while engaged in carrying out the execution or enforcement of this section; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed as an attempt to prohibit the pursuit of any remedy, legal or equitable, in any court of competent jurisdiction for the protection of property rights by the owner of any property within the municipality. 
(Prior code § 7-3.7) 
12.20.080 - Protection of trees. 
    All trees on any street or other publicly owned property near any excavation or construction of any building, structure or street work, shall be guarded with a good substantial fence, frame or box not less than four feet high and eight feet square, or at a distance in feet from the tree equal to the diameter of the trunk in inches diameter breast height, whichever is greater, and all building material, dirt, or other debris shall be kept outside the barrier. 
    No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels, trenches, or lay any drive within a radius of ten (10) feet from any public tree without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent of parks. 
    No person shall deposit, place, store or maintain upon any public place of the municipality, any stone, brick, sand, concrete, or other materials which may impede the free passage of water, air and fertilizer to the roots of any tree growing therein, except by written permit of the superintendent of parks. 
(Prior code § 7-3.8) 
12.20.090 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of the section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined a sum no less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or may be imprisoned for a term not exceeding six months, or both. 
(Prior code § 7-3.9) 
Chapter 12.24 - NEWSRACKS 

12.24.010 - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish a comprehensive set of regulations applicable to newsracks on the public right-of-way and other public property. The purpose of this chapter is to advance and improve safety and aesthetics by controlling the number, size, construction, placement and appearance of newsracks without restricting the free dispersal of information guaranteed by the Constitution of the United States and the state of California. 
    More specifically, the purpose of this chapter is to promote the public peace, morals, health, safety and general welfare by regulating the placement, appearance, servicing and insuring of newsracks so as to protect against the dangers of impairing or distracting the vision of motorists and pedestrians; the hazards of unreasonably interfering with or impeding the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including ingress into or egress from any residence or place of business, or from the street to the sidewalk by persons exiting or entering parked or standing vehicles; unreasonably interfering with the use of public property for its intended purpose; unduly restricting access to the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes or locations used for transportation purposes; unsightly structures; neglectful servicing of newsracks resulting in visual blight on public rights-of-way and other public property and detracting from the aesthetics of store window displays, adjacent landscaping and other improvements; reduction in value of surrounding property; unnecessary exposure of the city to personal injury or property damage claims or suits; and public dissemination and/or display of material harmful or offensive to minors. 
    The city council finds and determines that the interests of the public and of newspapers require a reasonable accommodation which can only satisfactorily be achieved through the means of this chapter, which is designed to accommodate such interests by regulating the time, place and manner of using newsracks. It is not the intent of this chapter to in any way discriminate against, regulate or interfere with the publication, circulation, distribution or dissemination of any newspapers. 
(Ord. No. 972, § 1, 12-13-2011; Ord. No. 918, § 1, 6-9-2009; prior code § 7-5.1) 
12.24.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the words set out in this section shall have the following meanings: 
    "City" means the City of Lancaster 
    "City council" means the city council of the city. 
    "Newsrack" means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display and sale of newspapers or periodicals. 
    "Parkway" means that area between the edge of the sidewalk furthest from the street and the curb of any street, and where there is no sidewalk that area between the edge of the roadway and the property line adjacent thereto. Parkway also includes any area within a roadway which is not open to vehicular travel. 
    "Person" means any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, county, city and county, municipality, district or other political subdivision, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
    "Public property" means parks, squares, plazas and any and all other real property owned by the city. 
    "Right-of-way" or "rights-of-way" means land which by deed, conveyance, agreement, easement, dedication, usage or process of law is reserved for and dedicated to the general public for street, highway, alley, pedestrian walkway, storm drainage, bicycle path or other purposes. 
    "Roadway" means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. 
    "Sidewalk" means any surface provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians. 
    "Street" means all that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes and includes, but is not limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks. 
    "The Boulevard" means that portion of Lancaster Boulevard that is bounded to the west by 10th Street West and to the east by Sierra Highway. 
    "The Boulevard newsrack locations" means the four (4) locations within or upon The Boulevard at which newsracks may be installed, as designated by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 972, § 1, 12-13-2011; Ord. No. 918, § 1, 6-9-2009; prior code § 7-5.2) 
12.24.030 - Permits. 
A.  No person shall install or maintain any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public right-of-way or other public property without first obtaining a permit therefor from the director of public works. An application for said permit shall be filed with the director of public works. The director of public works shall approve the application for a permit, provided that the applicant has satisfied all of the requirements set forth in this section and provided that the number, type, location and use of the proposed newsrack(s) complies with the requirements set forth in Section 12.24.040. An amended application for said permit shall be filed with the director of public works in the event that newsracks are removed from the city or additional newsracks are installed in the city by the applicant subsequent to the issuing of the original permit by the city. 
B.  Applications for permits required by this chapter shall be filed with the director of public works upon printed forms to be prescribed and supplied by the director of public works. The application shall be signed by the applicant and shall state the following: 
1.  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant; 
2.  The number of newsracks and the proposed location of each described with sufficient specificity to allow the director of public works to evaluate the application pursuant to this chapter; 
3.  The nature, type and model of the newsrack(s) proposed to be installed and maintained in the city; 
4.  That the applicant agrees, upon expiration or revocation of the permit, to remove within seven (7) calendar days any newsrack(s) installed pursuant to such expired or revoked permit and to contemporaneously restore the public right-of-way or other public property to its condition prior to the installation or maintenance of the newsrack(s); 
5.  The name, address and telephone number of a responsible individual whom the city may notify or contact at any time concerning the applicant's newsrack(s); 
6.  Any additional information which the director of public works may deem necessary for the proper disposition of the application. 
C.  Prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall pay an annual permit fee for each newsrack installed or maintained by the applicant. The amount of the permit fee shall cover the actual costs of processing the annual permit application and shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
D.  In addition to the annual permit fee payable pursuant to subsection C. of this section, each applicant shall pay an inspection fee for each newly installed, replaced or removed newsrack. The amount of the inspection fee shall cover the actual costs of inspecting the newly installed, replaced or removed newsrack and shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
E.  In addition to the permit application, each applicant shall also execute a document, approved as to form by the city attorney, agreeing to hold the city, its officers, employees and agents free and harmless from any claim demand or judgment in favor of any person, arising out of the location of any newsrack located upon, in or over a public right-of-way or other public property and deposit with the city clerk a certificate of insurance evidencing that a liability insurance policy in minimum amounts set by the city council has been issued, naming the city as an additional insured, and containing a provision that the policy cannot be canceled except upon twenty (20) days' written notice to the city of the fact of such cancellation. If such insurance is canceled at any time during the time the newsrack is installed or maintained on public property, said newsrack shall be removed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
F.  Each permit shall be valid for a period of one (1) year, and shall be renewed in the same manner set forth in this section for original applications. A permit renewal applicant must be currently in compliance with all federal, state and local laws applicable to the use, installation and maintenance of newsracks, including but not limited to California Penal Code Section 313.1 regulating the display and sale of material which is harmful to minors, in order to be eligible for permit renewal. 
G.  Each permit shall be valid only as to the permittee and assignment shall be prohibited. If any permittee assigns his permit to another, the permit will be deemed revoked as of the time of the attempted assignment. 
(Ord. No. 972, § 1, 12-13-2011; Ord. No. 918, § 1, 6-9-2009; Ord. 689 § 1, 1995; prior code § 7-5.3) 
12.24.040 - Standards and specifications. 
A.  No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack which projects onto, into or over any part of the roadway of any public street, or which rests, wholly or in part upon, along or over any portion of a roadway. 
B.  No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public right-of-way or other public property, when such installation, use or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property, or when such site or location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes or other government use, or when such newsrack interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian, disabled persons or vehicular traffic, the ingress into or egress from any residence, place of business, or any legally parked or stopped vehicle, or the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, or other objects permitted at or near said location, when such newsrack interferes with the ordinary use of public property. 
C.  Any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in, or over any public right-of-way or other public property, shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Newsracks shall not exceed fifty-one (51) inches in width by twenty-four (24) inches in thickness by fifty-eight (58) inches in height and subject to the provisions of this subsection C, each newsrack shall be located with its back against a building or wall adjacent to the sidewalk, or in an area of the sidewalk or parkway no closer than eight (8) inches or farther than three (3) feet from the curbline. Notwithstanding the foregoing, newsracks located within or upon The Boulevard shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches in width by sixteen (16) inches in thickness by forty-four (44) inches in height and shall not have a flat top. 
2.  Each newsrack, including mounts, shall be colored white, black, dark blue or green and shall be substantially made of metal, except for miscellaneous parts such as operating buttons, card inserts and view windows; provided, however, that each newsrack located within or upon The Boulevard shall be colored black gray (RAL 7021). Each newsrack shall have an affirmative mechanical closing mechanism to provide for the closing of the door through which the publication may be accessed. Such affirmative mechanical closing mechanism shall consist of either a spring, gas-powered or other similar device that will close the door by itself and without assistance. 
3.  Mounts shall be bolted in place in accordance with specifications provided by the public works department and only at such locations designated by the director of public works. 
4.  No newsrack shall be used for commercial advertising, signs or publicity purposes other than to state the name of the newspaper or periodical or advertising related to the newspaper or periodical. 
5.  Each newsrack shall be maintained by the permittee in clean, neat and attractive condition and in good repair so as not to become mechanically inoperable or have cracked or broken coverings or casings. All costs and expenses of installation, maintenance, replacement, removal or relocation of newspaper dispensing devices shall be borne by the permittee. 
6.  No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack which shall: 
a.  Project onto, into or over any part of the roadway of any public street or alley open to vehicular traffic, or rest wholly or in part upon, along or over any portion of the roadway of any public street or alley open to vehicular traffic; or 
b.  Be attached to any parking meter, traffic signal, fire hydrant, streetlight, power pole, sign post, tree or refuse container; or 
c.  Be placed within four (4) feet of any marked crosswalk; or 
d.  Be within fifteen (15) feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk; or 
e.  Rest within ten (10) feet of any hydrant, fire call box, police call box, or other emergency facility; or 
f.  Rest within four (4) feet of any driveway; or 
g.  Rest within five (5) feet ahead of, and fifteen (15) feet to the rear of any sign marking a designated bus stop; or 
h.  Rest within four (4) feet of any bus bench; or 
i.  Restrict the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians to less than three (3) feet; or 
j.  Rest within four (4) feet of any designated loading or unloading area; or 
k.  Be placed within three (3) feet of any area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs or trees; or within three (3) feet of any display window or any building abutting the sidewalk or parkway or in such a manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of such window display purpose; or 
l.  At any location where the newsrack causes, creates or constitutes a traffic hazard; or 
m.  At any location where the newsrack unreasonably obstructs or interferes with access to or the use and enjoyment of abutting property; or 
n.  Where the newsrack will endanger persons or property. 
7.  The placement of all newsracks in the city shall comply with all local, state and federal handicapped accessibility regulations. 
D.  The number of newsracks at a particular corner, intersection or other location shall not exceed five (5); provided, however that the number of newsracks located within or upon The Boulevard shall not exceed eight (8), which shall consist of a maximum of two (2) newsracks located at each of The Boulevard newsrack locations. In determining which newsracks shall be permitted, the director of public works shall be guided solely by the following criteria: 
1.  First priority shall be given to newsracks used for the sale of publications which have been adjudicated to be newspapers of general circulation for Los Angeles County pursuant to the procedures set forth in the Government Code Section 6020, et seq. 
2.  Second priority shall be given to newsracks used for the sale of daily publications published at least five (5) or more days in a calendar week which have not been adjudicated to be newspapers of general circulation for Los Angeles County. 
3.  Third priority shall be given to newsracks used for the sale of weekly publications, at least one (1) publication having been published in a calendar week which have not been adjudicated to be newspapers of general circulation for Los Angeles County. 
4.  Subject to the priorities listed, any publication not deemed to fall under the definitions of the above classes shall constitute a miscellaneous category and shall be eligible on a first-come, first-served basis to secure remaining available newsrack space pursuant to this chapter. 
5.  In the event that there is a conflict between publications within the same priority seeking the same location, and there are insufficient newsrack spaces remaining to accommodate the competing publications, after first filling as many spaces as possible by utilizing the criteria set forth above, then the director of public works or his/her designated representative shall assign the space or spaces at random by placing the names of all applicants for the remaining spaces at a location into a container from which the names shall be drawn, one at a time, until the particular locations remaining number of unfilled news-racks has been filled. Such drawing shall be open to the public at a time and date designated by the director of public works or his/her designated representative. 
E.  No person shall display in any public newsrack or other display device, any material which is defined by California Penal Code Section 313 as harmful to minors, unless such material is: 
1.  Displayed in an area from which minors are excluded; or 
2.  Is covered by a device, commonly known as a "blinder rack," such that the lower two-thirds of the material is not exposed to view. 
F.  No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack in violation of any other provision of federal, state or local law, including but not limited to California Penal Code Section 313.1 regulating the display and sale of material which is harmful to minors. 
(Ord. No. 972, § 1, 12-13-2011; Ord. No. 918, § 1, 6-9-2009; Ord. 689 § 2, 1995; prior code § 7-5.4) 
12.24.050 - Sidewalk restoration. 
A.  Sidewalk restoration shall be accomplished as follows: 
1.  The breaking of existing sidewalk structures, including drilling or setting of anchors, for the purpose of installing newsracks shall be done in such a manner as to do the least amount of damage to the remaining sidewalk structure and shall be done with approved equipment designed for that purpose. Flush cutting anchors after the removal of a newsrack is prohibited. 
2.  Portland concrete cement sidewalks shall be replaced with the thickness of that removed; but in no case less than four (4) inches and shall be of the same color and texture as the adjoining sidewalk. 
3.  All sidewalk reconstruction work required as a result of the installation of newsracks by the permittee shall conform to the latest edition of the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction as amended Section 303-5, adopted by the city. 
4.  The permittee is responsible for the installation of newsracks. All work undertaken shall be the sole responsibility of the permit holder. Damage resulting from the installation of said newsracks shall be repaired immediately by and at the expense of the permittee. Failure to make required repairs shall result in city forces undertaking to make such repairs. The cost of repairs shall be chargeable as a civil debt to the permit holder and may be collected by the city in the same manner as it collects any other civil debt or obligation. 
(Ord. No. 972, § 1, 12-13-2011; Ord. No. 918, § 1, 6-9-2009; prior code § 7-5.5) 
12.24.060 - Removal of newsracks. 
A.  Any newsrack installed, used or maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter may be subject to removal and storage by the director of public works. Such officer shall take steps to notify the permittee/owner thereof and request compliance within thirty (30) calendar days prior to removal. At any time within said thirty-day period an administrative hearing to challenge the existence of a violation may be requested by the permittee. Failure to request the hearing shall result in removal and storage of the newsrack(s) by the director of public works at any time after the expiration of the thirty-day period. 
B.  If the permittee requests a hearing as provided in subsection A of this section, said hearing shall be scheduled within five (5) days of the request and shall be administered by the director of public works or his designee. The permittee shall have thirty (30) days from the date of any adverse ruling which may result from the hearing to comply with the provisions specified in the ruling. If after thirty (30) days from the date of decision the permittee has failed to comply with the provisions(s) of this chapter cited in the decision, the subject newsrack(s) shall be removed and stored by the director of public works. 
C.  The cost of removal and/or storage by the director of public works of any newsrack subject to this chapter shall be chargeable as a civil debt to the permittee thereof and may be collected by the city in the same manner as it collects any other civil debt or obligation. In addition, the newsrack(s) in question shall be deemed to be unclaimed property and may be disposed of in accordance with law. 
D.  The director of public works or his designee may summarily remove any newsrack where its installation, use or maintenance poses a serious and imminent danger to pedestrians or motorists, or otherwise unreasonably interferes with the safe use of the right-of-way or other public property. After removal of a newsrack as provided for herein, the city shall notify the permittee. Upon failure of the permittee to claim such newsrack(s) and to reimburse the city for the costs of removal and storage within thirty (30) calendar days of such notice, the newsrack(s) shall be deemed unclaimed property and may be disposed of in accordance with law. 
(Ord. No. 972, § 1, 12-13-2011; Ord. No. 918, § 1, 6-9-2009; prior code § 7-5.6) 
12.24.070 - Nonconforming newsracks. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all newsracks whether installed and maintained prior to or after the effective date of any of the provisions herein. Those newsracks installed prior to the effective date of any provision enacted herein shall be brought into compliance with said provisions within thirty (30) days of the effective date thereof. 
B.  Any newsrack not brought into compliance within the aforementioned time period shall be deemed to be in violation of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 972, § 1, 12-13-2011; Ord. No. 918, § 1, 6-9-2009; prior code § 7-5.7) 
12.24.080 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first violation; a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second violation of the same section within one year; a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional violation of the same section within one year. Each day that such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 972, § 1, 12-13-2011; Ord. No. 918, § 1, 6-9-2009; prior code § 7-5.8) 

Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES  
Chapter 13.04 - DRAINAGE REGULATIONS  
Article I. - Maintenance of Drainage Facilities 
 
13.04.010 - Locations for the maintenance of drainage facilities—Purposes. 
A.  Regulations as set forth herein are required so as to permit drainage facilities and structures located on publicly and privately owned properties within the city, to be free and clear of all trash, debris, vegetation and other material which would, or might, impede the free flow of stormwaters therein; and 
B.  Numerous complaints have been made by residents of the city concerning public and private drainage facilities, natural and man-made, which are overgrown with vegetation and blocked by such weeds, debris and other material; and 
C.  This chapter is necessary in order to eliminate such conditions; damage to properties and possible injury to persons will result unless this chapter is immediately adopted; and 
D.  The public interest, convenience and necessity require the immediate adoption of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 5-3.1)  
13.04.020 - Depositing trash or debris in stormwater drainage facility prohibited. 
No person, firm or corporation shall place, deposit or leave any trash, debris or any other material, upon or in, any natural or man-made stormwater drainage facility, publicly or privately owned, within the city. Nor shall any such person who is the owner, or person in possession of any real property located within the city, upon which a privately owned natural or man-made stormwater drainage facility or channel is located, permit or allow the deposit in such facility of any trash, debris, vegetation or other material which could, or might, block, in whole or in part, the flow of water therein. 
(Prior code § 5-3.2)  
13.04.030 - Violation—Penalty. 
A violation of any provision of this code shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor, and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months, or both. Each day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this code is committed or permitted, shall be deemed to be a separate offense. 
(Prior code § 5-3.3)  
Article II. - Construction of Planned Local Drainage Facilities 
 
13.04.040 - Definitions. 
Whenever any of the following terms are used, they shall be construed to have the following meaning ascribed to them: 
"Dwelling unit" means "dwelling unit" as defined in Title 17. 
"Impervious area" means all surfaces, projected on a horizontal plane, on the property to be improved which will not permit the free flow of rainwater to the subsurface soils. Impervious area does not include any publicly dedicated streets. 
"Master plan of drainage" means the city revised plan of drainage dated October 1992, as may be amended from time to time, adopted by city council on November 16, 1992. 
"Planned drainage facilities" means the drainage system described in the adopted master plan of drainage and shown on the map included therein. 
"Subdivision" means "subdivision" as defined in Subdivision Map Act. 
Zone, Commercial. "Commercial zone" means those properties shown as GC, SRC, RC, OP on the adopted general plan map of the city. 
Zone, Industrial. "Industrial zone" means those properties shown as BP, LI, MI, HI on the adopted general plan map of the city. 
Zone, Multifamily. "Multifamily zone" means those properties shown as MR1 and MR2, as shown on the adopted general plan map of the city. 
Zone, Residential. "Residential zone" means those properties shown as NU1, NU2, NU3, NU4, UR1, UR2 and UR3 on the adopted general plan map of the city. 
(Prior code § 5-3.4)  
13.04.050 - Purpose and intent. 
The city declares its intent to construct the planned drainage facilities described in the master plan of drainage and to collect drainage fees to defray the cost of the planned drainage facilities. 
(Prior code § 5-3.5)  
13.04.060 - Existing developed properties. 
Existing developed properties are not subject to payment of drainage fees established by the ordinance codified in this chapter unless additional dwelling units are constructed on the property in residential and multifamily zones or impervious area is added to commercial or industrial zoned property. 
(Prior code § 5-3.6)  
13.04.070 - Required findings. 
A.  The city council finds that the subdivision and the development of property within each local area will require the construction of planned drainage facilities and that the fees are fairly apportioned within the drainage area based on the need for such facilities created by the proposed subdivision and development of other property within such area. 
B.  The city council finds that there is presently a county-wide general drainage plan affecting the city, and that the master plan of drainage is in conformity with the county-wide general drainage plan. 
C.  The city council finds that the fee to any property proposed for subdivision within the drainage area does not exceed the pro rata share of the amount of the total estimated costs of all planned drainage facilities within such drainage area adjusted annually which would be assessable on such property if such costs were apportioned uniformly on a per acre basis. 
D.  The city council finds that the planned drainage facilities are in addition to existing facilities serving the drainage area. 
(Prior code § 5-3.7)  
13.04.080 - Tentative map or parcel map approval. 
At the time of tentative map or parcel map approval for any subdivisions within the drainage area, there shall be a condition imposed that the developer shall pay to the city, prior to issuance of a building permit, the drainage fees established by the ordinance codified in this chapter for the drainage area. 
(Prior code § 5-3.8)  
13.04.090 - Drainage fees. 
The city shall, by resolution, from time to time designate the amount of the fees necessary to be collected by the department of building and engineering services when permits are issued for any building permit. Said fees shall be collected prior to issuance of any building permit. 
(Prior code § 5-3.9)  
13.04.100 - Reimbursement to subdividers. 
Pursuant to Sections 66485, 66486 and 66488 of the Subdivision Map Act, funds in the planned drainage facilities fund may be used for reimbursement to subdividers for the cost of construction of storm drainage facilities of supplemental size, capacity, number or length for benefit of property not within the subdivision. 
(Prior code § 5-3.10)  
13.04.110 - Rights-of-way. 
Owners of every subdivision proposed to be developed, sold, leased or financed shall as a condition of final map or parcel map approval dedicate or transfer to the city for storm drain purposes sufficient rights-of-way or property upon the property proposed for subdivision to construct and maintain the planned drainage facilities. Owners of every lot for which a building permit is issued shall dedicate or transfer to the city sufficient rights-of-way or property upon the property to be developed to construct and maintain the planned drainage facilities. 
(Prior code § 5-3.11)  
13.04.120 - Lancaster drainage benefit assessment district. 
In order to provide for maintenance of the planned drainage facilities the owner(s) of any proposed subdivision or development project who is (are) required to pay the drainage fees established by the ordinance codified in this chapter shall also be required to annex the area of the proposed subdivision or development project into the Lancaster drainage benefit assessment district and pay all required fees and charges to annex the property proposed to be developed. 
(Prior code § 5-3.12)  
13.04.130 - Exemption from payment of drainage maintenance assessments.* 
A.  All property used exclusively for religious or charitable purposes is exempt from drainage maintenance benefit assessments levied by the city if: 
1.  The owner is not organized or operated for profit; 
2.  No part of the net earnings of the owner inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual; 
3.  The property is used for the actual operation of the religious or charitable activity and does not exceed the amount of property reasonably necessary to the accomplishment of the exempt purposes. 
B.  For purposes of this section, whether property is used exclusively for religious or charitable purposes shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of Revenue and Taxation Code Section 214 et seq. 
(Ord. 739 § 1, 1998) 
* Editor's note: There were two ordinances passed as Ordinance 739. Ordinance 739 passed on January 27, 1998 is codified in this section.  
Chapter 13.07 - SANITARY SEWERS  
Article 1 - Definitions 
 
13.07.010 - Definitions applicable to chapter. 
The definitions in this chapter shall govern the construction of Chapters 13.07, 13.08 and 13.09, and any permits issued thereunder unless otherwise apparent from the context. 
"Act" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq. 
"Cesspool" means and is a lined excavation in the ground which receives the discharge of a drainage system, or part thereof, so designed as to retain the organic matter and solids discharging therein, but permitting the liquids to seep through the bottom and sides, and constructed pursuant to the provisions of the Plumbing Ordinance set out at Chapter 15.20 of this code. 
"Chimney" means a vertical section of a sewer pipe extending either from a vertical tee set ninety (90) degrees to the main line or from a long-radius one-quarter bend set vertically at the curb of property line, and in either case suitably reinforced with concrete. 
"City" means city of Lancaster 
"Council" means the city council of the city of Lancaster 
"City engineer" means the city engineer of the city of Lancaster or his/her designated representative. 
"County engineer" means the director of public works of the county of Los Angeles, or his authorized deputy, agent, representative or inspector. 
"County health officer" means the county health officer of the county of Los Angeles, or his duly authorized representative. 
"Director" means the director of public works of the city of Lancaster, or his authorized deputy, agent, representative or inspector. 
"Domestic sewage" means the waterborne wastes derived from ordinary living processes, and of such character as to permit satisfactory disposal, without special treatment, into the public sewer or by means of a private sewage disposal system. 
"Effluent" means the liquid flowing out of any treatment plant or facility constructed and operated for the partial or complete treatment of sewage or industrial waste. 
"Septic tank effluent" is effluent from private septic tanks and shall be considered, for the purposes of this chapter involving the discharge of septic tank effluent to a septic tank effluent pumping pressure sewer system (STEP), the same as industrial waste. Whenever this chapter refers to industrial waste, the reference shall include septic tank effluent. 
"EPA" means the United States Environmental Protection Agency 
"Frontage" means the length or width in feet applied to a lot based on the benefit received from the abutting sewer, as determined by the director. 
"House lateral" means that part of the sewer piping within the street or right-of-way which extends from the property or sewer right-of-way line to a connection with the main-line sewer. 
"Indirect discharge" or "discharge" into a sewer means the introduction of pollutants into a POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under Chapter 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act. 
"Industrial building" means any building, structure or works which is, or which is designed to be used for the manufacture, processing or distribution of materials, equipment, supplies, food or commodities of any description; or which is used or designed to be used as a school, sanitarium, hospital, penal institution or charitable institution, together with all appurtenances thereto and the surrounding premises under the same ownership or control. 
"Industrial connection sewer" means that part of the sewer piping within the street or right-of-way which extends from the property or sewer right-of-way line to a connection with the main-line sewer through which is discharged industrial waste. 
"Industrial user" or "user" means a source of indirect discharge. 
"Industrial waste" means any and all waste substances, liquid or solid, except domestic sewage, and includes among other things radioactive wastes and explosive, noxious or toxic gas when present in the sewage system. 
"Industrial waste treatment facility" means any works or device for the treatment, storage or control of industrial waste within a site prior to disposal. 
"Inspector" means the authorized inspector, deputy, agent or representative of the director. 
"Interceptor" means and is a device designed and installed so as to separate and retain deleterious, hazardous or undesirable matter from wastes. 
"Interference" means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources: 
1.  Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and 
2.  Is therefore a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Chapter 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Chapter II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including the state regulations contained in any sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
"Licensed contractor" means a contractor having a valid license issued pursuant to Chapter 9, Division 3, of the Business and Professions Code, state of California, which license includes the activities listed on the permit applied for. 
"Lot" means any piece or parcel of land bounded, defined or shown upon a map or deed recorded or filed in the office of the county recorder of Los Angeles County located within the corporate boundaries of the city of Lancaster; provided, however, that in the event any building or structure covers more area than a lot as defined above, the term "lot" shall include all such pieces or parcels of land upon which said building or structure is wholly or partly located together with the yards, courts and other unoccupied spaces legally required for the building or structure. 
"Main-line sewer" means any public sewer in a dedicated right-of-way in which changes in alignment and grade occur only at manholes, or where angle points or curves between manholes have been approved by the director. Such sewers are generally eight inches or more in diameter. 
"National Categorical Pretreatment Standard," "NCPS," "National Pretreatment Standard," "Pretreatment Standard," or "Standard" means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Chapter 307(b) and (c) of the Act which applies to industrial users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to Chapter 403.5 of Chapter 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations. 
"New source" means any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Chapter 307(c) of the Act applicable to such source. 
"NPDES permit" means a National Pollution Discharge Elimination System permit issued pursuant to Chapter 402 of the Act. 
"Off-site disposal" means the disposal or removal of industrial wastes or other materials regulated by this chapter to a site other than the premises where the wastes were generated, whether or not such site is under the control of the industrial waste disposal permittee. 
"On-site disposal" means the management, treatment, control or disposal, other than to the public sewer system, of industrial wastes or other materials within the premises named in an industrial waste disposal permit, whether or not the wastes were generated at the permitted site or by the permittee. 
"Ordinance" means an ordinance of the city of Lancaster. 
"Pass through" means a discharge which exits the POTW into the waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.) 
"Permittee" means the person to whom a permit has been issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
"Person" means an individual human being, a firm, partnership or corporation, his or their heirs, executors, administrators, assigns, officers or agents, the city of Lancaster, the county of Los Angeles, and any municipal, quasi-municipal or government agency, or district or officers thereof. 
"Pollution of underground or surface waters" means affecting the chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of such waters by man-made or man-induced activities. 
"Publicly owned treatment works" or "POTW" means a treatment works as defined by Title 212 of the Act, which is owned by a state or municipality (as defined by Title 502(4) of the Act). This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. For the purpose of this title, "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from outside the municipality by contract. 
"Pretreatment" or "treatment" means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW or other disposal facility. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes or process changes by use of an industrial waste treatment facility or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR Title 403.6(d). 
"Public sewer" means a main-line sanitary sewer, dedicated to public use. 
"Radioactive material" is defined to be any material composed of or containing chemical elements which spontaneously change their atomic structure by the emission of alpha or beta particles or gamma rays or any other particles or rays or forms of energy. 
"Rainwater diversion system" means any device designated to prevent the entry of storm waters into the public sewer system or other waste disposal or treatment systems, and to redirect storm flows to appropriate areas. 
"Saddle" shall mean: 
1.  "Wye saddle" means a short pipe-fitting with a shoulder at one end to allow the application of the fitting to a hole tapped in the main-line sewer such that the short pipe shall form a forty-five (45)-degree angle from the main-line sewer pipe. 
Or 
2.  "Tee saddle" means a short pipe-fitting with a shoulder at one end to allow the application of the fitting to a hole tapped in the main-line sewer such that the short pipe shall form a ninety (90)-degree angle from the main-line sewer pipe. 
"Seepage pit" means a line-excavation in the ground which receives the discharge of a septic tank, so designed as to permit the effluent from the septic tank to seep through its bottom and sides. 
"Septic tank" means a watertight receptacle which receives the discharge from a sewerage system, designed and constructed so as to retain solids, digest organic matter through a period of detention, and allow the liquids to discharge either into the soil outside of the tank through a drain field system or one or more seepage pits, or into a STEP system. 
"Sewage" means any waterborne or liquid wastes, including domestic sewage and industrial waste, but does not include or mean stormwater, groundwater, and roof or yard drainage. 
"Sewer disposal" means the disposal of industrial wastes or other materials into the public sewer system by means of a direct connection to the public sewer system from the premises named in an industrial waste disposal permit. 
"Sewage pumping plant" means any works or device used to raise sewage from a lower to a higher level or to overcome friction in a pipeline. 
"Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. 
"STEP system" means a septic tank effluent pumping system which is a public sewer system, operating under pressure and especially designed to receive effluent from private septic tanks. 
"Standard industrial classification" or "SIC" means a classification pursuant to the standard industrial classification manual issued by the executive office of the president, office of management and budget, 1972, as amended or the new replacement classification system promulgated as the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS). 
"Tapping" means the forming of a tee or wye branch connection to a main-line sewer by installing a tee or wye saddle after the sewer is in place. 
"Tee" or "T" means a fitting for a branch on which the spur joins the barrel of the pipe at an angle of approximately ninety (90) degrees. 
"Trunk sewer" means a sewer under the jurisdiction of the county sanitation districts of Los Angeles. 
"Uncontrolled discharge" means any discharge, intentional or accidental, occurring in such a manner that the discharger is unable to determine or regulate the quantity, quality or effects of the discharge. 
"Water pollution control plant" means any works or device for treating sewage except any industrial waste treatment facility, and except any private sewage disposal system covered by the Plumbing Code. 
"Wye" or "Y" means a fitting for a branch on which the spur joins the barrel of the pipe at an angle of approximately forty-five (45) degrees. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
Article 2 - General Provisions 
 
13.07.020 - Chapter for citation. 
The ordinance codified in Chapters 13.07, 13.08 and 13.09 shall be known as the "Sanitary Sewer and Industrial Waste Ordinance," and may be cited as such. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.07.030 - Applicability of chapter provisions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the discharge, deposit or disposal of all wastes, including any material which may cause pollution of underground or surface waters, in, upon or affecting the city of Lancaster; and the design, construction, alteration, use and maintenance of public sewers and house laterals, industrial connection sewers, water pollution control plants, sewage pumping plants, industrial liquid-waste pretreatment plants, sand and grease interceptors, and appurtenances; the issuance of permits and the collection of fees therefor, and fees to pay the cost of checking plans, inspecting the construction and making record plans of the facilities permitted hereunder or as provided elsewhere in this code; and providing penalties for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.07.040 - References to additions and amendments. 
Whenever reference is made to any portion of the ordinance codified in this chapter or in Chapter 13.08, such reference applies to all amendments and additions thereto now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.07.050 - Time limits—Extension permitted when. 
Any time limit provided for in the provisions of this chapter or Chapter 13.08 may be extended by mutual written consent of both the director and the permittee or applicant, or other person affected. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.07.060 - Responsibility and maintenance of facilities—Applicability of provisions. 
The requirements contained in this chapter and Chapter 13.08 covering the maintenance of sanitary sewer collection system pipelines, sewage pumping plants, industrial waste pretreatment plants, or other appurtenances, shall apply to all such facilities now existing or hereafter constructed. 
A.  Responsibility and maintenance for house laterals. Each property owner is responsible for the installation, repair and maintenance of the entire house lateral up to and including the wye or tee in the city's main line. Each owner shall keep his/her house lateral in good working order at his/her own expense and is responsible for damage to any of the city's property comprising any part of the public sewer system which results from the owner's use, repair or maintenance of the house lateral within the control and responsibility of the owner. If repair and/or maintenance of the house lateral extend into the main line sewer the director shall be notified prior to any work in the main line sewer being performed and that portion of the work affecting the main line sewer shall be performed under the supervision of the director. All house lateral facilities shall be maintained by the owners thereof in a safe and sanitary condition, and all devices or safeguards which are required by this chapter for the operation of such facilities shall be maintained in good working order. The city shall have the right to enter onto private property for the purpose of inspection, maintenance and evaluation of house laterals to assure safe and sanitary conditions. 
B.  Responsibility and maintenance of main line sewers. The city is responsible for the operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of any main line public sewer in a dedicated right-of-way. 
C.  Resolution of disputes over location of sewer malfunctions - reimbursement to city. If the location of a sewer malfunction and the responsibility for its repair is disputed or cannot be determined from surface observation, the director may expose parts of the sewer line within the public street, public right of way, or sewer main as necessary to determine the cause of the malfunction and whether it originates within either the house lateral or within the sewer main. If the malfunction is determined to be within the city's sewer system, the city shall conduct the repair at no charge to the property owner. If the malfunction is determined to be within the house lateral for which the property owner is responsible, the city may proceed with the repairs to such house lateral upon notice to the property owner of the need for repair. The city may require a written reimbursement agreement executed by the property owner before beginning repair. A malfunctioning house lateral is declared to be a public nuisance. The property owner shall reimburse the city for all costs necessarily incurred by the city in performing the repair work to the house lateral. 
D.  This chapter or Chapter 13.08 shall not be construed as permitting the removal or non-maintenance of any devices or safeguards on existing facilities unless authorized in writing by the director. 
(Ord. No. 932, § 1, 8-25-09; Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.07.090 - Inspection to ascertain compliance—Access required—Acceptance of permit conditions. 
A.  The director may inspect, as often as he deems necessary, every main-line sewer, sewage pumping plant, industrial waste pretreatment plant or facility, industrial sewer connection, interceptor, or other similar appurtenances to ascertain whether such facilities are maintained and operated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. All persons shall permit and provide the director with access to all such facilities at reasonable times. 
B.  An applicant, by accepting a permit issued pursuant to this chapter does thereby consent and agree to entry upon the premises described in the permit by the director at all reasonable times for the purpose of: 
1.  Inspection, sampling, flow measurement or examination of records; 
2.  Placing on the premises devices for monitoring, flow measurement or metering; 
3.  Inspecting and copying any records, reports, test results or other information required to carry out the provisions of this chapter; and 
4.  Photographing any waste, waste container, vehicle, waste treatment process, discharge location, or violation discovered during an inspection. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.07.100 - Enforcement—Director powers. 
The director shall enforce all the provisions of Chapters 13.07, 13.08 and 13.09, and for such purpose shall have the powers of a peace officer. Such powers shall not limit or otherwise affect the powers and duties of the county health officer. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.07.110 - Delegation of powers. 
Whenever a power is granted to or a duty is imposed upon the director, by provisions of this chapter, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy of the officer or a person authorized pursuant to law by the officer, unless this chapter expressly provides otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.07.120 - Identification for inspectors and maintenance personnel. 
The director shall provide means of identification of inspectors and sewer maintenance personnel which shall identify them as such. Inspectors and sewer maintenance personnel shall identify themselves upon request, when entering upon the work of any contractor or property owner for any inspection or work required by this chapter.  
13.07.130 - Notice service procedures. 
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, any notice required to be given by the director under this chapter shall be in writing, and served in the manner provided in the code of civil procedure for the service of process, or by registered or certified mail. If served by mail, the notice shall be sent to the last address known to the director. Where the address is unknown, service may be made as above provided upon the owner of record of the property. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.07.140 - Obstructing access to facilities prohibited. 
No object, whether a permanent structure, or a temporary structure, or any object which is difficult of removal, shall be located on a sewer easement or placed in such a position as to interfere with the ready and easy access to any facility described in Section 13.07.090. Any such obstruction, upon request of the director, shall be immediately removed by the violator at no expense to the city, and shall not be replaced. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.07.150 - Interference with inspectors prohibited when. 
No person in the city shall, during reasonable hours, refuse, resist or attempt to resist the entrance of the director into any building, factory, plant, yard, field or other place or portions thereof in the performance of his duty within the power conferred upon him by law or by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.07.160 - Violation—Penalty—Continued violations—Injunctive relief. 
Every person violating any provision of this chapter or any condition or limitation of permit issued pursuant thereto is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction is punishable by fine established at Chapter 1.12.020. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.07.180 - Severability. 
If any provision of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the ordinance and the application of such provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.07.200 - Notification of uncontrolled discharges required. 
A.  In the event of an uncontrolled discharge, the person, discharger or permittee shall within three hours notify the director of the incident by telephone. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of material, concentration and volume, and corrective actions taken. 
B.  Within ten (10) days after the uncontrolled discharge, the discharger or permittee shall submit to the director a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge, corrective action taken and measures to be taken to prevent future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the discharger or permittee of liability or fines incurred as a result of the uncontrolled discharge. 
C.  Notification of the director does not relieve the person, discharger or permittee from notifying other agencies as required by law within the time frame required by the various agencies. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.07.210 - Confidential information—Public access. 
Information and data concerning an industrial user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits, monitoring programs and inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
Article 3 - Administration, Permits and Fees 
 
13.07.250 - Permits—Issuance authorized when. 
If it appears from the application for any permit required by this chapter that the work to be performed thereunder is to be done according to the provisions of this chapter, the director, upon receipt of the fees hereinafter required, shall issue such permit. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.07.260 - Fees—Records required—Disposition of funds. 
The director shall keep in proper books a permanent and accurate account of all fees received under this chapter, giving the names and addresses of the persons on whose accounts the same were paid, the date and amount thereof, and the number of permits granted, if any, which books shall be open to public inspection. The director shall pay all fees received by him into the city treasury and take the treasurer's receipt therefor. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.07.270 - Fees—Estimated valuation procedures. 
Whenever the fees required by this chapter are based on valuations, the director shall determine the estimated valuation in all cases, and for such purposes he shall be guided by approved estimating practices. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.07.280 - Fees—Reimbursement authorized when—Procedures for awarding contracts. 
A.  The director may recommend that the council, by the adoption of a resolution or the approval of an agreement, authorize reimbursement to a subdivider, school district, special assessment district or person, either by direct payment or deferred reimbursement, for a portion of the cost of constructing sanitary sewers for public use where such sewers can or will be used by areas outside of the area for which the sewers are being installed; such authorization action shall conform with the requirements of the applicable state laws, shall include the establishment of a reimbursement district and collection rates to be applied, and shall provide that notice be published inviting sealed bids on the work proposed and that the bids be publicly opened. 
B.  The procedure for the receipt of bids and the award of contract for work to be done by a special assessment district or any public agency directly controlled by state law shall be as required by the particular laws applicable; for all other projects, the director shall receive and analyze the bids, and authorize the principals involved to award the contract to the lowest responsible bidder. In the event that the low bid received exceeds the engineer's estimate by more than ten percent, the director shall notify the principals involved of the increase over the estimated cost. If the principals involved and the director agree, the contract may be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder, otherwise all bids shall be rejected and the proposal readvertised for new bids. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.07.290 - Certificate of final inspection—Conditions. 
When it appears to the satisfaction of the director that all work done under the permit has been constructed according to and meets the requirements of all the applicable provisions of this chapter, and that all fees have been paid, the director, if requested, shall cause to be issued to the permittee constructing such work a certificate of final inspection. The certificate shall recite that such work as is covered by the permit has been constructed according to this chapter, and that said work is in an approved condition. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.07.300 - Refund procedures. 
A.  In the event that any person shall have paid a fee as required under the chapters set forth below and no work or processing has been done on these functions by the director and the project has been formally abandoned or cancelled, such person, upon presentation to the director of a request in writing, on special provided forms, shall be entitled to a refund in an amount equal to seventy-five (75) percent of the fee actually paid: 
Chapter 	Type of Fee 
13.08.065 	Sewer construction permit fees 
13.08.090 	Tap fee 
13.08.095 	Manhole reconstruction inspection charges 
13.08.105 	Plan checking fees 
13.08.110 	Sewer easement processing fees 
13.08.115 	Special studies—Preparation and checking fees 
13.08.120 	Reimbursement processing fees 
13.08.125 	Charges for sewer maintenance 
13.08.635 	Industrial waste disposal permit—Application fee. 
 
Except that refunds and credits for plan check and inspection fees shall be in accordance with Chapter 16.28 of the Municipal Code. 
B.  In the event that the director has commenced any plan checking or other work for which a fee was paid, or the contractor has commenced work on the construction, no portion of the fee shall be refunded. 
C.  Refund requests must be submitted within a one-year period after the date the fee was paid. 
D.  The director shall satisfy himself as to the right of such person to a refund, and each refund shall be paid as provided by law for the payment of claims against the city. 
(Ord. No. 932, § 1, 8-25-09; Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.07.310 - Educational work—Performance authorized when. 
The director may perform educational work, and may cooperate with civic organizations, industries, water companies and public agencies whenever, in the opinion of the director, such work and cooperation is essential to the development of standards or procedures which will prevent creation of a public nuisance, or menace to the public health or safety, or pollution of underground or surface waters. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.07.320 - Joint action with other public agencies. 
The director may contact, confer, and negotiate with officials of any public agency and may recommend to the council a contract by which the city and one or more public agencies may jointly exercise any powers pertinent to the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and any similar statute, ordinance, rule or regulation of such public agencies, common to all. The director may enter into agreements with other public agencies for the purpose of control of industrial waste disposal and may in conjunction with such agencies issue joint permits for industrial waste disposal to satisfy the requirements of this chapter. The director may also recommend to the council a contract between the city and any city within the county. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
Chapter 13.08 - SANITARY SEWERS AND INDUSTRIAL WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 910, § 1 Exh A, adopted January 13, 2009, repealed the former Chapter 13.08, §§ 13.08.010—13.08.040, and enacted a new Art. Chapter 13.08 as set out herein. The former Chapter 13.08 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Prior code §§ 5-2.1—5-2.4. 
 
Article 1 - Sewer Construction Permit 
 
13.08.005 - Findings. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter is necessary to protect public health and safety, and to prevent endangerment of public and private property. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.010 - Sanitary sewer policy. 
It is the policy of the city of Lancaster that all new buildings, constructed for human occupancy, be connected to a public sewer. That all such sewers shall be designed and constructed according to the provisions of this Chapter 13.08 and Title 15 of the Municipal Code of the city of Lancaster. All sanitary sewers including pumping stations, constructed and dedicated for public use shall be operated and maintained by the city of Lancaster and the benefitting property owner shall bear the cost thereof as provided in Chapter 13.09. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.015 - Definitions. 
The definitions in this chapter shall be the same as those included in Section 13.07.010 and govern the construction of this chapter unless separately defined in this chapter or apparent from the context. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.020 - Required when—Period of validity. 
A.  No person other than the person specifically excepted by this chapter shall commence, do or cause to be done, construct or cause to be constructed, use or cause to be used, alter or cause to be altered any public sewer, main-line sewer, house lateral, sewage pumping plant, or other similar appurtenance in the city of Lancaster without first obtaining a sewer construction permit from the director. 
B.  A sewer construction permit issued by the director shall expire one year from the date of issuance, except when the plans were approved in accordance with an agreement either with another governmental agency, or for a subdivision as required by the Subdivision Ordinance set out at Title 16 of this code, or reimbursement in accordance with Section 13.07.280, the permit shall be valid for the period specified in the agreement. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.022 - Not required when. 
The provisions of this article requiring permits shall not apply to contractors constructing public sewers and appurtenances under contracts awarded by the council and entered into under proceedings had or taken pursuant to any of the special procedure statutes of this state providing for the construction of sewers and the assessing of the expense thereof against the lands benefited thereby, or under contracts between the contractor and council. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.025 - Application—Form and contents. 
A.  Any person requiring a sewer construction permit shall make written application to the director. 
B.  The director shall provide printed application forms for the permits provided for by this chapter, indicating thereon the information to be furnished by the applicant. The director may require, in addition to the information furnished by the printed form, any additional information from the applicant which will enable the director to determine that the proposed work or use complies with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.030 - Plan approval prerequisite to issuance. 
No sewer construction permit shall be issued until the director has checked and approved the plans in accordance with Section 13.08.215 and the other applicable provisions of this code. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.035 - Tapping fee payment required when. 
A.  When, in the opinion of the director, it is necessary to connect a house lateral to a public sewer at a point where no connection facility has been provided, application for a city encroachment permit shall be submitted and a fee shall be paid by the applicant before the permit is issued for the construction and inspection of the house lateral. 
B.  Tapping of the public sewer as required on sewer plans approved by the director shall be constructed by a licensed contractor under inspection of the director. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.040 - Permit from other agencies required. 
Before granting any permit for the construction, installation, repair or removal of any sewer, or appurtenances thereto, which will necessitate any excavation or fill, in, upon or under any public street, highway or right-of-way under the jurisdiction of another public agency, the director shall require the applicant to first obtain a permit from the agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.045 - Requirements for pumping plants. 
Before granting a permit for the construction of any sewage pumping plant the director shall check and approve the plans or required modification thereof as to their compliance with city, county, state and other governmental laws or ordinances, and shall require that the facilities be adequate in every respect for the use intended. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.050 - Excessive discharge of sewage—Conditional permit requirements. 
A.  Any person proposing to have sewage discharged from any property to a public sewer in quantities or at a rate greater than the capacity for which the sewer was designed, when proportioned to such property, and which such additional quantity will immediately overload the sewer, shall be denied a permit to connect any facilities to the sewer which will discharge more than the proportionate share allotted to the property. However, if such additional discharge will not immediately but may in the future overload the sewer, a conditional permit to connect to the sewer may be issued after the owner of the property agrees by a covenant satisfactory to the director recorded against the land to construct or to share in the cost of construction of additional sewer capacity at such future time as the director determines that an overload situation exists or is imminent. 
B.  The owner of the property shall supply a faithful performance bond guaranteeing compliance with the terms of the covenant, in a penal sum which, in the opinion of the director, equals the future cost of construction of sewer facilities to carry such additional discharge. 
C.  The faithful performance bond shall be kept in full force and effect until such additional discharge is discontinued or until such additional sewer facilities are completed, and this obligation shall pass to succeeding owners of the property. 
D.  If any owner fails to supply and keep in effect the required faithful performance bond or fails to comply with the terms of the covenant, the conditional permit allowing such additional discharge may be revoked, and the continuing of such additional discharge thereafter will constitute a violation of this chapter. 
E.  The provisions of this chapter shall also apply to any property previously connected to a public sewer, the discharge from which is later proposed to be increased or is found to have been increased substantially beyond the proportionate share of public sewer capacity allotted to the property. 
F.  Any property from subsection E above discharging more than that permitted may be charged an additional charge to cover the cost of maintenance. Such additional charge shall not exceed that sewer service charge per Chapter 13.09 based on the specific use of the property. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.055 - Nontransferability of permits. 
Permits issued under this chapter are not transferable from one person to another person or from one location to another location. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
Article 2 - Fees and Deposits 
 
13.08.060 - Connection to public sewer—Payment of fees required. 
Any person desiring to connect any lot to a public sewer shall, as a prerequisite to obtaining the permits required by the Plumbing Code set out at Chapter 15.20, pay all fees or charges which may be required by the city of Lancaster. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.065 - Sewer construction permit fees. 
Before granting any permit for the construction of main-line sewer, house lateral sewer, sewage pumping plant, and whenever a permit for any industrial waste treatment or disposal facility is required by the director the director shall collect the appropriate fees as established from time to time by the city council in the fee resolution, from the applicant to cover the cost of field inspection of the proposed construction, procuring or preparing record plans, and all overhead and indirect costs. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.070 - Connection charges—Designated. 
Connection Charge. No permit shall be issued for the direct connection of any lot to a public sewer which has been constructed at no cost to such lot or to a trunk sewer in which capacity has been assigned by the owner thereof to the city of Lancaster until, in addition to any other fees required by this chapter and by any other ordinance or resolution, there has been paid a connection charge for the lot sought to be connected if said lot is rectangular and has an average depth of one hundred feet or more. If the shape of lot is other than the usual rectangular shape or unusual in area and the strict adherence to the above-mentioned provision would require payment of an amount not commensurate with the benefits to be received, the provisions of this chapter as the amount to be charged may be modified as determined by the director. The connection charge shall be determined by the city. The city shall, by resolution, from time to time establish the connection charge required under the provisions of this chapter. 
Property owned by a public entity and being used by such entity in the performance of a governmental function is not exempt from the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.072 - Area and connection charges in reimbursement districts. 
A.  If any property is in a sewer reimbursement district which was formed by the board of supervisors of the county of Los Angeles or the Council prior to July 1, 2008 or by the council after July 1, 2008, no permit shall be issued for the connection of such property to a public sewer until, in addition to any other fees required by this chapter and by the Plumbing Code set out at Chapter 15.20, all area charges and frontage charges required by this section have been paid. 
B.  An area charge computed by the area rates established for the reimbursement district shall be collected, whether or not additional public sewer is being constructed to serve the property. If the property is in more than one reimbursement district, an area charge shall be collected for each district. 
C.  Additionally, if the reimbursement agreement provides for frontage reimbursement, any lot located in the frontage reimbursement area and seeking direct house connection to any public sewer shall pay a reimbursement district connection charge in the amount specified below. 
D.  The reimbursement district connection charge shall be computed at the rate as established from time to time by the city council in the fee resolution. If a reimbursement district connection charge is collected as provided in this section, then the connection charge required by Section 13.08.70 shall not be collected. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.075 - Connections to trunk sewers—Permit requirements. 
No permit shall be issued for the direct connection of any lot to a trunk sewer until the applicant has first obtained a permit for such connection from the agency or owner of such trunk sewer. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.080 - Sewer connection permit—Determination of capacity—Agreement on future assessments. 
No permit shall be issued for the direct connection of any lot to a public sewer which was not designed for and intended to directly serve such lot unless the director first determines that there is additional capacity available in such sewer beyond that required to serve the property for which it was designed. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.085 - Sewer connection permit—Charges for portions of property. 
Whenever a sewer connection permit is requested for only a portion of a lot and the director finds that only such portion will be benefited by a sewer connection, and that both the area of such portion and the remaining area of such lot conform to the requirements of the Title 17, Zoning, a house sewer connection permit may be issued for such portion and all charges required shall be based on the dimensions of such portion as determined by the director. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.090 - Tap fee. 
The director shall collect from the applicant a fee as established by resolution of the council to tap the public sewer. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.095 - Manhole reconstruction inspection charges. 
A.  A permit shall be obtained from the director wherever construction, reconstruction or adjustment is to be performed adjacent to an existing sewer manhole, to ascertain that the sewer lines and manholes have been thoroughly cleaned and the manholes have been satisfactorily constructed, reconstructed or adjusted to city standards. 
B.  This inspection is also required for construction of industrial waste measuring manholes, reconstruction or adjustment of any portion of a manhole due to service connections or grading or paving operation, or any other work which in the opinion of the director may cause damage to a manhole. 
C.  The fee shall be as established by resolution of the council. These fees shall cover the costs of field inspection, and all overhead and indirect costs. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.100 - Future assessments for additional benefits. 
In the event that any lot which has paid any charges required under this chapter receives additional benefit from any public or trunk sewer, nothing contained in this chapter shall relieve the property owner from future payment of charges as herein provided nor from a special assessment levied under a statute of the state of California for such additional benefit. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.105 - Plan checking fees. 
Any person required by this chapter to have plans checked and processed shall pay the fee established by the city council for this service and as required by Chapter 16.28 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.110 - Sewer easement processing fees. 
For each private contract requiring the processing of sewer easements, the director shall collect from the applicant the fee established by the city council for this service and as required by Chapter 16.28 of this code. For each private contract requiring the vacation of a sewer easement, the director of public works shall collect from the applicant the fee established by the city council for this service and as required by Chapter 16.28 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.115 - Special studies—Preparation and checking fees. 
A.  Before proceeding with the preparation of a sewer area, reimbursement, or other special study, the director shall collect from the person making the request for the work the fee established by the city council for this service and as required by Chapter 16.28 of this code. 
B.  If the cost of doing the work exceeds the fee originally collected; a supplemental fee shall be collected to cover the additional cost as determined by the director. 
C.  If the director determines that a flow measurement of this existing system is required, there will be an additional cost as determined by the director. 
D.  Studies prepared by others and submitted for checking by the director shall be subject to the fee requirements stated above. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.120 - Reimbursement processing fees. 
For each private contract requiring reimbursement under Section 13.07.280, the applicant shall pay, in addition to the plan checking fee, the fee established by the city council for this service and as required by Chapter 16.28 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.125 - Charges for sewer maintenance. 
A.  Any person who desires to place a newly constructed public sewer system in operation prior to the availability of sewer maintenance revenue from the property to be served by such sewer system, shall pay a sewer maintenance charge in an amount determined by the director to cover such cost of maintaining such system from the time the sewer is placed in operation until the property so benefited is included on the next available property tax rolls and revenue becomes available. 
B.  Such charge shall be computed by multiplying the sewage service charge, as annually determined by the city council, times the number of sewage units determined in Chapter 13.09 to be discharging from the subject property. 
C.  If a sewage pumping plant is included in the computations, an additional sum shall be paid as determined by the director to cover the maintenance and operation costs until the property benefited can be included in a maintenance district and revenue becomes available. 
D.  If the newly constructed sewers are in an area served by an existing sewage pumping plant an additional sum shall be paid as determined by the director to cover the additional maintenance and operation costs of the pumping station until the property benefited can be included on the next available property tax rolls and revenue becomes available. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.130 - Deposit of collected moneys. 
All money received pursuant to 13.07, 13.08 and 13.09 except as otherwise provide for in this chapter shall be deposited with the director of finance and credited to the city sewer fund. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.135 - City sewer fund—Use restrictions. 
Money deposited in the city sewer fund, as provided in Section 13.09.040, may be expended by the director, contingent upon receipt and availability of such funds, to accomplish the purpose set forth in Section 5471 of the Health and Safety Code, for which no other provisions have been made or for such other sewer purposes that the council may authorize not in conflict with existing laws. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.140 - Recordkeeping requirements. 
The director and the director of finance shall keep a permanent record of all applications and a permanent and accurate account of all payments received under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
Article 3 - Design Standards 
 
13.08.175 - New main-line sewers. 
New main-line sewers shall conform to the requirements of this article unless otherwise specifically excepted. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.180 - Sewage pumping plants. 
Sewage pumping plants are expensive to maintain and are not the preferred method of sewage disposal. Sewage pumping plants are to be avoided whenever feasibly possible. If determined by the director that a sewage pumping plant is the only feasible method of sewage disposal the plant shall conform to the requirements of the LOS ANGELES COUNTY DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS WATERWORKS AND SEWER MAINTENANCE DIVISION GUIDELINES FOR WASTEWATER PUMP STATION DESIGN AND PLAN SUBMITTAL PROCEDURES dated June 2005 unless otherwise specifically approved by the director. The private engineer designing the sewage plant shall demonstrate to the director that a deviation from the Los Angeles County guidelines is warranted. 
(Ord. No. 932, § 1, 8-25-09; Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.185 - New house laterals. 
New house laterals shall conform to the requirements of this article unless otherwise covered by the Plumbing Code, Chapter 15.20 et seq, of the Municipal code, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.190 - Condominium sewers. 
New condominium developments shall be served with main-line sewers and house lateral sewers such that each building will have a separate and independent connection to a main-line sewer. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.195 - Large lots—Sewer service requirements. 
Where a lot is of sufficient size that the Zoning Ordinance, as set out at Title 17 of this code does not prohibit its division into smaller parcels, each of such possible parcels into which such lot legally may be divided, upon which one or more buildings containing plumbing facilities are or may be located, shall be considered as a separate lot. Separate house laterals shall be constructed to the main-line sewer for each of such possible parcels except where the owner has filed an affidavit as provided in the Plumbing Code (see Chapter 15.20). If the main-line sewer does not extend to a point from which such possible parcels can be served in accordance with the requirements of this chapter the main-line sewer must be extended in compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.198 - Participation in project—Letter requirements. 
A.  A "letter of participation," prepared on a form provided by the director, shall be submitted before approval of public sewer plans describing all properties which have participated in the cost of the project. 
B.  All such properties listed will be exempt from the connection charge only, specified in Section 13.08.070. 
C.  The "letter of participation" shall not be revised after the sewers have been accepted for public use by the council. 
D.  Exception: The "letter of participation" shall not be revised after a reimbursement agreement authorized under Section 13.07.280 has been approved by the council. Listed participants will be exempt from the reimbursement district connection charges specified in Section 13.08.72 established for that project in which they have participated. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.200 - Dedication of sewers. 
A.  An offer of dedication of sewers to the city shall be included in the agreement to construct sewers for a new subdivision which accompanies the faithful performance security guaranteeing the construction required as a condition for the recordation of the tract map or parcel map. 
B.  Before plans for the construction of any other public main-line sewer are approved by the director, the person causing such plans to be prepared shall present an "offer of dedication," signed and acknowledged, on forms provided by the director. 
C.  When the construction of the sewer, has been completed and accepted by the council, the sewer becomes a public sewer. 
D.  No sewer shall be accepted for dedication by the city unless such sewer has been constructed in conformity with the requirements of Chapter 13.08. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.205 - Exceptions to requirements authorized when. 
If a literal compliance with any engineering requirement of this chapter is impossible or impractical because of peculiar conditions in no way the fault of the person requesting an exception, and the purposes of this chapter may be accomplished and public safety secured by an alternate construction or procedure, and the director so finds that such alternate complies with sound engineering practice, he may grant an exception permitting such alternate construction or procedure. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.210 - Plan preparation by registered civil engineer. 
Any plans submitted for approval under the provisions of this chapter shall be prepared by or under the direction of and shall be signed by a registered civil engineer of the state of California. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.215 - Sewer plans. 
A.  Before a sewer construction permit required by Section 13.08.020 may be issued, plans for the proposed construction shall be submitted to and approved by the director, unless the director determines that plans are not necessary. 
B.  After the fees required by Section 13.08.105 has been paid, the director shall check the submitted plans for compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and other applicable laws and ordinances of the county, state, or other governmental jurisdiction. 
C.  If plan corrections and other requirements necessary for plan approval have not been completed within one year after the checked plans are returned by the of public works department, it shall constitute abandonment of the work and the director shall so notify the person who has submitted the plans. 
D.  Approval of a sewer plan shall expire two years from the date of the approval, unless construction of the facilities has commenced. 
E.  Resubmission of abandoned and expired plans shall be subject to new plan check fees as specified in Section 13.08.020. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.220 - Sewer easement requirements. 
A.  A person desiring to construct a sewer in an easement under the provisions of this chapter shall present to the director a request for processing, sufficient information to enable the preparation of a written description, and the fee specified in Section 13.08.110. 
B.  The location and dimensions of sanitary sewer easements shall be sufficient to provide present and future sewer service to abutting areas and adequate access for maintenance as determined by the director. 
C.  Until the required easements have been properly executed and recorded: 
1.  No plans shall be approved by the director for sewer facilities to be constructed by any person across the property of others; 
2.  No sewer facilities shall be accepted for public use, nor placed in use by any person. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.225 - Main-line sewers—Size specifications. 
A.  The size of main-line sewer pipe shall be determined by standards of design and the coefficients determined by the director, but in no case shall it be less than eight inches inside diameter. Individual building, commercial or industrial plant capacities shall be the determining factor when they exceed the coefficients shown. 
B.  The coefficient to be used for any zoned area not listed will be determined by the director based upon the intended development and use. 
C.  The director shall determine which of the coefficients or combination of coefficients shall be used for design, as determined by the established or proposed zoning in the study area. Any modifications to these coefficients due to topography, development or hazard areas shall be approved by the director. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.230 - Main-line sewers—Minimum velocity. 
A mainline sewer shall be designed to provide a minimum velocity of two feet per second for pipes flowing one-half full, except that the director may approve a gradient that will develop a lower velocity if he finds that a gradient that will develop a velocity of two feet per second is unobtainable. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.235 - Bench marks and elevations. 
A bench mark shall be shown on the profile sheets. The elevations shall be based on NAVD 88 datum or a datum acceptable to the utility services manager. The bench mark shall be a published benchmark near the project area used in the design of the project and adequate to construct the work. The bench mark description shall state the bench mark datum, county quad name, adjustment year and description. The elevation of the sewer at the point where the system is to be discharged shall be shown as determined in the field from the above shown datum. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.240 - Soil conditions. 
Soil conditions, particularly in areas known to have high groundwater tables, rock, or filled ground, shall be prospected, and the results shown on the profile, if required by the director. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.245 - Grades. 
The slope of the sewer shall be shown on the plans in feet of fall per one hundred (100) feet of horizontal distance, expressed as a percentage. Slopes used expressed in percentages shall be divisible, without remainder, by four in the hundredth column. For example, 0.36 percent complies with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.250 - Main-line sewers—Alignment and location in street. 
Where design considerations permit, main-line sewers shall have a straight alignment, and shall be located five feet from and on the northerly and easterly sides of the centerlines of streets or alleys, except on major or secondary highways where separate sewers shall be located in the roadway six feet from each curb line. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.255 - Main-line sewers—Depth. 
A.  The minimum depth for mainline sewers shall be seven and one-half feet. 
B.  Where groundwater is present, the depth for residential main-line sewers may be sufficient to provide for a house lateral with a minimum depth of at least five feet below the curb grade or centerline of street or alley grade at the property line. 
C.  Exceptions to the above minimum may be made only as set forth in Section 13.08.205. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.260 - House laterals—Specifications generally. 
A. For each lot, a six-inch internal diameter house lateral sewer shall be provided in the street, straight in alignment and grade between the main-line sewer and the property line, with minimum depths as required by Section 13.08.265, and at right angles to the mainline sewer whenever possible. 
B.  Exception: House laterals constructed in the street under the provisions of the Plumbing Code, (as set out at Chapter 15.20) or house laterals provided in the street for lots restricted to single-family residential use under the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, Title 17, may have an internal diameter of four inches. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.265 - House laterals—Depth. 
A.  The depth of house laterals at the property line shall be sufficient to provide service to the lowest or farthest point to be served on the lot at a minimum grade of two percent, with the top of the pipe not less than one foot below the ground surface at any point. 
B.  The minimum depth for house laterals at the property line shall be six feet below the curb grade or the centerline of street or alley grade, except as set forth in Section 13.08.255 for locations where groundwater is present. 
C.  Where street-widening lines have been established by the Zoning Ordinance, as set out at Title 17 of this code, the minimum depth shall be measured at such established line. If house laterals are constructed before the existing street is widened, the depth at the property line shall be such that extension at the same straight grade and alignment to the new property line will produce the required depth. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.270 - End structures—Location specifications. 
End structures shall be placed at whichever of the following locations is farthest up grade: 
A.  Not less than ten (10) feet upgrade from the downgrade lot line of the last lot being served; 
B.  Not more than forty (40) feet downgrade from the upgrade lot line of the last lot being served, if there may be a future extension of the main-line sewer; 
C.  At a location where the house lateral and building sewer can be constructed in a straight alignment at right angles to the main-line sewer. 
D.  End structures shall be manholes. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.275 - Manhole structures. 
Manhole structures shall be placed in the main-line sewer at all changes of alignment and gradient; the maximum distance between structures shall be not more than three hundred fifty (350) feet. All structures shall be designed according to the standard drawings for structures on file in the office of the director. Exceptions to the above requirements may be made only on approval of the director. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.280 - Substructures. 
All substructures which will be encountered in the construction or which will be installed as part of the improvement shall be shown and designated on the plan. Large substructures which require special treatment in the design of the sewer shall also be shown in the profile. The engineer who has prepared the plans shall submit to the director a statement that he has determined from each utility or other company having substructures in the affected area that the location and size of such structures, as shown on the submitted plans, are the same as shown upon such company's records. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.285 - Pipe materials—Approval required. 
A.  All pipe other than vitrified clay or cast iron shall first have been approved for use by the director and shall be equivalent to vitrified clay or cast iron pipe in strength, effectiveness, durability and safety in accordance with the use intended. 
B.  Before approving any pipe, the director may require satisfactory proof that such pipe is suitable for use, including actual tests performed by an independent and approved testing laboratory at no expense to the city. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.290 - Vitrified clay pipe—Installation specifications. 
A.  Vitrified clay pipe, main-line and house lateral sewers, shall be constructed of the class designated as extra-strength pipe. 
B.  Sewer pipe installed under a railway shall be encased in concrete, or encased in a steel pipe backfilled with sand, or encased by other approved means which will protect the pipe to the same extent to the satisfaction of the railway company. 
C.  Sewer pipe installed under a conduit or other structure, or at depths greater than twenty (20) feet or in other locations where the director determines that additional protection is required, shall be reinforced with a concrete cradle, or encased in concrete, or reinforced by other approved means which will protect the pipe to the same extent. 
D.  Sewer pipe installed in streets or public easements with the top of the pipe less than four feet below the surface, as determined during construction or indicated on the plans, shall be encased in concrete, or other approved means to protect the pipe. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
Article 4 - Inspection 
 
13.08.325 - Materials and construction—Conformity with standard specifications. 
All material used in any work done under provisions of this chapter shall be new, first-class material and shall conform to, and the manner of construction shall meet all the requirements prescribed by this chapter, by the standard specifications for public works construction, and by special provisions and standard plans on file in the office of the director. All such work shall be approved by the director before a certificate of final inspection will be issued. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.330 - Inspection by director of public works—Requirements. 
A.  All work done under the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to inspection by and shall meet the approval of the director; provided, however, that approval by the director shall not relieve the permittee or any other person from complying with all of the applicable provisions of the Plumbing Code set out at Chapter 15.20 et seq. of this code, and no provision of this chapter supersedes, affects or modifies in any way the provisions of said Plumbing Code. 
B.  After the fee required by Section 13.08.065 has been paid and the permit issued, the director shall inspect the construction for compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.332 - Notice to city when ready for inspection. 
The permittee shall notify the director at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the time any inspection is to be made. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.335 - Work to be convenient and uncovered. 
At the time of the inspection the permittee shall have all work uncovered and convenient, and shall give the director every facility to make a thorough inspection. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.340 - Using facilities before inspection prohibited—Exceptions. 
No sewer or other facility constructed under the provisions of this chapter shall be placed in use until the work has been approved by the director and has been accepted for maintenance by the city council. Exceptions to this requirement may be made only when the work is substantially complete and has been inspected, and if the director determines that the best interests of the public will be served by permitting such use prior to completion of the work. Such approval, prior to completion, shall make the properties being served by the sewer subject to the sewer service charge required by Chapter 13.09. The charge will be placed on the next available tax rolls for the subject properties. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.342 - CCTV inspection of sewers prior to acceptance. 
All new main line sewers shall be video inspected by the contractor to the requirements of the city prior to being placed into operation or accepted for maintenance. Videos will clearly show the quality of work and cleanliness of the pipe. Pipe that is determined to have defective joints or cracked, broken, dirty or otherwise be unacceptable shall be repaired and or cleaned to the satisfaction of the director prior to being placed into operation. Video requirements shall be as referenced in the latest version of the engineering design guidelines prepared by the director. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.345 - Correction of defective work. 
If the construction does not conform to the provisions of this chapter, or if the permittee fails to prosecute the work with such diligence to insure its completion within the time specified, the director shall notify the permittee, in writing, to comply. If the permittee fails to comply within five business days after the written notice, the permit shall be suspended or revoked in accordance with the procedures set forth in Sections 13.08.600, 13.08.605, 13.08.610 and 13.08.625 and no further work shall be done by the permittee until the suspension is removed either by correction of the work or after appeal and public hearing in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 13.08.620. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
Article 5 - Maintenance 
 
13.08.375 - Injuring or removing sewers or equipment. 
An unauthorized person shall not remove or cause to be removed, or injure or cause to be injured, any portion of any public sewer, sewage pumping plant, or any appurtenances thereto. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.380 - Manholes—Opening or entering prohibited. 
An unauthorized person shall not open or enter, or cause to be opened or entered, for any purpose whatsoever, any manhole in any public sewer. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.385 - Reconnection following violations—Conditions—Cost reimbursement. 
Whenever an industrial connection sewer has been disconnected from the public sewer by the director for failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter, reconnection shall be made only upon issuance of a permit as elsewhere in this chapter provided. Before such permit is issued, the applicant shall reimburse the city for the cost of the disconnection made, and the director may require the installation of a manhole for the purpose of measuring the flow, or for making periodic tests of the wastes from such connection. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.390 - Reimbursement for repairs and maintenance following violations. 
Whenever an industrial sewer connection permittee by reason of violation of 13.08.730 of this code, or any other person by reason of violation of 13.08.375, causes obstruction, damage or destruction of a public sewer, or any appurtenances thereto, or pumping plants in connection therewith, he shall reimburse the city in which damage occurred for the cost of flushing, cleaning, repairing and reconstruction of such sewer or facility, made necessary by such violation, within thirty (30) days after the director has rendered an invoice for the same. The amount when paid shall be deposited into the sewer enterprise fund. 
(Ord. No. 932, § 1, 8-25-09; Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
Article 6 - Industrial Waste—Permits 
 
13.08.500 - Discharge of offensive or damaging substances prohibited. 
A person shall not discharge or deposit or cause or suffer to be discharged or deposited at any time or allow the continued existence of a deposit of any material which may create a public nuisance, or menace to the public health or safety, or which may pollute underground or surface waters, or which may cause damage to any storm-drain channel or public or private property. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.505 - Dilution prohibited. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any water or other substance added for the purpose of diluting any industrial waste to achieve compliance with limitations imposed by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.510 - Construction of new industrial buildings—Information required. 
Every  person applying for a permit pursuant to the provisions of the Building Code, as set out at Title 15 of this code, for construction of a new industrial building or for an addition or alteration to an existing industrial building shall furnish to the director such plans, information, data, statements or affidavits as the director may require for determination of the nature and quantity of industrial waste involved and the facilities to be provided for the disposal thereof.  
13.08.515 - Construction of new industrial buildings—Building permit issuance prerequisites. 
An application for a permit pursuant to the Building Code to construct a new industrial building or for an addition or alteration to an existing industrial building will not be approved until provision has been made for the installation of such pretreatment facilities and disposal methods or both as, in the opinion of the director, are necessary to carry out the provisions and intent of this article. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.520 - Permit to discharge industrial waste—Issuance conditions. 
A.  The director may issue a permit containing limitations or conditions, or both, in addition to those recommended by the county health officer, or may modify an existing permit by the addition of or elimination of such conditions and limitations as may be necessary to accomplish the purpose of this chapter; but in a permit covering the discharge deposit or disposal of wastes other than to the public sewer he shall include all limitations and conditions recommended by the county health officer. 
B.  Permits for the discharge of industrial wastes to a public sewer shall state the maximum permissible rate of discharge. 
C.  The director may impose a permit expiration date not to exceed a term of five years where the director determines such a date is necessary to insure compliance with all applicable laws and regulations governing the disposal of industrial wastes. Application for renewal of such a permit shall be made not later than one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the expiration date of the existing permit. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.525 - Change of facts—Notification to director. 
Every person having a permit issued pursuant to this chapter either automatically or otherwise within five days shall notify the director in writing of any change in any facts which are required to be stated in an application for a permit. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.530 - Revised permit—Application required when. 
A permittee shall submit to the director an application for revised industrial waste disposal permit and obtain approval prior to affecting any of the following waste-discharge conditions: 
A.  Change in method of disposal; 
B.  Change in disposal point for non-sewered discharge; 
C.  Change in discharge volume affecting treatment or storage facilities; or 
D.  Change in character of the waste discharge. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.540 - Expiration of application. 
An application for an industrial waste disposal permit for which no permit is issued within one hundred eighty (180) days following the date of application submittal shall expire by limitation. The application and other information submitted may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed. The director may extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days upon written request by the applicant showing that circumstances directly related to the processing of the application but beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. In order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit all necessary application forms and other data and pay a new application fee and plan review fee. No application shall be extended more than once. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.545 - Grant or denial—Notice to applicant. 
A.  The director shall either grant or deny a permit within thirty (30) days after all fees required by this chapter have been paid and upon the receipt of the application complete with all supplemental data. 
B.  The director shall notify the applicant whenever he grants a permit, denies a permit, grants a permit subject to special conditions or limitations, or adds to or eliminates any conditions or limitations of an existing permit. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.550 - Hearing—Time limit for request. 
Within thirty (30) days after receipt of notice of denial of a permit, granting of a permit subject to conditions or limitations, or the addition of conditions or limitations to an existing permit, the applicant or permittee may file with the city council a written demand for a public hearing. If he does not do so, he shall be deemed to have consented to the action of the director, and such action shall be final.  
13.08.555 - Hearing—Notice requirements. 
Within thirty (30) days after application for a hearing has been requested, the council shall give notice of the time and place of public hearings to the applicant or permittee, the director, and the county health officer when matters pertaining to public health are involved, at least twenty (20) days in advance of the date set for such hearing. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.560 - Hearing—Conduct—Board determination authority. 
After a public hearing requested by an applicant or a permittee, the council may: 
A.  Confirm the action of the director in denying a permit or issuance of a permit subject to special conditions and limitations; 
B.  Instruct the director to issue a permit without conditions or limitations or with such special conditions and limitations as the council may designate; 
C.  Continue suspension of an existing permit invoked by the director pending correction of objectionable conditions by the permittee; 
D.  Remove the suspension of an existing permit invoked by the director pending correction of objectionable conditions by the permittee; 
E.  Deny that objectionable conditions exist and reinstate an existing permit; 
F.  Revoke an existing permit on any of the following grounds: 
1.  Failure of the permittee to correct conditions as required by the director, 
2.  Conditions which would justify the denial of a permit, 
3.  Fraud or deceit was employed in the obtaining of a permit, 
4.  Any other violation of this chapter or of any permit, license or exception granted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.565 - Failure to obtain permit deemed violation when. 
A person who is required to, but does not have a permit and who has been notified by the director that he is required to obtain a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall immediately submit to the director an application and fee as required by this chapter for such permit, and shall rectify and cure all such violations. Failure to do so shall constitute a willful violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.570 - Successor in interest—New permit required. 
The successor in title or interest of a premises for which a permit had previously been granted shall file with the director a new permit application, in accordance with the provisions of Section 13.08.690 or 13.08.790, within thirty (30) days after assumption of such title or interest, and shall furnish plans and data as may be required by the director. If it appears from the application, data, and/or inspection of the facility that the succeeding operation and disposal practices comply with the provisions of this chapter, the director, upon receipt of the fees hereinafter required, shall issue such permit. The director may issue an interim permit pursuant to Section 13.08.575 to allow continued operations during the permit processing period. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.575 - Interim permit—Ongoing discharge. 
Upon determination that any person is discharging industrial wastewater directly or indirectly to a facility regulated by this chapter without a valid permit or upon receipt of an application for a permit for an ongoing discharge, an interim permit may be issued by the director to allow the continuation of such discharge during the application review period, subject to such conditions, limitations, restrictions, and other provisions or requirements which the director determines are necessary or advisable to protect the city sewage collection system and to assure compliance with all federal, state and local laws and that the continuation of such discharge will not be detrimental to the public health and safety. An interim permit is revocable by the director at any time. Any person whose interim permit is revoked shall immediately cease and desist all unpermitted discharge of industrial waste. Unless revoked by the director, the interim permit shall be enforceable until such time as a permit is issued or denied by the director and shall be subject to annual inspection fees pursuant to Section 13.08.650. The discharger shall immediately comply with all of the provisions and requirements of such interim permit, and if the discharger has not already applied for a permit, shall apply for a permit within thirty (30) days from the issuance of the interim permit. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.580 - Permit not transferable from one location to another. 
Permits issued under this chapter are not transferable from one location to another, and discharge of wastes shall be made strictly in accordance with all provisions contained in the permit, at the location specifically designated therein. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.585 - Monitoring and sampling—Pre-notification. 
Any permittee required by the director, by permit or otherwise, to engage in periodic monitoring or sampling of a discharge shall notify the director by telephone at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance of any monitoring or sampling to be done. Prior to the commencement of any sampling or monitoring, the director may request that the permittee furnish the director a split sample and all supporting data. Each permittee shall submit to the director, certified under penalty of perjury by the permittee, its monitoring and sampling reports or other requested data. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.590 - Notice to correct violations. 
A.  The director may serve notice of violation upon the person owning or operating premises describing the conditions and requiring prompt correction thereof, when he finds that: 
1.  Industrial waste, effluent, or any other material is being maintained, discharged or deposited in such a manner as to create, or if allowed to continue will create, any one or more of the following conditions: 
a.  A public nuisance, 
b.  A menace to the public safety, 
c.  Pollution of underground or surface waters, 
d.  Adverse effect or damage to any public sewer, storm drain, channel, or public or private property; or that: 
2.  The permittee has failed to conform with conditions or limitations of any permit issued in accordance with this chapter; 
3.  The industrial waste disposal permit was issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or in violation of any ordinance, law or regulation. 
B.  Failure to comply with such notice shall constitute a willful violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.595 - Investigation of complaints—Correction of violations. 
Notwithstanding any exception mentioned in this article, the director shall promptly investigate every complaint charging violation of any of the provisions of this article, and shall take action to correct any violation discovered. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.600 - Suspension of permit—Conditions. 
When the conditions described in Section 13.08.590 are so aggravated that immediate cessation of operation is necessary and the director so finds, he shall suspend the permit. He shall serve notice of such suspension on the permittee. The director may also suspend a permit if objectionable conditions listed in a notice to correct, served in accordance with Section 13.08.590, and are not corrected within the time specified in such notice. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.605 - Suspension of permit—Notice. 
The director shall immediately notify the permittee of suspension of permit or recommendation to the council that such permit be revoked, or both. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.610 - Discontinuance of discharge or deposit required when. 
A person whose permit has been suspended, or who has been notified of violation, as provided in this chapter, shall immediately discontinue the deposit or discharge of industrial waste, sewage, or effluent, or use of any described facility, and shall not resume such deposit or discharge, or use of the described facility, until a permit has been issued or reinstated by the director or council as hereinafter provided. Failure so to do shall constitute willful violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.615 - Rights of permittee following notice of violation or suspension. 
Within the time specified in the notice of violation or suspension, the permittee shall: 
A.  Correct and remedy the conditions so specified, to the satisfaction of the director; or 
B.  File with the council a denial that all of the conditions so specified exist, request a public hearing, and correct the conditions which the permittee admits do exist; or 
C.  File with the council a denial that any of the conditions so specified exist and request a public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.620 - Reinstatement of suspended permit. 
The director shall reinstate a suspended permit when all violations are corrected and all fees required by this chapter have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.625 - Revocation of permit—Recommendation by director. 
The director may recommend to the council that a permit be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.630 - Cancellation of permit and facility closure—Conditions. 
A.  A person owning or operating premises containing industrial waste treatment or disposal facilities operated under a valid permit issued under the provisions of this article may file a written application with the director to cancel such permit upon termination of operations and/or closure of the permitted facility. Upon receipt of such an application, the director shall investigate and cancel the permit if he determines that: 
1.  All industrial-waste producing operations have ceased; 
2.  Any industrial waste treatment facilities have been removed or rendered inoperable to prevent further use; 
3.  All permits to abandon or disconnect, as may be required by the Plumbing Code, have been obtained; 
4.  Any industrial wastes remaining on the premises have been removed to a legal point of disposal; 
5.  All fees required by this article due up to the date of closure of the facility have been paid; 
6.  The applicant has demonstrated that no environmental contamination has occurred by the previous operation of the treatment facility or that any contamination found has been mitigated. 
B.  Should the director deny an application for a permit cancellation or closure of the facility, the owner or operator of any facilities required by the permit shall maintain these facilities in good operating condition and pay all fees required by this chapter to maintain a valid permit. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
Article 7 - Fees and Deposits 
 
13.08.635 - Industrial waste disposal permit—Application fee—Schedule. 
The director shall collect a permit application fee, as set by resolution of the city council, for each application received. Such fee shall be separate and apart from any fee or deposit collected for industrial waste plan review or imposed under provisions of the Plumbing Code, between the applicant and other public agency. Such application fee shall not be refundable even though the application be denied except as provided in Section 13.07.300. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.640 - Successor in interest or revision—Application fee. 
The application fee for a permit application by a successor in interest where the director finds that the succeeding operation is essentially the same as the preceding permitted operation in quantity, strength and method of disposal for industrial wastes generated, shall be the amount set forth by resolution of the city council for permit revision. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.645 - Industrial waste plan review—Fee schedule. 
A.  The director shall collect a plan review fee, as set forth in a resolution of the city council for each set of plans received for any single site or location. Such plan review fee shall be applied to any submittal required by the director pursuant to this chapter and shall not be refundable even though the submittal be rejected or the project terminated except as provided in Section 13.07.300. 
B.  The director may impose a reinstatement fee of one-half of the plan review fee if the applicant fails to correct any plans or submittal upon written notice of correction or request for additional information by the director after three attempts have been made to gain such correction. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.650 - Annual inspection fee—Scheduling and billing. 
A.  For each industrial waste disposal permit issued by the director, an annual inspection fee as determined by resolution of the city council shall be due and payable to the city annually, in advance, on a billing date to be determined by the director. 
B.  Immediately upon issuance of a new permit, the permittee shall be billed the above inspection fee for the first annual billing period. 
*  Industries subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards (NCPS) and not regulated by a joint permit pursuant to Section 13.08.720, shall have fee amounts governed by the NCPS facility designations. Where an industry or process falls into more than one fee class category, the higher fee shall prevail unless the director determines a lesser amount is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.660 - Wastewater sampling and analysis fee. 
The director may charge the discharger a fee established by resolution of the city council for each analysis performed by or on behalf of the director on wastewater samples taken from the discharger. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.665 - Annual inspection fee, wastewater sampling and analysis fee and miscellaneous service fee—Payment time—Penalties for delinquency. 
All inspection fees required by Section 13.08.650 of this code, wastewater sampling and analysis fees required by Section 13.08.660 and any applicable miscellaneous fees shall be due and payable on the billing date as established by those sections or by the due date indicated on any invoices issued. Fees not paid within thirty (30) calendar days from the invoice date shall be considered delinquent. Delinquent fees shall be subject to penalty fee as established by city council for each thirty (30)-day period beyond the invoicing date that the fee is due. Permits for which the inspection fee is delinquent for sixty (60) days or more are subject to suspension as provided in Section 13.08.600. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.670 - Annual inspection fee—Refund conditions. 
Upon cancellation of permit pursuant to Section 13.08.630, and upon written request of the permittee, the director shall refund a portion of the current paid annual inspection fee as determined from the table below: 
Days From Previous Payment Date 	Percent Required 
1—60 	75% 
61—150 	50% 
151—240 	25% 
241 or more 	0% 
 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
Article 8 Discharge to Public Sewers 
 
13.08.675 - Application of Article 8 provisions. 
The provisions of this article of this chapter shall pertain to the disposal of industrial waste to the public sewer only. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.680 - Permit—Required when. 
A.  A person shall obtain a permit from the director prior to the discharge of industrial waste to a public sewer. 
B.  The director shall not grant such a permit unless he finds that sufficient capacity exists in the public sewer to allow for such industrial waste, as determined by the requirements of Section 13.08.050. 
C.  A separate permit shall be required for each connection discharging industrial wastes to the public sewer. 
D.  For the purpose of this chapter, discharges resulting from garbage grinders powered by motors of one horsepower or less, and grease interceptors installed in restaurants in accordance with the provisions of the Los Angeles County Plumbing Code prior to July 1, 2008 or the city of Lancaster Plumbing Code thereafter where such facilities are not required by other provisions of this chapter, are not considered to be industrial waste discharges. 
E.  A person shall obtain a permit from the director to maintain an existing but non-used industrial waste connection to the public sewer. The annual inspection fee for such permit shall be as established by resolution of the city council. The connection shall be removed upon the expiration or revocation of such permit pursuant to the criteria established by Section 13.08.630. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.685 - Permit—Application forms—Information required. 
A.  The director shall provide printed application forms for the permit required by this article, indicating thereon the information to be furnished by the applicant. In conjunction therewith, the applicant may be required to furnish the following: 
1.  The name and address of the applicant; 
2.  The name and address of the discharger; 
3.  The address or location of the premises where the discharge will take place; 
4.  The North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS) classification designation (formerly the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC)) of the discharger; 
5.  Information with respect to constituents and characteristics of wastewater proposed to be discharged, including but not limited to those referred to in this Part 3. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as amended, and by laboratories certified by the state of California. In the absence of a state certification process, the director may certify a laboratory to perform necessary sampling and analysis; 
6.  Time and duration of the proposed discharge or discharges; 
7.  Average daily and five-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variation, if any; 
8.  Each byproduct waste of the discharges by type, amount and rate of production; 
9.  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, storm drains, connections and appurtenances by their size, location and elevation; 
10.  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the applicant's premises, including all pollutants which could be discharged; 
11.  Detailed plans showing pretreatment facilities, sampling facilities, uncontrolled discharge containment facilities, and operating procedures; 
12.  Identification of the nature and concentration of any pollutant located at the premises of the discharger (and/or applicant if different) if that pollutant is prohibited from discharge under this Part 3, or any proposed discharge which is regulated by any applicable local limit, plus a statement specifying whether the specific limitations set forth in said local limits are being met, and, if not, what operation and maintenance (O&M) or pretreatment is proposed by the discharger to cause compliance; 
13.  The shortest time scheduled by which the discharger shall provide the necessary additional pretreatment or O&M, if additional pretreatment or O&M will be required to meet the regulations in this Division 2. Any completion date in such a proposed schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established by the applicable regulations. The schedule shall provide for reporting increments in progress in the form of dates for commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment necessary for the discharger to meet the applicable regulation (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction); 
14.  Each product of the discharger by type, amount, and rate of production; 
15.  Type and amount of raw materials processed by the discharger (average and maximum per day); 
16.  Number of employees, hours of operation of plant, and hours of operation of the proposed pretreatment system; 
17.  Copies of any current NPDES permit, Antelope Valley Air Quality Management District permit, Regional Water Quality Control Board permit, fire department business plan, health department license and State Department of Public Health permit for the subject premises; 
18.  The name, business address and motor vehicle driver's license number of the authorized representative; 
19.  Any other information deemed by the director to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
The application shall be signed under penalty of perjury by the authorized representative of the discharger. 
B.  For the purpose of this chapter, the director may utilize joint permit application forms under agreements established with other public agencies as provided in Section 13.07.320. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.690 - Permit—Issuance conditions. 
If it appears from the application and supporting information submitted for any permit required by this chapter that the proposed disposal complies with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable laws and ordinances, the director, upon receipt of the fees hereinafter required, shall issue such permit. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.695 - Determination of type of liquid waste. 
Before granting an industrial waste disposal permit to any applicant, the director shall determine either that the waste is one which will not damage or destroy the public sewer, or cause an unwarranted increase in the cost of maintenance of the public sewer, or retard or inhibit the treatment of the sewage, or is one that can be made acceptable by pretreatment. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.700 - Pretreatment—Plans prerequisite to permit issuance when. 
In event pretreatment or special facilities are required to make the waste acceptable as provided under the provisions of this chapter the applicant for an industrial waste disposal permit may be required to furnish plans showing the method of collections and pretreatment proposed to be used, and a permit shall not be issued until said plans or required modification thereof have been checked and approved by the director. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.705 - Permit—Revocation conditions. 
By following the procedure set forth in Article 6 of this chapter, the director may recommend the revocation of and the council may revoke any permit if, after a public hearing, if a public hearing is requested, or otherwise, after due investigation, the council finds: 
A.  A failure of the permittee to correct conditions as required by the director; or 
B.  Conditions which would justify the denial of a permit; or 
C.  Fraud or deceit was employed in obtaining the permit; or 
D.  Any other violation of this article or of any conditions of any permit including the one to be revoked, license or exception granted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.710 - Public participation—Notification of significant violations. 
At least annually, the director shall provide public notification, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality in which a POTW is located, of industrial users of the POTW which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were significantly violating applicable pretreatment standards or other pretreatment requirements, as provided in 40 CFR 403.8. The director need not provide such notification if a notice meeting all applicable EPA requirements has been published by the POTW operator. The cost of such public notification shall be collected by the director from the discharger causing such violation and/or notification. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.715 - Disconnection following permit revocation. 
If a permit is revoked, the director may disconnect from the public sewer any industrial connection sewer which was connected pursuant to such permit. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.720 - Pretreatment—Standards and criteria. 
The director may establish uniform minimum standards and criteria for the application of such standards for pretreatment of specific industrial waste discharges. The provision of this chapter shall not prohibit the director from requiring additional pretreatment to accomplish the objective of Section 13.08.695. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.725 - Rainwater diversion systems—Authorized when. 
The director may authorize the installation of a rainwater diversion system in lieu of roofing to prevent the discharge of stormwaters to the sewer system where roofing is impractical, in conflict with existing laws or regulations, may create a hazardous or unsafe working condition, or may cause undue hardship on the applicant, providing the director finds that: 
A.  The applicant has applied for an industrial waste disposal permit and has submitted all plans and specifications of the proposed system; 
B.  The system provides for continuous twenty-four (24)-hour protection to the public sewer system; 
C.  The system meets minimum operational and component standards as may be established pursuant to Section 13.08.720; and 
D.  Pollution of underground or surface waters, nor damage to any streets, gutters, storm drains, channels or any public or private property will not be caused by the diverted storm flows. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.730 - Deposit of certain substances prohibited. 
A person shall not place, throw or deposit, or cause or permit to be placed, thrown or deposited in any public sewer or main-line sewer any dead animal, offal, or garbage, fish, fruit or vegetable waste, or other solid matters, or materials or obstructions of any kind whatever of such nature as shall clog, obstruct or fill such sewer, or which shall interfere with or prevent the effective use or operation thereof. A person shall not cause or permit to be deposited or discharged into any such sewer any water or sewage, or liquid waste of any kind containing chemicals, greases, oils, fats, tars or other matters in solution or suspension, which may clog, obstruct or fill the same, or which may in any way damage or interfere with or prevent the effective use thereof, or which may necessitate or require frequent repair, cleaning out or flushing of such sewer to render the same operative, or which may obstruct or cause an unwarranted increase in the cost of treatment of the sewage, or which may introduce into a POTW any pollutant(s) which cause pass through or interference. Stormwater runoff shall not be discharged into a sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.735 - National Categorical Pretreatment Standards (NCPS)—Compliance. 
Upon the promulgation of mandatory NCPS for any industrial subcategory, the NCPS, if more restrictive than limitations imposed by this division, shall apply. The director may impose a phased compliance schedule to insure that affected industries meet the NCPS. Failure to meet the phased compliance schedule may result in permit suspension or revocation. Those dischargers subject to NCPS shall comply with all reporting requirements in accordance with the General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution (Chapter 40, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 403). Facilities subject to this division and regulated by joint permits issued in conjunction with other agencies pursuant to 13.07.320 may meet the requirements of this chapter as set forth in such joint permit and by furnishing such evidence of compliance as may be required by the director. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.740 - Compliance with local limits. 
No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced wastewater to the sewer system or a POTW that exceeds specific local limits which have been developed by the receiving POTW. Said local limits shall not apply where more restrictive limitations are imposed by permit or National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.745 - Toxic substances. 
All toxic chemical substances shall be retained or rendered acceptable before discharge into the public sewer. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.750 - Control of pH. 
No person shall discharge acids or alkali materials into the public sewer until the pH has been controlled to a level not less than 6.0 nor at or higher than a level which the director finds excessive. No discharge shall have any corrosive or detrimental characteristics that may cause injury to wastewater treatment, inspection or maintenance personnel or may cause damage to structures, equipment or other physical facilities of the public sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.755 - Temperature restrictions. 
A person shall not discharge into the public sewer effluent exceeding a temperature of one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit or which will exceed one hundred four (104) degrees Fahrenheit at the point of entry into the POTW treatment plant. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.760 - Cooling water. 
No uncontaminated cooling water shall be discharged into a public sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.762 - Recycled water—Fire hydrant flushing. 
Recycled water discharge from recycled water systems may be discharged into the public sewer system upon approval of the director. Fire hydrant flushing water may be discharged into the sewer system upon approval of the director. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.765 - Ground garbage. 
Garbage resulting from the preparation of food may be discharged into the public sewer (but not into a STEP sewer system unless as septic tank effluent) if ground to a fineness sufficient to pass through a three-eighths-inch screen. Excessive or unnecessarily large quantities of water shall not be used to flush ground garbage into the sewer. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
Article 9 - Other Methods of Disposal 
 
13.08.770 - Applicability of Article 9 provisions. 
The provisions of this article shall pertain to the disposal, discharge or deposit of all industrial waste except where such wastes are discharged to a public sewer in accordance with the provisions of Article 8 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.775 - Depositing or discharging wastes prohibited without permit. 
A person shall not maintain a deposit of waste material, or discharge or deposit or cause or suffer to be discharged or deposited, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any waste material or effluent in or upon the territory of the city of Lancaster, or into streams or bodies of surface or subsurface water, or storm drains, or flood control channels, where the same is deposited upon or may be carried through or upon territory of the city without first securing, in the manner provided in this chapter, a permit from the director so to do, and at all times having an unrevoked permit therefor, unless otherwise exempted by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.780 - Maintenance of existing, non-used facility for industrial waste deposit, discharge or storage. 
A person shall obtain a permit from the director to maintain an existing but nonused facility designed or formerly used for the deposit, discharge or storage of industrial wastes. The annual inspection fee for such permit shall be as established by resolution of the council 
Exception: Such permit is not required when, to the satisfaction of the director, compliance with the permit cancellation criteria of Section 13.08.630 has been provided. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.785 - Permit—Not required when. 
No permit shall be required for the disposal of waste which consists only of domestic sewage into septic tanks or cesspools constructed pursuant to the provisions of the Plumbing Code, as set out at Title 15 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.790 - Permit—Application—Form and contents. 
Any person requiring a permit under the provisions of this article shall make written application therefor to the director, giving such information as the director may require. The director shall provide printed application forms, indicating thereon the information to be furnished by the applicant. The director may require from the applicant, in addition to the information furnished on the printed form, any additional information including detailed plans and specifications which will enable the director to determine that the proposed discharge or deposit and plan of operation complies with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable laws and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.795 - Permit—Plans required with application when. 
A.  The director may require that an application for a permit to dispose of industrial waste shall be accompanied by suitable plans showing the proposed method of collection, treatment and disposal, and a permit shall not be issued until said plans or required modification thereof have been checked and approved by the director. 
B.  The director may submit the application or plans, or both, to any public agency for comment or recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.800 - Use of public property—Permit required when. 
Whenever facilities for the discharge of industrial waste connect to structures, or encroach on the property or rights-of-way owned or controlled by a public agency, the director may either: 
A.  Require that the applicant obtain a property-use permit, license, easement, or other right to use said properties prior to the issuance of a permit to dispose of industrial waste; or 
B.  Issue such permit subject to the execution of a property-use permit, license, easement, or other right to use said properties. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.805 - Notification of public agencies required. 
Whenever an application for permit is filed, the director shall notify the county health officer and such other public agencies as in his opinion may be affected, and shall request a prompt reply containing their recommendations. Upon request, he shall secure from the applicant and furnish to the affected department or agency such additional plans or information as it may require, relative to such application. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.810 - Investigation by other public agencies. 
Whenever notified that an application for permit has been filed, the county health officer, and any public agency determined to be affected shall make such investigations as in their opinions are required. The health officer and such other public agencies shall, within a timely manner of the filing of the application, make and file reports of their investigations with the director. Such reports shall narrate all facts found, and shall recommend that the application be denied, or be granted in whole or in part, and if granted, subject to what conditions, if any. Such report may also disclaim interest in the application. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.815 - Deposits creating menace to public health—Notice requirements. 
When the county health officer finds that industrial waste or effluent, or any other material, is being discharged or deposited in such manner as to create a menace to the public health, he may serve notice of violation upon the person owning or operating the premises, describing the conditions, and requiring the prompt correction thereof and shall so notify the director. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.820 - Permit—Issuance conditions. 
The director shall issue a permit as required by this chapter if he determines that all of the following conditions have been met: 
A.  All fees or deposits hereinafter required have been paid; 
B.  Recommendations and conditions of any other public agency, as contained in their reports, if any, have been met. The director may waive this provision except as to the requirements of the county health officer; 
C.  The material to be discharged or deposited does not or will not, in the opinion of the county health officer, constitute a potential public nuisance or menace to the public health and safety, and will not violate other provisions of the Health and Safety Code of the state of California; 
D.  The material to be discharged or deposited does not or will not involve disposal of any toxic materials or chemicals in such manner as to cause pollution of any stream, watercourse, lake, or other body of water, or underground or surface water storage reservoir, either natural or artificial; 
E.  The material to be discharged or deposited does not or will not damage or adversely affect any storm drain, channel, or any public or private property; 
F.  Under existing circumstances and conditions it is necessary and reasonable to dispose of such waste matter. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
Article 10 - Industrial Waste Treatment Plants and Facilities 
 
13.08.825 - Installation—Required when. 
Industrial waste treatment plants or facilities shall be installed whenever the director shall find as a fact that such facilities are required to safeguard the public health; prevent pollution of streams or bodies of surface or underground water; prevent pollution of water wells or storage reservoirs, either natural or artificial; prevent damage or increased maintenance costs in the sewerage system; prevent damage to public or private property; prevent a public nuisance; or to comply with applicable regulations of any other public agency. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.830 - Pretreatment—Standards and criteria. 
The director may establish uniform minimum standards and criteria for the application of such standards for pretreatment of specific industrial waste discharges. The provisions of this chapter shall not prohibit the director from requiring additional pretreatment to accomplish the objective of Section 13.08.695 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.835 - Facilities not required when. 
Installation of industrial waste treatment facilities may not be required if the director determines that: 
A.  The waste is prohibited for discharge to the available systems by this chapter or other applicable ordinances or regulations; 
B.  The affected industry has guaranteed to separately dispose of any objectionable waste to legal points of disposal; 
C.  Adequate facilities are to be provided for the collection and containment of such wastes, and that provisions have been made to prevent intentional or accidental discharge of such wastes to the sewer system, ground surface, surface or underground water supplies, rivers, channels, storm drains, public streets or gutters; 
D.  An application for industrial waste disposal permit has been filed in accordance with Article 9 of this chapter; and 
E.  All fees required by this chapter have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.840 - Installation—Access of inspection and maintenance. 
Interceptors or other industrial waste treatment facilities shall be so installed and constructed that they shall be at all times easily accessible for inspection and maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.845 - Separation of domestic and industrial wastes. 
All domestic wastes from restrooms, showers, drinking fountains, etc., shall be kept separate from all industrial wastes until the industrial wastes have passed through any required pretreatment facilities. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.850 - Operation and maintenance. 
All  industrial waste treatment facilities or, and all appurtenances thereto, existing as of July 1, 2008, or hereafter constructed under jurisdiction of this chapter shall be maintained, by the owner or person having jurisdiction of the property affected, in good operating condition and in a safe and sanitary condition at all times. All devices and safeguards which are required by this chapter for the operation thereof, and all records of such operation, shall be maintained in good order. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.855 - Inspection and testing. 
The director may make tests of industrial wastes, and or periodic inspections of industrial waste treatment plants or facilities to determine whether such treatment plants or facilities are maintained in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. The director shall also make periodic tests on samples of sewage, industrial waste or effluents obtained at the point of discharge or deposit to determine whether such discharges or deposits are made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.860 - Right of entry for inspection authorized when. 
A.  The director shall be permitted at all reasonable hours to inspect water pollution control plants and industrial waste treatment plants or facilities, and to enter and inspect the place, enclosure or structure where industrial wastes or effluent are discharged or deposited. 
B.  A person shall not refuse to permit, and shall not hinder or obstruct in any way, any reasonable inspection or investigation of such treatment plant or facilities or deposits or discharges by the director. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.865 - Owner's safety regulations—Compliance by inspector. 
Inspector shall comply with any special safety regulations brought to his attention by the owner or operator. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.08.870 - Test manholes or other structures. 
The director may require the installation of a test manhole or other structure through which all industrial waste shall pass. Said structure shall be so designed that flows may be measured and samples readily obtained therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
Chapter 13.09 - SEWER SERVICE CHARGES 
 
13.09.010 - Purposes of charges. 
The purpose of this chapter is to impose a charge on users of the sanitary sewer system to reimburse the city for the reasonable costs of providing this service. The cost of providing sanitary sewer service includes the costs of acquisition, construction, reconstruction, maintenance, and operation of the sanitary sewer system and the payment of principal and interest on bonds or other debt instruments issued for the construction or reconstruction of the sanitation sewer system. These costs are not related to expenses incurred to accommodate new development. The amount of the charge to the user shall be reasonably related to the quantity and quality of the user's discharge into the sanitary sewer system as determined by the city council. 
(Ord. 876 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
13.09.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Council" means the city council of the city of Lancaster. 
"Director of finance" means the director of finance of the city of Lancaster or the designated representative thereof. 
"Director of public works" means the director of public works of the city of Lancaster or the designated representative, deputy, agent or inspector. 
"Improved parcel of real property" means a parcel of real property upon which, as of July 1st of the fiscal year, improvements have been made which make use of the sewer collection system owned, operated and maintained by the city. 
"Operations charge" means the portion of the sewer service charge as established pursuant to Section 13.09.030(A). 
"Parcel of real property" means a parcel of real property as shown on the local secured tax rolls of the county of Los Angeles. 
"Replacement charge" means the portion of the sewer service charge as established pursuant to Section 13.09.030(B). 
"Sewage units" means the applicable unit set forth in Section 13.09.120. 
"Sewer service charge" means the sanitary sewer service charge established pursuant to Section 13.09.030. 
(Ord. 876 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
13.09.030 - Charge for sanitary sewer service. 
The owner of real property which is connected to the sanitary sewer system of the city shall pay a sewer service charge pursuant to this chapter. For the purpose herein above specified in Section 13.09.010, the sanitary sewer service charge is hereby prescribed and imposed, and shall be paid to and collected by the city, for services and facilities furnished by the city in connection with its sewer collection system to or for each premises which is connected directly or indirectly to said sewer collection system or any part thereof, or from which any sewage is conveyed or discharged directly or indirectly into said sewer collection system. The amount of the sewer service charge for each premise shall be the sum of the amount determined by multiplying the operation charge as established in Section 13.09.030(A) and the replacement service charge as established in subsection B of this section by the number of applicable sewer units set forth in Section 13.09.120. These charges shall be considered a lien against the property if not paid. 
A.  The operations charge shall be established by ordinance for purpose of providing for the operation and maintenance of the sanitary sewer system of the city. All revenues generated with respect to such charge shall be deposited in a separate segregated subaccount of the sewer enterprise fund and expended only for the purposes described above. 
B.  The replacement charge shall be established by ordinance for the purpose of providing for the reconstruction of existing sewer facilities and construction of relief sewer facilities within the city. All revenues generated with respect to such charge shall be deposited in a separate segregated subaccount of the sewer enterprise fund and expended only for the purpose described above. 
(Ord. 876 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
13.09.040 - Sewer enterprise fund established. 
There is hereby established a "sewer enterprise fund" in the financial records of the city. All fees and charges levied and collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited into the sewer enterprise fund. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from depositing other revenues in the sewer enterprise fund. The director of finance may establish such subaccounts within the sewer enterprise fund as may be necessary to properly account for collections and expenditures of the sewer service charges. The sewer service charges shall be used for the purposes set forth in Section 13.09.010. 
(Ord. 876 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
13.09.050 - Exceptions. 
All premises in the city which are connected to the sewer system of any other city, and which are required to pay sewer service, use, rental or other charges, rentals or fees for sewer services and facilities furnished by such other city, are hereby excepted from payment of such charges as would be otherwise applicable to such premises under the provisions of this chapter, except to the extent that the charges payable under the provisions of this chapter exceed those payable to such other city. 
(Ord. 876 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
13.09.060 - Power to inspect premises. 
In order to effect the powers of this section and pursuant to Section 6523.2 of the Health and Safety Code of the state, the city's director of public works shall have the power and authority to enter upon private property for the purpose of inspection and maintenance of sanitary and waste disposal facilities, including, but not limited to, ascertaining the nature of such premises, the type of activities carried on therein, the number of plumbing fixtures situated therein, and any other facts or information reasonably necessary to ascertain the applicability of any charges to such premises, or the amount of such charges. 
(Ord. 876 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
13.09.070 - Government or public entity defined. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to governmental or public premises. As used herein the term "governmental or public premises" means and includes premises which are owned, controlled or used by: 
A.  Any city, county, or any of their departments or agencies; 
B.  Any school district; 
C.  Any other governmental or public entity other than the United States Government or the state of California. 
(Ord. No. 913, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 913, § 1 (Exh. A), adopted January 13, 2009, in effect repealed the former Section 13.09.070, and enacted a new Section 13.09.070 as set out herein. The former Section 13.09.070 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 876 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007.  
13.09.080 - Collection of charges on tax roll. 
A.  Pursuant to the provisions of Division 5, Part 3, Chapter 6, Article 4 of the Health and Safety Code of the state, and subject to the exceptions set forth in this chapter, the city elects, as an alternative procedure for the collection of sewer service charges prescribed or imposed by the provisions of this chapter to have all such sewer service charges for each fiscal year from and after July 1, 2007, collected on the tax roll in the same manner, by the same persons and at the same time as, and together with and not separately, from its general taxes. 
B.  The director of public works is directed to annually prepare and file with the city clerk of the city of Lancaster before the fifteenth day of May, a written report containing a description of each and every parcel of real property receiving the sewer services hereinabove mentioned and the amount of the sewer service charge for each parcel for the forthcoming fiscal year, in conformity with the charges prescribed herein. Providing and excepting that: the sewer service charges for any and all governmental or public premises or for any premises which are not subject to taxation on the tax roll shall not be included in the report, but shall be collected in accordance with other provisions of this chapter. The parcels of real property included in the report may be described by reference to maps prepared in accordance with Section 327 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state and on file in the office of the county assessor, or by reference to plats or maps on file in the office of the city. 
C.  The city clerk shall cause notice of the filing of the report and of a time and place of hearing thereon to be published prior to the date set for hearing in a newspaper of general circulation printed and published within the city. The publication of the notice shall be once a week for two successive weeks with at least five days intervening between the respective publication dates not counting publication dates and the first publication being not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
D.  The city clerk shall also cause a notice in writing of the amount of the charge, of the filing of the first report hereunder proposing to have such charge for the forthcoming fiscal year collected on the tax roll and of the time and place of hearing thereon, to be mailed to each person to whom any parcel or parcels of real property described in the report is assessed on the last equalized assessment roll available on the date the report is prepared, at the address shown on the assessment roll or as known to the director of public works, in accordance with Division 5, Part 3, Chapter 6, Article 4 of the Health and Safety Code. 
E.  At the time stated in the above mentioned notice, the city council shall hear and consider all objections or protests, if any, to the report referred to in the notice and may continue the hearing from time to time. If the city council finds that protest is made by owners of a majority of separate parcels of property described in the report, then the report shall not be adopted and the charges shall not be collected separately from the tax roll and shall not constitute a lien against any parcel or parcels of land. 
F.  Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the city council may adopt, revise, change, reduce or modify and change or overrule any or all objections, and shall make its determination upon each charge as described in the report, which determination shall be final. 
G.  On or before the tenth of August of each year following such final determination, the director of public works shall file with the auditor of the county a copy of the report with a statement endorsed thereon over his signature that it has been finally adopted by the city council. 
H.  The amount of the charges shall constitute a lien against the lot or parcel of land against which the charge has been imposed as of the date prescribed by law as the lien date for general property taxes. 
I.  Thereafter the amount of the charges shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner and by the same persons as, together with and not separately from, the general taxes for the city and shall be delinquent at the same time and thereafter be subject to the same delinquency penalties. 
J.  All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of general taxes of the county, including but not limited to, those pertaining to matters of delinquency, collection, cancellation, refund and redemption, are applicable to such charges. 
K.  If any premises within the city are omitted from the above mentioned report or the tax roll, either because the charge therefore shall not have yet been ascertained by the director of public works as of the date of the report or for any other reason, the sanitary sewer service charge for each premises shall be collected in the manner provided elsewhere in this chapter. 
(Ord. 876 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007) 
The alternate manner of collecting the sewer service charges for premises identified in Section 13.09.080(K) above shall be by direct billing. An invoice shall be prepared for each premise (or if multiple premises are under a single ownership a single invoice detailing the multiple premises) and mailed to the owner. The city shall prepare and mail invoices by September 15th of the then current year. Upon mailing of the invoice by the city the provisions of Section 13.09.080(H) through (J) above shall apply, including but not limited to: due dates, delinquency of payment and penalties and liens. 
(Ord. No. 913, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09)  
13.09.090 - Disputed bills. 
If any owner disputes the amount of the annual sewer charge or the replacement charge, he or she shall file a claim with the director of public works accompanied by detailed supporting factual data in support of the claim. It shall be the duty of each such owner to prove to the director of public works, that such bill or invoice is in error and the correct amount thereof. If the director of public works, after consulting with the city engineer, determines that the bill or invoice was in error, the director of public works shall correct said bill. Failure to dispute the amount of the charge in accordance with this section shall be deemed acceptance of the correctness of the charge. 
(Ord. 876 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
13.09.100 - Adjustments. 
A.  It is the intent of the provisions of this chapter, in establishing different sewer service charges for different categories of properties, to reflect the benefit from such service to each property. If, in respect to any customer, the council should find that the charge is inequitable, or unfair because of unusual circumstances, it may establish a special service charge for such customer, differing from those otherwise established which will bear a closer relationship to the benefit received from the city system. Such special charge may be revoked at any time by the council whenever it finds that continuation thereof would be inequitable or unfair under the circumstances then prevailing. 
B.  The owner of any premises who by reason of special circumstances finds that the applicable rates are unjust or inequitable as applied to his or her premises may make written application to the director of public works, stating the circumstances and requesting a different basis of charges for such premises. If such application is approved, the council may fix and establish fair and equitable rates for such premises to be effective as of the date of such application and continuing during the period of such special circumstances. 
(Ord. 876 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
13.09.110 - Refunds. 
When any refund becomes due and owing by virtue of action of the city council or by virtue of any error made in ascertaining the charge applicable to any customer, the director of public works is authorized to make payable such moneys from the specific fund established for the deposit of sewer service charges. 
(Ord. 876 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
13.09.120 - Table A sewage units for designated land uses. 
Table A 
Number of Sewage Units for Current Land Use 
Land Use 	Number of Sewage Units 
Residential 	
Vacant residential property 	0.5 
Single residential unit 	1 
Double, duplex, or two units 	2 
Three units (any combination) 	3 
Four units (any combination) 	4 
Five or more apartments 	
4 stories or less, per individual residential unit 	1 
5 stories or more, per individual residential unit 	1 
Modular homes, per individual residential unit 	1 
Mobilehomes, per residential unit 	1 
Rooming houses 	3 
Mobilehome parks, per individual residential unit 	1 
Commercial 	
Vacant commercial property 	0.5 
Stores 	1 
Store combination 	
Store and office 	2 
Store and residential 	2 
Department stores 	5 
Supermarkets 	
12,000 square feet or more 	5 
6,000 through 11,999 square feet 	2 
Small food store 	1 
Shopping centers 	
Neighborhood, community 	10 
Regional 	30 
Office buildings 	5 
Loft-type building 	3 
Office and residential combination 	2 
Hotels and motels 	
Hotels—Under 50 rooms 	25 
Hotels—50 rooms and over 	40 
Motels—Under 50 units 	25 
Motels—50 units and over 	40 
Motel/hotel and apartments 	
Under 50 units 	40 
50 units and over 	60 
Professional buildings 	5 
Medical/dental buildings 	5 
Veterinary hospitals, clinics 	3 
Restaurants, cocktail lounges 	
Restaurants, cocktail lounges, taverns 	5 
Fast food—Walk-up 	2 
Fast food—Auto-oriented 	2 
Wholesale and manufacturing outlets 	2 
Banks, savings and loans 	1 
Service shops 	2 
Service stations 	
Full-service 	1 
Self-service 	1 
Station with car wash 	5 
Auto, recreation, construction equipment 	
Sales and service 	
Auto service center (no gasoline) 	1 
Auto service shops 	1 
Used car sales 	1 
New car sales and service 	3 
Car wash 	5 
Car wash—Self-service 	5 
Recreation equipment sales and service 	1 
Farm and construction equipment sales and service 	2 
Parking lots 	0.5 
Animal kennels 	2 
Nurseries or greenhouses 	1 
Miscellaneous commercial property 	2 
Industrial 	
Vacant industrial property 	0.5 
Light manufacturing 	5 
Heavy manufacturing 	100 
Warehousing, distribution, storage 	2 
Food processing plants 	
Meat and poultry (slaughtering house) 	5 
Beverage 	200 
Other 	200 
Motion picture, radio and television industries 	
Microwave relay towers 	1 
Studios 	5 
Transmission facilities 	1 
Lumber yards 	1 
Mineral processing 	
Cement, rock and gravel plants 	1 
Petroleum refineries, chemical plants 	200 
Other mineral processing 	1 
Parking lots 	0.5 
Open storage 	
Trucking companies, terminals 	5 
Contractor storage yards 	1 
Other open storage 	1 
Miscellaneous industrial property 	2 
Agricultural 	
General uses 	0.5 
Dairies 	30 
Recreational 	
Theaters 	
Movie—Indoor 	2 
Movie—Drive-in 	2 
Legitimate theater 	2 
Bowling alleys 	5 
Clubs, lodge halls, fraternal organizations 	2 
Athletic and amusement facilities 	
Auditoriums, stadiums, amphitheaters 	10 
Amusement facilities 	10 
Commercial swimming pools, schools 	5 
Gymnasiums, health spas 	2 
Dance halls 	2 
Tennis courts, clubs, pro shops 	2 
Golf courses 	
Nonprofit 	3 
Three-par 	3 
Miniature 	1 
Other golf courses 	3 
Race tracks 	25 
Horse stable—Private 	1 
Camps 	10 
Skating rinks 	
Ice 	2 
Roller 	2 
Miscellaneous recreational property 	2 
Vacant recreational property 	0.5 
Institutional 	
Churches 	2 
Church parking lot 	0.5 
Schools 	5 
Colleges, universities 	50 
Hospitals 	100 
Convalescent hospitals, nursing homes 	50 
Homes for aged and others 	10 
Cemeteries, mausoleums, mortuaries 	
Cemeteries 	1 
Mortuaries, funeral homes 	1 
Miscellaneous institutional property 	5 
Vacant institutional property 	0.5 
Miscellaneous 	
Undesignated 	2 
Vacant undesignated 	0.5 
Utility; commercial and mutual; pumping plants; and state-assessed property 	5 
Mining 	1 
Petroleum and gas 	1 
Pipelines, canals 	0.5 
Rights-of-way 	1 
Dump sites 	2 
 
(Ord. No. 913, § 1 (Exh. A), 1-13-09; Ord. 876 § 1 Exh. A (part), 2007)  
Chapter 13.10 - FATS, OILS AND GREASE  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
13.10.100 - Purpose and policy. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the maximum beneficial public use of the city's sewer system while preventing blockages of the sewer lines resulting from discharges of fats, oils, and grease ("FOG") to the sewer system and to specify appropriate FOG discharge requirements for FSEs. 
B.  This chapter shall be known as the FOG control program. 
C.  This chapter shall be interpreted in accordance with the definitions set forth in Section 13.10.100. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the direct or indirect discharge of all wastewater or waste containing FOG carried to the sewer system of the city. 
D.  To comply with federal, state, and local policies and to allow the city to meet applicable standards, provisions are made in this chapter for the regulations of wastewater or waste containing FOG discharges to the sewer system. 
E.  This chapter establishes quantity and quality standards on all wastewater and/or waste discharges containing FOG, which may alone or collectively cause or contribute to FOG accumulation in the sewer facilities causing or potentially causing or contributing to the occurrence of SSOs. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.110 - Definitions. 
A.  Unless otherwise defined herein, terms related to water quality shall be as adopted in the latest edition of Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Environment Federation. The testing procedures for waste constituents and characteristics shall be as provided in 40 CFR 136 (Code of Federal Regulations). 
B.  Other terms not herein defined are defined as being the same as set forth in 13.07.010 of the Lancaster Municipal Code and the latest adopted applicable editions of the California Codes applicable to building construction adopted pursuant to the California Building Standards Law. 
C.  Subject to the foregoing provisions, the following definitions shall apply in this chapter: 
"Best management practices." Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to prevent or reduce the introduction of FOG to the sewer facilities. 
"Compliance schedule agreement." An agreement between the city and a permittee when the permittee is in noncompliance with the requirements of the applicable FOG wastewater discharge permit. 
"Council." The city council of the City of Lancaster. 
"Change in operations." Any change in the ownership, food types, or operational procedures that have the potential to increase the amount of FOG generated and/or discharged by FSEs in an amount that alone or collectively causes or creates a potential for sanitary sewer overflows (SSO) s to occur. 
"Composite sample." A collection of individual samples obtained at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time. The resulting mixture (composite sample) forms a representative sample of the waste stream discharged during the sample period. Samples will be collected when a wastewater discharge occurs. 
"City." The City of Lancaster. 
"Director." Director of Public Works of the City of Lancaster 
"Discharger." Any person who discharges or causes a discharge of wastewater directly or indirectly to a city sewer system. "Discharger" shall mean the same as "user." 
"Effluent." Any liquid outflow from a FSE that is discharged to the sewer system. 
"Fats, oils, and grease ("FOG")." Any substance such as vegetable or animal products that is used in, or is a byproduct of, the cooking or food preparation process, and that turns or may turn viscous or solidifies with a change in temperature or other conditions. It is typically a non-petroleum organic polar compound derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules and are detectable and measureable using analytical procedures established in the most current version of the United States Code of Federal Regulations 40 CFR 136. 
"FOG control program." The FOG control program identified in and developed pursuant to the city sewer system management plan (SSMP) and this chapter. 
"FOG wastewater discharge permit." A permit issued by the city subject to the requirements and conditions established by the city authorizing the permittee or discharger to discharge wastewater into the city's sewer system. 
"FOG wastewater discharge permit application fee." The FOG wastewater discharge permit application fee shall be as approved by resolution of the city council and shall be paid by the applicant upon submittal of the required FOG wastewater discharge permit application for coverage under the FOG control program. 
"Food service establishment (FSE)." Food facilities defined in California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law (CURFFL) Section 113789 of the Health and Safety Code, and any commercial entity within the boundaries of the city, operating in a permanently constructed structure such as a room, building, or place, or portion thereof, maintained, used, or operated for the purpose of storing, preparing, serving, or manufacturing, packaging, or otherwise handling food for sale to other entities, or for consumption by the public, its members or employees, and which has any process or device that uses or produces FOG, or grease vapors, steam, fumes, smoke or odors that are required to be removed by mechanical ventilation as required by Health and Safety Code Section 114149. An establishment that limits its food preparation activities to those defined as "limited food preparation" in Health and Safety Code Section 113818 is not considered a FSE when engaged only in reheating, hot holding or assembly of ready to eat food products and as a result, there is no wastewater discharge containing a significant amount of FOG and does not include any operation that changes the form, flavor, or consistency of food. 
"Food grinder." Any device installed in the plumbing or sewage system for the purpose of grinding food waste or food preparation by products for the purpose of disposing it in the sewer system. 
"Grease control device." Any grease interceptor, grease trap or other mechanism, device, or process, which attaches to, or is applied to, wastewater plumbing fixtures and lines, the purpose of which is to trap or collect or treat FOG prior to it being discharged into the sewer system. "Grease control device" may also include any other proven method to reduce FOG subject to the approval of the FOG control program manager. 
"Grease interceptor." A multi-compartment device that is constructed in different sizes and is generally required to be located, according to the California Plumbing Code, underground between a FSE and the connection to the sewer system. These devices primarily use gravity to separate FOG from the wastewater as it moves from one compartment to the next. These devices must be cleaned, maintained, and have the FOG removed and disposed of in a proper manner on regular intervals to be effective. 
"Grease trap." A grease control device that is used to serve individual fixtures and have limited effect and should only be used in those cases where the use of a grease interceptor or other grease control device is determined to be impossible or impracticable. 
"Grab sample." A sample taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time. 
"Hot Spots (areas of enhanced maintenance)." Areas in sewer lines that have experienced sanitary sewer overflows or that must be cleaned or maintained frequently to avoid blockages of sewer system. 
"Inflow." Water entering a sewer system through a direct stormwater/runoff connection to the sanitary sewer, which may cause an almost immediate increase in wastewater flows. 
"Infiltration." Water entering a sewer system, including sewer service connections, from the ground through such means as defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manhole walls. 
"Inspector." A person authorized by the city to inspect any existing or proposed wastewater generation, conveyance, processing, and disposal facilities. 
"Interceptor." A grease interceptor. 
"Manifest." That receipt which is retained by the generator of wastes for disposing recyclable wastes or liquid wastes as required by the city. 
"New construction." Any structure planned or under construction for which a sewer connection permit pursuant to Chapter 13.08. 080 that has not been issued. 
"Permittee." A person who has received a permit to discharge wastewater into the city's sewer system subject to the requirements and conditions established by the city. 
"Person." Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or public agency, including the State of California. 
"Public agency." The State of California and/or any city, county, special district, other local or federal governmental authority or public body of or within this state. 
"Public sewer, city sewer system." A sewer owned and operated by the city. 
"Regulatory agencies." Those agencies having regulatory jurisdiction over the operations of the city, including, but not limited to: 
A.  United States Environmental Protection Agency, Region 9, San Francisco and Washington, DC (EPA). 
B.  California State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB). 
C.  California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Lahontan Region (RWQCB). 
D.  California Department of Public Health (CDPH). 
E.  Los Angeles County Department of Public Health (LACDPH) 
F.  Los Angeles County Sanitation District No. 14 (LA San) 
"Remodeling." A physical change or operational change causing generation of the amount of FOG that exceed the current amount of FOG discharge to the sewer system by the FSE in an amount that alone or collectively causes or create a potential for SSOs to occur; or exceeding a cost of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) to a FSE that requires a building permit, and involves any one or combination of the following: 
A.  Under slab plumbing in the food processing area; 
B.  A thirty (30) percent increase in the net public seating area; 
C.  A thirty (30) percent increase in the size of the kitchen area; or 
D.  Any change in the size or type of food preparation equipment. 
"Sample point." A location approved by the city, from which wastewater can be collected that is representative in content and consistency of the entire flow of wastewater being sampled. 
"Sampling facilities." Structure(s) provided at the user's expense for the city or user to measure and record wastewater constituent mass, concentrations, collect a representative sample, or provide access to plug or terminate the discharge. 
"Sanitary sewer overflow (SSO)." Any overflow, spill, release, discharge or diversion of untreated or partially treated wastewater from a sanitary sewer system including: 
A.  Overflows or releases of untreated or partially treated wastewater that reach waters of the United States; 
B.  Overflows or releases of untreated or partially treated wastewater that do not reach waters of the United States; 
C.  Wastewater backups into buildings and onto private properties that are caused by blockages or flow conditions within the publicly owned portions of the sanitary sewer system. 
"Sewage." Any waterborne or liquid wastes, including domestic sewage and industrial waste, but does not include or mean stormwater, groundwater, and roof or yard drainage. 
"Sewer system." Any and all facilities used for collecting, conveying, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater and sludge. 
"Sewer lateral." A building sewer as defined in the latest edition of the California Plumbing Code. It is the wastewater connection between the building's wastewater facilities and the city sewer system. 
"Sludge." Any solid, semi-solid or liquid decant, subnate or supernate from a manufacturing process, utility service, or pretreatment facility. 
"Specialty FOG compliance charge." Charge to recover actual costs of FOG compliance including but not limited to repeat inspections, additional reports and increased monitoring of FSEs. 
"User." Any person who discharges or causes a discharge of wastewater directly or indirectly to the city sewer system. "User" shall mean the same as "discharger." 
"Variance." An approval granted to a permittee to vary from a specific requirement or requirements of this chapter when it can be demonstrated that the requirement(s) can be met with an equal or better process, technology or method. 
"Waste." Sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous or radioactive, associated with human habitation or of human or animal nature, including such wastes placed within containers of whatever nature prior to and for the purpose of disposal. 
"Wastehauler." Any person carrying on or engaging in vehicular transport of waste as part of, or incidental to, any business for that purpose. 
"Wastewater." The liquid and water-carried wastes of the community and all constituents thereof, whether treated or untreated, discharged into or permitted to enter the city sewer system. 
"Wastewater constituents and characteristics." The individual chemical, physical, bacteriological, and other parameters, including volume and flow rate and such other parameters that serve to define, classify, or measure the quality and quantity of wastewater. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
Article 2 - General Limitations, Prohibitions and Requirements on Fats, Oils and Grease ("FOG") Discharges 
 
13.10.200 - FOG discharge requirement. 
No FSE shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the sewer system FOG that exceeds a concentration level adopted by the council or that may accumulate and/or cause or contribute to blockages in the sewer system or at the sewer lateral which connects the FSE to the sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.210 - Prohibitions. 
The following prohibitions shall apply to all FSEs: 
A.  Installation of food grinders in the plumbing system of new construction of FSEs shall be prohibited. Furthermore, all food grinders shall be removed from all existing FSEs within one hundred eighty (180) working days of the effective date of this chapter, except when expressly allowed by the FOG control program manager. 
B.  Introduction of any additives into a FSE's wastewater system for the purpose of emulsifying FOG or biologically/chemically treating FOG for grease remediation or as a supplement to interceptor maintenance, unless a specific written authorization or FOG wastewater disposal permit from the FOG control program manager is obtained. 
C.  Disposal of waste cooking oil into drainage pipes is prohibited. All waste cooking oils shall be collected and stored properly in receptacles such as barrels or drums for recycling or other acceptable methods of disposal. 
D.  Discharge of wastewater from dishwashers to any grease trap or grease interceptor is prohibited. 
E.  Discharge of wastewater with temperatures in excess of one hundred forty (140) degrees F to any grease control device, including grease traps and grease interceptors, is prohibited. 
F.  Discharge of wastes from toilets, urinals, wash basins, and other fixtures containing fecal materials to sewer lines intended for grease interceptor service, or vice versa, is prohibited. 
G.  Discharge of any waste including FOG and solid materials removed from the grease control device to the sewer system is prohibited. Grease removed from grease interceptors shall be wastehauled periodically as part of the operation and maintenance requirements for grease interceptors. 
H.  Operation of grease interceptors with FOG and solids accumulation exceeding twenty-five (25) percent of the design hydraulic depth of the grease interceptor (twenty-five (25) percent rule). 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.220 - FOG wastewater discharge permit required. 
No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged any wastewater from FSEs directly or indirectly into the city sewer system without first obtaining a FOG wastewater discharge permit pursuant Article 3 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.230 - Best management practices required. 
All food services establishments shall implement best management practices in its operation to minimize the discharge of FOG to the sewer system. Detailed requirements for best management practices shall be specified in the permit. This may include, but not be limited to, kitchen practices and employee training that is essential in minimizing FOG discharge. Commercial and industrial discharges shall also be in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.240 - FOG pretreatment required. 
FSEs are required to permit, install, operate and maintain an approved type and adequately sized grease interceptor necessary to maintain compliance with the objectives of this chapter, subject to the variance and waiver provisions of Section 13.10.250. The grease interceptor shall be adequate to separate and remove FOG contained in wastewater discharges from FSEs prior to discharge to the sewer system. Fixtures, equipment, and drain lines located in the food preparation and clean up areas of FSEs that are sources of FOG discharges shall be connected to the grease interceptor. Compliance shall be established as follows: 
A.  New Construction of Food Service Establishments. New construction of FSEs shall include installation of grease interceptor(s) prior to commencing discharges of wastewater to the sewer system. 
B.  Existing Food Service Establishments. 
1.  For existing FSEs, the requirement to install and to properly operate and maintain a grease interceptor may be conditionally stayed, that is, delayed in its implementation by the FOG control program manager for a maximum period of three years from the effective date of this chapter (three-year amortization period). Terms and conditions for application of a stay to a FSE shall be set forth in the permit. The council finds that three years is a reasonable amortization period for existing FSEs that are operating without a grease interceptor. 
2.  Existing FSEs, which have caused or contributed to grease-related blockage in the sewer system, or which have sewer laterals connected to hot spots, or which have been determined to contribute significant FOG to the sewer system by the FOG control program manager based on inspection or sampling, shall be deemed to have reasonable potential to adversely impact the sewer system, and shall install grease interceptors within one hundred eighty (180) working days upon notification by the FOG control program manager. 
3.  Existing FSEs or FSEs that change ownership, that undergo remodeling or a change in operations as defined in Section 13.10.110 of this chapter, shall be required to install a grease interceptor. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.250 - Variance and waiver of grease interceptor requirement. 
A.  Variance from Grease Interceptor Requirements. An existing FSE may obtain a variance from the grease interceptor requirement to allow alternate pretreatment technology that is, at least, equally effective in controlling the FOG discharge in lieu of a grease interceptor, if the FSE demonstrates that it is impossible or impracticable to install, operate or maintain a grease interceptor. The FOG control program manager's determination to grant a variance will be based upon, but not limited to, evaluation of the following conditions: 
1.  There is no adequate space for installation and/or maintenance of a grease interceptor. 
2.  There is no adequate slope for gravity flow between kitchen plumbing fixtures and the grease interceptor and/or between the grease interceptor and the private collection lines or the city sewer. 
3.  The FSE can justify that the alternative pretreatment technology is equivalent or better than a grease interceptor in controlling its FOG discharge. In addition, the FSE must be able to demonstrate, after installation of the proposed alternative pretreatment, its effectiveness to control FOG discharge through downstream visual monitoring of the sewer system, for at least three months (with a minimum of two visual inspections; one at the beginning and one at the end of the three-month period), at its own expense. A variance may be granted if the results, as determined by the FOG control program manager, show no visible accumulation of FOG in its lateral and/or tributary downstream sewer lines. 
B.  Conditional Waiver from Installation of Grease Interceptor. An existing FSE may obtain a conditional waiver from installation of a grease interceptor, if the FSE demonstrates that it has negligible FOG discharge and insignificant impact to the sewer system. Although a waiver from installation of grease interceptor may be granted, the FSE may be required to provide space and plumbing segregation for future installation of a grease interceptor. The FOG control program manager's determination to grant or revoke a conditional waiver shall be based upon, but not limited to, evaluation of the following conditions: 
1.  Quantity of FOG discharge as measured or as indicated by the size of the FSE based on seating capacity, number of meals served, menu, water usage, amount of on-site consumption of prepared food and other conditions that may reasonably be shown to contribute to FOG discharges. 
2.  Adequacy of implementation of best management practices and compliance history. 
3.  Sewer size, grade, condition based on visual information, FOG deposition in the sewer by the FSE, and history of maintenance and sewage spills in the receiving sewer system. 
4.  Changes in operations that significantly affect FOG discharge. 
5.  Any other condition deemed reasonably related to the generation of FOG discharges by the FOG control program manager. 
C.  Waiver from Grease Interceptor Installation with a FOG Control Surcharge Fee. For FSEs where the installation of a grease interceptor is not feasible and no equivalent alternative pretreatment can be installed, a waiver from the grease interceptor requirement may be granted with the imposition of a FOG control surcharge fee as described in Section 13.10.270. Additional requirements may be imposed to mitigate the discharge of FOG into the sewer system. The FOG control program manager's determination to grant the waiver with a FOG control surcharge fee will be based upon, but not limited to, evaluation of the following conditions: 
1.  There is no adequate space for installation and/or maintenance of a grease interceptor. 
2.  There is no adequate slope for gravity flow between kitchen plumbing fixtures and the grease interceptor and/or between the grease interceptor and the private collection lines or the city sewer. 
3.  A variance from grease interceptor installation to allow alternative pretreatment technology cannot be granted. 
D.  Application for Waiver or Variance of Requirements for Grease Interceptor. A FSE may submit an application for variance or waiver from the grease interceptor requirement to the FOG control program manager. The FSE bears the burden of demonstrating, to the FOG control program manager's reasonable satisfaction, that the installation of a grease interceptor is not feasible or applicable. Upon determination by the FOG control program manager that reasons are sufficient to justify a variance or waiver, the permit will be issued or revised to include the variance or waiver and relieve the FSE from the requirement. 
E.  Terms and Conditions. A variance or waiver shall contain terms and conditions that serve as the basis for its issuance. A variance or waiver may be revoked at any time as set forth in Article 6 of this chapter, when any of the terms and conditions for its issuance is not satisfied or if the conditions upon which the waiver was based change so that the justification for the waiver no longer exists. The variance or waiver shall be valid so long as the FSE remains in compliance with their terms and conditions until the expiration date specified in the variance or waiver. Such expiration date shall be no longer than two years from the date of issuance of the variance or waiver. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.260 - Commercial properties. 
Property owners of commercial properties or their official designee(s) shall be responsible for the installation and maintenance of the grease interceptor serving multiple FSEs that are located on a single parcel. The owner or their official designee(s) of a commercial property with multiple FSEs on a single parcel shall enter agreements with the individual FSEs setting forth responsibilities for maintenance, costs and liabilities for the grease interceptor. A copy of such agreement(s) may be requested by the city. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.270 - Annual FOG control surcharge fee. 
FSEs that operate without a grease control interceptor may be required to pay an annual FOG control surcharge fee in addition to the annual FOG control program charge, to equitably cover the costs of increased maintenance of the sewer system as a result of the FSEs' inability to adequately remove FOG from its wastewater discharge. This section shall not be interpreted to allow the new construction of or existing FSEs undergoing remodeling or change in operations to operate without an approved grease interceptor unless the city has determined that it is impossible or impracticable to install or operate a grease control interceptor for the subject facility under the provisions of Section 13.10.250 of this chapter. 
A.  The amount of the annual FOG control surcharge fee shall be established by resolution of the city council, and shall be based on the estimated annual increased cost of maintaining the sewer system and for inspection and removal of FOG and other viscous or solidifying agents attributable to the FSE resulting from the lack of a grease interceptor or grease control device. 
B.  The annual FOG control surcharge fee may be waived or reduced to when the discharger demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the FOG control program manager that they had used best management and waste minimization practices on a regular basis that has significantly reduced the introduction of FOG into the sewer system. The waiver or reduction of the fee shall be applicable for twelve (12) months from the date of waiver or reduction issuance. 
C.  The FOG control surcharge fee may not be waived or reduced when the FSE does not comply with the minimum requirements of this chapter and/or its discharge into the sewer system has caused or potentially caused or contributed alone or collectively, in any sewer blockage or public or private SSO in the sewer immediately downstream, or surrounding the FSE in the preceding twelve (12) months prior to the waiver request. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.280 - Sewer system overflows, public nuisance, abatement orders and cleanup costs. 
Notwithstanding the three-year amortization period established in Section 13.10.240, FSEs found to have contributed to a sewer blockage, SSOs or any sewer system interferences resulting from the discharge of wastewater or waste containing FOG, shall be ordered to install and maintain a grease interceptor, and may be subject to a plan to abate the nuisance and prevent any future health hazards created by sewer line failures and blockages, SSOs or any other sewer system interferences. SSOs may cause threat and injury to public health, safety, and welfare of life and property and are hereby declared public nuisances. Furthermore, sewer lateral failures and SSOs caused by FSEs alone or collectively, are the responsibility of the private property owner or FSE, and individual(s) as a responsible officer or owner of the FSE. If the city must act immediately to contain and/or clean up an SSO caused by blockage of a private sewer lateral or private sewer system of a FSE, or at the request of the property owner or operator of the FSE, or because of the failure of the property owner or FSE to abate the condition causing immediate threat of injury to the health, safety, welfare, or property of the public, the city costs for such abatement may be entirely borne by the property owner or operator of the FSE, and individual(s) as responsible officer(s) or owner(s) of the FSE(s) and may constitute a debt to the city and become due and payable upon the city's request for reimbursement of such costs. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
Article 3. - FOG Wastewater Discharge Permits and Fees for Food Service Establishments 
 
13.10.300 - FOG wastewater discharge permit required. 
A.  FSEs including commercial parcels with multiple FSEs, proposing to discharge or currently discharging wastewater containing FOG into the city sewer system shall obtain a FOG wastewater discharge permit from the city. 
B.  FOG wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other regulations, charges for use, and fees established by the city. The conditions of FOG wastewater discharge permits shall be enforced by the city in accordance with this chapter and applicable local, state and federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.310 - FOG wastewater discharge permit application. 
A.  Any person required to obtain a FOG wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the city prior to commencing or continuing discharges, an application in a form prescribed by the city. The applicable fees shall accompany the application. The applicant shall submit, at a minimum, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
1.  Name, address, telephone number, assessor's parcel number(s), description of the FSE, operation, cuisine, service activities, or clients using the applicant's services. 
2.  (Whichever is applicable) Name, address of any and all principals/owners/major shareholders of all FSE to be permitted hereunder; articles of incorporation; most recent report of the secretary of state; business license. 
3.  Name and address of property owner or leaser and the property manager where the FSE is located. 
4.  Any other information requested by the FOG control program manager as specified in the application form. 
B.  Applicants may be required to submit site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, FOG control device, grease interceptor or other pretreatment equipment and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation for evaluation. 
C.  Other information related to the applicant's business operations and potential discharge may be requested to properly evaluate the permit application. 
D.  After evaluation of the data furnished, the city may issue a FOG wastewater discharge permit, a variance or waiver of requirements or no permit subject to terms and conditions set forth in this chapter and as otherwise determined by the FOG control program manager to be appropriate to protect the city's sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.320 - FOG wastewater discharge permit conditions. 
The issuance of a FOG wastewater discharge permit may contain any or all of the following conditions or limits: 
A.  Limits on discharge of FOG and other priority pollutants. 
B.  Requirements for proper operation and maintenance of grease interceptors and other grease control devices. 
C.  Grease interceptor maintenance frequency and schedule. 
D.  Requirements for implementation of best management practices and installation of adequate grease interceptor and/or grease control device. 
E.  Requirements for maintaining and reporting status of best management practices. 
F.  Requirements for maintain and submitting logs and records, including wastehauling records and manifests. 
G.  Requirements to self-monitor. 
H.  Requirements for the FSE to construct, operate and maintain, at its own expense, FOG control device and sampling facilities. 
I.  Additional requirements as otherwise determined to be reasonably appropriate by the FOG control program manager to protect the city's sewer system or as specified by other regulatory agencies. 
J.  Requirement for training for all employees annually and at the time of hiring. 
K.  Term of the permit. 
L.  Other terms and conditions, which may be reasonably applicable to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.330 - FOG wastewater discharge permit application fee. 
The FOG wastewater discharge permit application fee shall be as approved by resolution of the city council and shall be paid by the applicant upon submittal of the required FOG wastewater discharge permit application for coverage under the FOG control program. Payment of all applicable fees or charges must be received by the city upon submission of the permit application. A permittee shall also pay any delinquent invoices in full prior to permit issuance or renewal. Fees are non refundable. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.340 - FOG wastewater discharge permit modification of terms and conditions. 
A.  The terms and conditions of an issued permit may be subject to modification and change by the sole determination of the FOG control program manager during the life of the permit based on: 
1.  The discharger's current or anticipated operating data; 
2.  The city's current or anticipated operating data; 
3.  Changes in the requirements of regulatory agencies which affect the city; or 
4.  A determination by the FOG control program manager that such modification is appropriate to further the objectives of this chapter. 
B.  The permittee may request a modification to the terms and conditions of an issued permit. The request shall be in writing stating the requested change, and the reasons for the change. The FOG control program manager shall review the request, make a determination on the request, and respond in writing. 
C.  The permittee shall be informed of any change in the permit limits, conditions, or requirements at least forty-five (45) days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.350 - FOG wastewater discharge permit duration and renewal. 
FOG wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a term of twelve (12) months commencing on the first day of the month when the permit application and fees/charges are received by the city. Annual renewal of FOG wastewater discharge permits will be made upon payment of the applicable fees/charges which will be invoiced with the applicant's annual city business license renewal notice. A FOG wastewater discharge permit will be issued within thirty (30) days after receipt of the fees/charges. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.360 - Exemption from FOG wastewater discharge permit. 
A "limited food preparation" establishment is not considered a FSE and is exempt from obtaining a FOG wastewater discharge permit. Exempted establishments shall be engaged only in reheating, hot holding or assembly of ready to eat food products and as a result, there is no wastewater discharge containing significant amounts of FOG. A limited food preparation establishment does not include any operation that changes the form, flavor, or consistency of food. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.370 - Non-transferability of permits. 
FOG wastewater discharge permits issued under this chapter are for a specific FSE identified on the permit, for a specific operation and create no vested rights. 
A.  No permit holder shall assign, transfer, or sell any FOG wastewater discharge permit issued under this chapter nor use any such permit for or on any premises or for facilities or operations or discharges not expressly encompassed within the underlying permit. 
B.  Any permit which is transferred to a new owner or operator or to a new facility is void. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.380 - Annual FOG control program charge. 
An annual charge, as determined by resolution of the council, shall be collected from all non-exempt FSEs to cover the costs of administering the FOG control program. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
Article 4. - Facilities Requirements 
 
13.10.400 - Drawing submittal requirements. 
Upon request by the City: 
A.  FSEs may be required to submit two copies of facility site plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewer locations and connections. The submittal shall be in a form and content acceptable to the city for review of existing or proposed grease control device, grease interceptor, monitoring facilities, metering facilities, and operating procedures. The review of the plans and procedures shall in no way relieve the FSEs of the responsibility of modifying the facilities or procedures in the future, as necessary to produce an acceptable discharge, and to meet the requirements of this chapter or any requirements of other regulatory agencies. 
B.  Applicants may be required to submit site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, FOG control device, grease interceptor or other pretreatment equipment and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation for evaluation. 
C.  FSEs may be required to submit a schematic drawing of the FOG control device, grease interceptor or other pretreatment equipment, piping and instrumentation diagram, and wastewater characterization report. 
D.  The city may require the drawings be prepared by a California registered civil, chemical, mechanical, or electrical engineer. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.410 - Grease interceptor requirements. 
A.  All FSEs shall provide wastewater acceptable to the city under the requirements and standards established herein before discharging to any city sewer. Any FSE required to provide FOG pretreatment shall install, operate, and maintain an approved type and adequately sized grease interceptor necessary to maintain compliance with the objectives of this chapter. 
B.  Grease interceptor sizing and installation shall conform to the current edition of the California Plumbing Code. Grease interceptors shall be constructed in accordance with the design approved by the FOG control program manager and shall have a minimum of two compartments with fittings designed for grease retention. 
C.  The grease interceptor shall be installed at a location where it shall be at all times easily accessible for inspection, cleaning, and removal of accumulated grease. 
D.  Access manholes, with a minimum diameter of 24 inches, shall be provided over each grease interceptor chamber and sanitary tee. The access manholes shall extend at least to finished grade and be designed and maintained to prevent non-wastewater inflow or infiltration. The manholes shall also have readily removable covers to facilitate inspection, grease removal, and wastewater sampling activities. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.420 - Grease trap requirements. 
A.  FSEs may be required to install grease traps in the waste line leading from drains, sink, and other fixtures or equipment where grease may be introduced into the sewer system in quantities that can cause blockage. 
B.  Sizing and installation of grease traps shall conform to the current edition of the California Plumbing Code. 
C.  Grease traps shall be maintained in efficient operating conditions by removing accumulated grease on a daily basis. 
D.  Grease traps shall be maintained free of all food residues and any FOG waste removed during the cleaning and scraping process. 
E.  Grease traps shall be inspected periodically by the permittee and at least annually by the inspector to check for leaking seams and pipes, and for effective operation of the baffles and flow regulating device. Grease traps and their baffles shall be maintained free of all caked-on FOG waste. Removable baffles shall be removed and cleaned during the maintenance process. 
F.  Dishwashers and food waste disposal units shall not be connected to or discharged into any grease trap. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.430 - Monitoring facilities requirements. 
A.  The city may require the FSEs to construct and maintain in proper operating condition at the FSE's sole expense, flow monitoring, constituent monitoring and/or sampling facilities. 
B.  The location of the monitoring or metering facilities shall be subject to approval by the FOG control program manager. 
C.  FSEs may be required to provide immediate, clear, safe and uninterrupted access to the FOG control program manager or inspectors to the FSE's monitoring and metering facilities. 
D.  FSEs may also be required by the FOG control program manager to submit waste analysis plans, contingency plans, and meet other necessary requirements to ensure proper operation and maintenance of the grease control device or grease interceptor and compliance with this chapter. 
E.  No FSE shall increase the use of water or in any other manner attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for treatment to achieve compliance with this chapter and the FOG wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.440 - Requirements for best management practices. 
A.  All FSEs shall implement best management practices in accordance with the requirements and guidelines established by the city under its FOG control program in an effort to minimize the discharge of FOG to the sewer system. 
B.  All FSEs shall be required, at a minimum, to comply with the following best management practices, when applicable: 
1.  Installation of drain screens. Drain screens shall be installed on all drainage pipes in food preparation areas. 
2.  Segregation and collection of waste cooking oil. All waste cooking oil shall be collected and stored properly in recycling receptacles such as barrels or drums. Such recycling receptacles shall be maintained properly to ensure that they do no leak. Licensed wastehaulers or an approved recycling facility must be used to dispose of waste cooking oil and all manifests and paperwork shall be available for inspection by the city. 
3.  Disposal of food waste. All food waste shall be disposed of directly into the trash or garbage, and not into sinks. Double-bagging food wastes that have the potential to leak in trash bins is highly recommended. 
4.  Employee training. At the time of hiring and at least annually thereafter or as specified in the permit employees of the FSE shall be trained by ownership/management or permittee on the following subjects: 
a.  How to "dry wipe" pots, pans, dishware and work areas before washing to remove grease. 
b.  How to properly dispose of food waste and solids in enclosed plastic bags prior to disposal in trash bins or containers to prevent leaking and odors. 
c.  The location and use of absorption products to clean under fryer baskets and other locations where grease may be spilled. 
d.  How to properly dispose of grease or oils from cooking equipment into a grease receptacle such as a barrel or drum without spilling/splashing. 
Training shall be documented and employee signatures retained indicating each employee's attendance and understanding of the practices reviewed. Training records shall be available for review at any reasonable time by the FOG control program manager or inspector. 
5.  Maintenance of kitchen exhaust filters. Filters shall be cleaned as frequently as necessary to be maintained in good operating condition. The wastewater generated from cleaning the exhaust filter shall be disposed of properly. 
6.  Kitchen signage. Best management and waste minimization practices shall be posted conspicuously in the food preparation and dishwashing areas at all times. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.450 - Grease interceptor maintenance requirements. 
A.  Grease interceptors shall be maintained in efficient operating condition by periodic removal of the full content of the interceptor which includes wastewater, accumulated FOG, floating materials, sludge and solids. 
B.  All existing and newly installed grease interceptors shall be maintained in a manner consistent with a maintenance frequency approved by the FOG control program manager pursuant to this section. 
C.  No FOG that has accumulated in a grease interceptor shall be allowed to pass into any sewer lateral, sewer system, storm drain, or public right of way during maintenance activities. 
D.  FSEs with grease interceptors may be required to submit data and information necessary to establish the maintenance frequency of the grease interceptors. 
E.  The maintenance frequency for all FSEs with a grease interceptor shall be determined in one of the following methods: 
1.  Grease interceptors shall be fully pumped out and cleaned at a frequency such that the combined FOG and solids accumulation does not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total design hydraulic depth of the grease interceptor. This is to ensure that the minimum hydraulic retention time and required available hydraulic volume is maintained to effectively intercept and retain FOG discharged to the sewer system. 
2.  All FSEs with a grease interceptor shall maintain their grease interceptor not less than every six months. 
3.  Grease interceptors shall be fully pumped out and cleaned quarterly when the frequency described in 1. has not been established. The maintenance frequency shall be adjusted when sufficient data have been obtained to establish an average frequency based on the requirements described in 1. and guidelines adopted pursuant to the FOG control program. The city may change the maintenance frequency at any time to reflect changes in actual operating conditions in accordance with the FOG control program. Based on the actual generation of FOG from the food service establishment, the maintenance frequency may increase or decrease. 
4.  The owner/operator of a FSE may submit a request to the FOG control program manager requesting a change in the maintenance frequency at any time. The FSE has the burden of responsibility to demonstrate that the requested change in frequency reflects actual operating conditions based on the average FOG accumulation over time and meets the requirements described in 1., and that it is in full compliance with the conditions of its permit and this chapter. Upon determination by the FOG control program manager that the requested revision is justified, the permit shall be revised accordingly to reflect the change in maintenance frequency. 
5.  If the grease interceptor, at any time, contains FOG and solids accumulation that does not meet the requirements described in 1., the FSE shall be required to have the grease interceptor serviced immediately such that all fats, oils, grease, sludge, and other materials are completely removed from the grease interceptor. If deemed necessary, the FOG control program manager may also increase the maintenance frequency of the grease interceptor from the current frequency. Notice of any change to the maintenance frequency shall be given by written notice by the FOG control program manager. 
F.  Wastewater, accumulated FOG, floating materials, sludge/solids, and other materials removed from the grease interceptor shall be disposed off site properly by wastehaulers in accordance with federal, state and/or local laws. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
Article 5. - Monitoring, Reporting, Notification and Inspection Requirements 
 
13.10.500 - Monitoring and reporting conditions. 
A.  Monitoring for Compliance with Permit Conditions and Reporting Requirements. 
1.  The FOG control program manager may require periodic reporting of the status of implementation of best management practices, in accordance with the FOG control program. 
2.  The FOG control program manager may require visual monitoring/inspection (closed captioned television (CCTV)) at the sole expense of the permittee to observe the actual conditions of the FSE's sewer lateral and sewer lines downstream. 
3.  The FOG control program manager may require reports for self-monitoring of wastewater constituents and FOG characteristics for the permittee needed for determining compliance with any conditions or requirements as specified in the FOG wastewater discharge permit or this chapter. Monitoring reports of the analyses of wastewater constituents and FOG characteristics shall be in a manner and form approved by the FOG control program manager and shall be submitted upon request of the FOG control program manager. Failure by the permittee to perform any required monitoring, or to submit monitoring reports required by the FOG control program manager constitutes a violation of this chapter and shall be cause for the city to initiate all necessary tasks and analyses to determine the wastewater constituents and FOG characteristics for compliance with any conditions and requirements specified in the FOG wastewater discharge permit or in this chapter. The permittee shall be responsible for any and all expenses of the city in undertaking such monitoring analyses and preparation of reports. 
4.  Other reports may be required such as compliance schedule progress reports, FOG control monitoring reports, and any other reports deemed reasonably appropriate by the FOG control program manager to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
5.  The FOG control program manager will provide upon permit application approval an initial FOG permit binder to the permittee for the purpose of maintaining necessary documents related to permittee's site FOG control and maintenance program. The binder with appropriate documents such as grease interceptor maintenance schedule, wastehauler manifest, employee training record, etc. shall be made available to the FOG control program manager or inspector during inspections or upon request. Should the binder not be available for the inspections or when requested a replacement binder will be provided and a charge, as determined by resolution of the council, shall be collected from the permittee. 
6.  Failure to accurately maintain the FOG binder with the appropriate information and records or if the binder is not available upon request are considered violations of the permittee's FOG wastewater discharge permit. 
B.  Record Keeping Requirements. The permittee shall be required to keep all manifests, receipts and invoices of all cleaning, maintenance, grease removal of/from the grease control device, disposal carrier and disposal site location for no less than two years. The permittee shall, upon request, make the manifests, receipts and invoices available to any city representative, or inspector. These records shall be kept in the binder provided by the city and include but are not limited to: 
1.  A record of grease interceptor, grease trap or grease control device cleaning and maintenance practices. 
2.  A record of best management practices being implemented including employee training. 
3.  Copies of records and manifests of wastehauling interceptor contents. 
4.  Records of sampling data and sludge height monitoring for FOG and solids accumulation in the grease interceptors. 
5.  Records of any spills and/or cleaning by the FSE or FSE's contractor of private lateral or private sewer system. 
6.  Any other information deemed appropriate by the FOG control program manager to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
C.  Falsifying Information or Tampering with Process. It shall be unlawful to make any false statement, representation, record, report, plan or other document that is filed with the city, or to tamper with or knowingly render inoperable any grease control device, monitoring device or method or access point required under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.510 - Inspection and sampling conditions. 
A.  The FOG control program manager may inspect or order the inspection and sample the wastewater discharges of any FSE to ascertain whether the intent of this chapter is being met and the permittee is complying with all requirements. The permittee shall allow the city access to the FSE premises, during normal business hours, for purposes of inspecting the FSE's grease control device or interceptor, reviewing the manifests, receipts and invoices relating to the cleaning, maintenance and inspection of the grease control devices or interceptor. 
B.  The FOG control program manager shall have the right to place or order the placement on the FSE's property or other locations as determined by the FOG control program manager, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. Where a FSE has security measures in force, the permittee shall make necessary arrangements so that representatives of the city shall be permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities. 
C.  In order for the FOG control program manager to determine the wastewater characteristics of the discharger for purposes of determining the annual use charge and for compliance with permit requirements, the permittee shall make available for inspection and copying by the city all notices, monitoring reports, waste manifests, and records including, but not limited to, those related to wastewater generation, and wastewater disposal without restriction but subject to the confidentiality provision set forth in this 13.07.210 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. All such records shall be kept by the permittee a minimum of two years. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.520 - Right of entry. 
Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the FOG control program manager, or city representatives, reasonable access to all parts of the wastewater generating and disposal facilities for the purposes of inspection and sampling during all times the dischargers facility is open, operating, or any other reasonable time. No person shall interfere with, delay, resist or refuse entrance to city representatives attempting to inspect any facility involved directly or indirectly with a discharge of wastewater to the city sewer system. In the event of an emergency involving actual or imminent sanitary sewer overflow, city representatives may access adjoining businesses or properties which share a sewer system with a FSE in order to prevent or remediate an actual or imminent sanitary sewer overflow. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.530 - Notification of spill. 
A.  In the event a permittee is unable to comply with any permit condition due to a breakdown of equipment, accidents, or human error or the permittee has reasonable opportunity to know that his/her/its discharge will exceed the discharge provisions of the FOG wastewater discharge permit or this chapter, the discharger shall immediately notify the city by telephone at the number specified in the permit. If the material discharged to the sewer has the potential to cause or result in sewer blockages or SSOs, the discharger shall immediately notify the local health department and the city. 
B.  Confirmation of this notification shall be made in writing to the FOG control program manager at the address specified in the permit no later than five working days from the date of the incident. The written notification shall state the date of the incident, the reasons for the discharge or spill, what steps were taken to immediately correct the problem, and what steps are being taken to prevent the problem from recurring. 
C.  Such notification shall not relieve the permittee of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage or loss to the city or any other damage or loss to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the permittee of any fees or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.540 - Notification of planned changes. 
Permittee shall notify the city at least sixty (60) days in advance of any facility expansion/remodeling, or process modifications that may result in new or substantially increased FOG discharge or a change in the nature of the discharge. Permittee shall notify the city in writing of the proposed expansion or remodeling and shall submit any information requested by the city for evaluation of the effect of such expansion on permittee's FOG discharge to the sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
Article 6. - Enforcement 
 
13.10.600 - Purposes and scope. 
A.  The council finds that in order for the city to comply with the laws, regulations, and rules imposed upon it by regulatory agencies and to ensure that the city sewer system is protected and is able to operate with the highest degree of efficiency, and to protect the public health and environment, specific enforcement provisions must be adopted to govern the discharges to the city's system by FSEs. 
B.  To ensure that all interested parties are afforded due process of law and that violations are resolved as soon as possible, the general policy of the city is that: 
1.  Any determination relating to a notice of violation and compliance schedule agreement (CSA) will be made by the FOG control program manager, with a right of appeal by the permittee to the director pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 13.10.655. 
2.  A permittee, or applicant for a permit, may request the council hear an appeal of the director's decision pursuant to Section 13.10.660. Such request may be granted or denied by the city council. 
3.  Any permit suspension or revocation recommended by the FOG control program manager will be heard and a recommendation made to the director or other person designated by the director with a right of appeal of the director's order by the permittee to the council pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.10.660. 
C.  The city, at its discretion, may utilize any one, combination, or all enforcement remedies provided in this Article 6 in response to any permit or chapter violations. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.605 - Determination of non-compliance with FOG wastewater discharge permit conditions. 
A.  Inspection Procedures. 
1.  Inspection of FSEs shall be conducted in the time, place, manner, and frequency determined at the sole discretion of the FOG control program manager. 
2.  Non-compliance with best management practices, twenty-five (25) percent rule for grease interceptors, maintenance frequency requirements for grease interceptors, permit discharge conditions, or any discharge provisions of this chapter may be determined by an inspection of the FSE. 
B.  Sampling Procedures. 
1.  Sampling of FSEs wastewater discharge shall be conducted in the time, place, manner, and frequency determined at the sole discretion of the FOG control program manager. 
2.  Non-compliance with mass emission rate limits, concentration limits, permit discharge conditions, or any discharge provision of this chapter may be determined by an analysis of a grab or composite sample of the effluent of a user. Non-compliance with mass emission rate limits shall be determined by an analysis of a composite sample of the user's effluent, except that a grab sample may be used to determine compliance with mass emission rate limits when the discharge is from a closed (batch) treatment system in which there is no wastewater flow into the system when the discharge is occurring, the volume of wastewater contained in the batch system is known, the time interval of discharge is known, and the grab sample is homogeneous and representative of the discharge. 
3.  Any sample taken from a sample point is considered to be representative of the discharge to the city sewer. 
C.  Specialty FOG Compliance Charges. Any permittee determined to be in non-compliance with the terms and conditions specified in its permit or with any provision of this chapter shall pay specialty FOG compliance charges in addition to any other FOG related charges required by this chapter. The purpose of this charge is to compensate the city for costs of additional inspection and follow-up, sampling, monitoring, laboratory analysis, treatment, disposal, and administrative processing incurred as a result of the non-compliance, and shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any penalties as may be assessed pursuant to Sections 13.10.645 and 13.10.650. The specialty FOG compliance charge shall be in an amount to cover the actual costs incurred by the city to obtain compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.610 - Compliance schedule agreement (CSA). 
A.  Upon determination that a permittee is in non-compliance with the terms and conditions specified in its permit or any provision of this chapter, or needs to construct and/or acquire and install a grease control device or grease interceptor, the FOG control program manager may require the permittee to enter into a CSA. 
B.  The issuance of a CSA may contain terms and conditions including but not limited to requirements for installation of a grease control device, grease interceptor and facilities, submittal of drawings or reports, audit of waste hauling records, best management and waste minimization practices, payment of fees, or other provisions to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
C.  The FOG control program manager shall not enter into a CSA until such time as all amounts owed to the city, including user fees, non-compliance sampling fees or other amounts due are paid in full, or an agreement for deferred payment secured by collateral or a third party is approved by the council. 
D.  If compliance is not achieved in accordance with the terms and conditions of a CSA during its term, the FOG control program manager may issue an order suspending or revoking the discharge permit pursuant to section 13.10.615 or 13.10.620 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.615 - Permit suspension. 
A.  The director may suspend any permit when it is determined that a permittee: 
1.  Fails to comply with the terms and conditions of a CSA order. 
2.  Knowingly provides a false statement, representation, record, report, or other document to the city. 
3.  Refuses to provide records, reports, plans, or other documents required by the city to determine permit terms or conditions, discharge compliance, or compliance with this chapter. 
4.  Falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or sample collection method. 
5.  Refuses reasonable access to the permittee's premises for the purpose of inspection and monitoring. 
6.  Does not make timely payment of all amounts owed to the city for user charges, permit fees, or any other fees imposed pursuant to this title. 
7.  Causes interference, sewer blockages, or SSOs with the city's sewer system. 
8.  Violates grease interceptor maintenance requirements, any condition or limit of its discharge permit or any provision of this chapter. 
B.  When the FOG control program manager has reason to believe that grounds exist for permit suspension, he/she shall give written notice thereof by certified mail to the permittee setting forth a statement of the facts and grounds deemed to exist, together with the time and place where the charges shall be heard by the director or his/her designee. The hearing date shall be not less than fifteen (15) calendar days nor more than forty-five (45) calendar days after the mailing of such notice. 
1.  At the suspension hearing, the permittee shall have an opportunity to respond to the allegations set forth in the notice by presenting written or oral evidence. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the director and approved by the city attorney. 
2.  If the director designated a hearing officer, after the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall submit a written report to the director setting forth a brief statement of facts found to be true, a determination of the issues presented, conclusions, and a recommendation. 
3.  Upon receipt of the written report of a hearing officer or conclusion of the hearing, if the director conducted the hearing, the director shall make his/her determination and should he/she find that grounds exist for suspension of the permit, he/she shall issue his/her decision and order in writing within thirty (30) calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing. The written decision and order of the director shall be sent by certified mail to the permittee or its legal counsel/representative at the permittee's business address. 
C.  Effect. 
1.  Upon an order of suspension by the director becoming final, the permittee shall immediately cease and desist its discharge and shall have no right to discharge any wastewater containing FOG directly or indirectly to the city's sewer system for the duration of the suspension. All costs for physically terminating and reinstating service shall be paid by the permittee. 
2.  Any owner or responsible management employee of the permittee shall be bound by the order of suspension. 
3.  An order of permit suspension issued by the director shall be final in all respects on the sixteenth day after it is mailed to the permittee unless a request for hearing is filed with the council pursuant to Section 13.10.660 no later than 5:00 p.m. on the fifteenth day following such mailing. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.620 - Permit revocation. 
A.  The director may revoke any permit when it is determined that a permittee: 
1.  Knowingly provided a false statement, representation, record, report, or other document to the city. 
2.  Refuses to provide records, reports, plans, or other documents required by the city to determine permit terms, conditions, discharge compliance or compliance with this chapter. 
3.  Falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or sample collection method. 
4.  Fails to comply with the terms and conditions of permit suspension or CSA. 
5.  Discharges effluent to the city's sewer system while its permit is suspended. 
6.  Refuses reasonable access to the permittee's premises for the purpose of inspection and monitoring. 
7.  Does not make timely payment of all amounts owed to the city for user charges, permit fees, or any other fees imposed pursuant to this title. 
8.  Causes interference, sewer blockages, or SSOs with the city sewer system. 
9.  Violates grease interceptor maintenance requirements, any condition or limit of its discharge permit or any provision of this chapter. 
B.  Approval. When the FOG control program manager has reason to believe that grounds exist for the revocation of a permit, he/she shall give written notice by certified mail thereof to the permittee setting forth a statement of the facts and grounds deemed to exist together with the time and place where the charges shall be heard by the director or his/her designee. The hearing date shall be not less than fifteen (15) calendar days nor more than forty-five (45) calendar days after the mailing of such notice. 
1.  At the hearing, the permittee shall have an opportunity to respond to the allegations set forth in the notice by presenting written or oral evidence. The revocation hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures established by the director and approved by the city's attorney. 
2.  If the director designated a hearing officer, after the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall submit a written report to the director setting forth a brief statement of facts found to be true, a determination of the issues presented, conclusions, and a recommendation. 
3.  Upon receipt of the written report by the hearing officer, or conclusion of the hearing, if the director conducted the hearing, the director shall make his/her determination and should he/she find that grounds exist for permanent revocation of the permit, he/she shall issue his/her decision and order in writing within thirty (30) calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing. The written decision and order of the director shall be sent by certified mail to the permittee or its legal counsel/representative at the permittee's business address. 
In the event the director determines to not revoke the permit, he/she may order other enforcement actions, including, but not limited to, a temporary suspension of the permit, under terms and conditions that he/she deems appropriate. 
C.  Effect. 
1.  Upon an order of revocation by the director becoming final, the permittee shall permanently lose all rights to discharge any wastewater containing FOG directly or indirectly to the city's sewer system. All costs incurred by the city for physical termination shall be paid by the permittee. 
2.  Any owner or responsible management employee of the permittee shall be bound by the order of revocation. 
3.  Any future application for a permit at any location within the city by any person associated with an order of revocation will be considered by the city after fully reviewing the records of the revoked permit, which records may be the basis for denial of a new permit. 
4.  An order of permit revocation issued by the director shall be final in all respects on the sixteenth day after it is mailed to the permittee unless a request for hearing is filed with the council pursuant to Section 13.10.660 no later than 5:00 p.m. on the fifteenth day following such mailing. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.625 - Damage to facilities or interruption of normal operations. 
A.  Any person who discharges any waste which causes or contributes to any sewer blockage, SSOs, obstruction, interference, damage, or any other impairment to the city's sewer facilities or to the operation of those facilities shall be liable for all costs required to clean or repair the facilities together with expenses incurred by the city to resume normal operations. The total amount shall be payable within forty-five (45) days of invoicing by the city. 
B.  Any person who discharges a waste which causes or contributes to the city violating its discharge requirements established by any regulatory agency incurring additional expenses or suffering losses or damage to the facilities, shall be liable for any costs or expenses incurred by the city, including regulatory fines, penalties, and assessments made by other agencies or a court. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.630 - Public nuisance. 
Discharge of wastewater in any manner in violation of this chapter or of any order issued by the FOG control program manager or director, as authorized by this chapter, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the FOG control program manager or director. Any person creating a public nuisance is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.635 - Termination of service. 
A.  The city, by order of the director, may physically terminate sewer service to any property as follows: 
1.  On a term of any order of suspension or revocation of a permit; or 
2.  Upon the failure of a person not holding a valid FOG wastewater discharge permit to immediately cease the discharge, whether direct or indirect, to the city's sewer facilities after the notice and process in Section 13.10.605 herein. 
B.  All costs for physical termination shall be paid by the owner or operator of the FSE or permittee as well as all costs for reinstating service. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.640 - Emergency suspension order. 
A.  The city may, by order of the director, suspend sewer service when the director determines that such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or impending discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health and welfare of persons, or to the environment, or may cause SSOs, sewer blockages, interference to the city's sewer systems, or may cause the city to violate any state or federal law or regulation. Any discharger notified of and subject to an emergency suspension order shall immediately cease and desist the discharge of all wastewater containing FOG to the sewer system. 
B.  As soon as reasonably practicable following the issuance of an emergency suspension order, but in no event more than five business days following the issuance of such order, the director shall hold a hearing to provide the FSE or permittee the opportunity to present information in opposition to the issuance of the emergency suspension order. Such a hearing shall not stay the effect of the emergency suspension order. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the director and approved by the city attorney. The director shall issue a written decision and order within two (2) business days following the hearing, which decision shall be sent by certified mail to the FSE or its legal counsel/representative at that FSE's business address. The decision of the director following the hearing shall be final and not appealable to the city council, but may be subject to judicial review. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.645 - Civil penalties. 
A.  All users of the city's sewer system are subject to enforcement actions administratively or judicially by the city, U.S. EPA, sanitation districts of Los Angeles County, and/or state regional water quality control board. Said actions may be taken pursuant to the authority and provisions of several laws, including but not limited to: 
1.  Federal Water Pollution Control Act, commonly known as the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C.A. Section 1251 et seq.); 
2.  California Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act (California Water Code Section 13000 et seq.); 
3.  California Hazardous Waste Control Law (California Health and Safety Code Sections 25100 to 25250); 
4.  Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 U.S.C.A. Section 6901 et seq.); and 
5.  California Government Code, Sections 54739—54740. 
B.  In the event the city is subject to the payment of fines or penalties pursuant to the legal authority and actions of other regulatory or enforcement agencies based on a violation of law or regulation or its permits, and said violation can be established by the city, as caused by the discharge of any user of the city's system which is in violation of any provision of this chapter or the user's permit, the city shall be entitled to recover from the user all costs and expenses, including, but not limited to, the full amount of said fines or penalties to which it has been subjected. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.650 - Criminal penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, which upon conviction is punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. Each violation and each day in which a violation occurs may constitute a new and separate violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties contained herein. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.655 - Appeals to director. 
A.  Any FSE, permit applicant or permittee affected by any decision, action or determination made by the FOG control program manager or notice of violation issued by any city inspector may file with the director a written request for an appeal hearing. The request must be received by the city within fifteen (15) days of mailing of notice of the decision, action, or determination of the FOG control program manager to the appellant. The request for hearing shall set forth in detail all facts supporting the appellant's request. 
B.  The director shall, within fifteen (15) days of receiving the request for appeal, designate a hearing officer to hear the appeal and provide written notice to the appellant of the hearing date, time and place. The hearing date shall not be more than thirty (30) days from the mailing of such notice by certified mail to the appellant unless a later date is agreed to by the appellant. If the hearing is not held within said time due to actions or inactions of the appellant, then the staff decision shall be deemed final. 
C.  At the hearing, the appellant shall have the opportunity to present information supporting its position concerning the FOG control program manager's decision, action or determination. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the director and approved by the city attorney. 
D.  After the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer (or other designee) shall submit a written report to the director setting forth a brief statement of facts found to be true, a determination of the issues presented, conclusions, and a recommendation whether to uphold, modify or reversed the FOG control program manager's original decision, action or determination. Upon receipt of the written report, the director shall make his/her determination and shall issue his/her decision and order within thirty (30) calendar days of the hearing by his/her designee. The written decision and order of the director shall be sent by certified mail to the appellant or its legal counsel/representative at the appellant's business address. 
The order of the director shall be final in all respects on the sixteenth day after it is mailed to the appellant unless a request for hearing is filed with the council pursuant to Section 13.10.660 no later than 5:00 p.m. on the fifteenth day following such mailing. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.660 - Appeals to the city council. 
A.  Any FSE, permit applicant, or permittee adversely affected by a decision, action, or determination made by the director may, prior to the date that the director's order becomes final, file a written request for hearing before the council accompanied by an appeal fee in the amount established by a separate resolution of the city council. The request for hearing shall set forth in detail all the issues in dispute for which the appellant seeks determination and all facts supporting appellant's request. 
No later than sixty (60) days after receipt of the request for hearing, the council shall either set the matter for a hearing, or deny the request for a hearing. 
A hearing shall be held by the council within sixty-five (65) days from the date of determination granting a hearing, unless a later date is agreed to by the appellant and the city council. If the matter is not heard within the required time, due to actions or inactions of the appellant, the director's order shall be deemed final. 
B.  The council shall grant all requests for a hearing on appeals concerning permit suspension, revocation, or denial. Whether to grant or deny the request for a hearing on appeals of other decisions of the director shall be within the sole discretion of the city council. 
C.  The appeal fee shall be refunded if the council denies a hearing or reverses or modifies, in favor of the appellant, the order of the director. The fee shall not be refunded if the council denies the appeal. 
D.  After the hearing, the council shall make a determination whether to uphold, modify, or reverse the decision, action, or determination made by the director. 
The decision of the council shall be set forth in writing within sixty-five (65) days after the close of the hearing and shall contain a finding of facts found to be true, the determination of issues presented, and the conclusions. The written decision and order of the council shall be sent by certified mail to the appellant or its legal counsel/representative at the appellant's business address. 
The order of the council shall be final upon its adoption. In the event the council fails to reverse or modify the director's order, it shall be deemed affirmed. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.665 - Payment of charges. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided, all fees, charges and penalties established by this chapter are due and payable upon receipt of notice thereof. Such amounts are delinquent if unpaid after thirty (30) days. 
B.  Penalties for failure to pay such fees, charges and penalties within the time identified in the notice shall be in accordance with Section 5.04.080, penalty, of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
C.  Any invoice outstanding and unpaid after ninety (90) days shall be cause for immediate initiation of permit revocation proceedings or immediate suspension of the permit. 
D.  Penalties charged under this section shall not accrue to those invoices successfully appealed, provided the city receives written notification of said appeal prior to the payment due date. 
E.  Payment of disputed charges is still required by the due date during city review of any appeal submitted by permittee. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
13.10.670 - Collection of delinquent accounts. 
Collection of delinquent accounts shall be in accordance with the city's procedures for collection of delinquent obligations owed to the city. Any such action for collection may include an application for an injunction to prevent repeated and recurring violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
Article 7. - Severability 
 
13.10.700 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, subdivision, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of this entire Chapter or any of the remaining portions hereof. The council hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter, and each section, subsection, subdivision, sentence, clause or phrase hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 1, 7-14-2009)  
Chapter 13.12 - WATER ORDINANCE 
 
13.12.010 - Adoption by reference of county water ordinance. 
A.  Except as hereinafter provided, that certain water ordinance as adopted by Division 1 of Title 20, as amended, of the county of Los Angeles entitled the "water ordinance" shall become the water ordinance of the city of Lancaster. 
B.  Three copies of said Division 1 of said Title 20, as amended, of the county of Los Angeles, together with amendments included in this chapter, have been deposited in the office of the city clerk of the city of Lancaster and shall be at all times maintained by said clerk for use and examination by the public. 
(Prior code § 5-6.1)  
13.12.020 - Definitions. 
Whenever any of the following names or terms are used in said Los Angeles County water ordinance each such name or term shall be deemed and construed to have the meaning ascribed to it as follows: 
"Board" or "board of supervisors" means the city council of the city of Lancaster. 
"Building Code set out as Title 26 of this code" means the building code of the city of Lancaster. 
"Clerk" or "clerk of the board" means the city clerk. 
"County" or "county of Los Angeles" means the city of Lancaster, California. 
"County counsel" means the city attorney. 
"Director of planning" means the director of community development of the city. 
"Division 1 of Title 16 of this code" means the highway permit ordinance of the city. 
"Electrical Code set out as Title 27 of this code" means the electrical code of the city. 
"Engineer or county engineer" means the city engineer. 
"Plumbing Code set out as Title 28 of this code" means the plumbing code of the city. 
"Regional planning commission" means the Lancaster planning commission. 
"Road commissioner" means the director of public works. 
"Section 21.32.100 of Title 21, Subdivisions" or "Subdivision Ordinance set out as Title 21 of this code" shall mean the subdivision ordinance of the city. 
"Unincorporated area of the county" means the incorporated area of the city of Lancaster. 
"Zoning ordinance" means the zoning ordinance of the city, codified in Title 17 of this code. 
(Prior code § 5-6.2)  
13.12.030 - Amendments to county water ordinance. 
A.  Section 20.04.340 of said Los Angeles County water ordinance is amended to read: 
  Section 20.04.340 Group R-3 occupancy. "Group R-3 occupancy" means Group R-3 occupancy as now or hereafter used in the City Building Code and refers to single and two-family dwellings. 
B.  Section 20.04.420 of said Los Angeles County water ordinance is amended to read: 
  Section 20.04.420 Required area. "Required area" means required area as defined in the City Zoning Ordinance. 
C.  Subsection A of Section 20.08.030 of said Los Angeles County water ordinance is amended to read: 
  A. Place of Filing. The applicant shall file an application with the Department of Building and Engineering Services of the City. 
D.  Chapter 20.12, Water Appeals Board, of the county water ordinance is deleted in its entirety. 
(Prior code § 5-6.3)  
Chapter 13.16 - REFUSE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 960, § 1, adopted January 25, 2011, amended the Code by repealing former Ch. 13.16, §§ 13.16.010—13.16.130, and adding a new Ch. 13.16, §§ 13.16.010—13.16.140. Former Ch. 13.16 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the prior code, §§ 5-4.1—5-4.13. 
 
13.16.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the health, safety and welfare of the city's residents by establishing regulations governing the collection and disposal of refuse. The city council finds and determines that such regulations are necessary to: 
A.  Ensure property maintenance; 
B.  Protect against pollution and fire hazards; and 
C.  Provide collection and disposal services that are efficient and responsive to community needs. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 1, 1-25-2011)  
13.16.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter: 
"Collection" means and includes gathering refuse within the city and transporting it to a point for disposal. 
"Commercial premises" means and includes premises with greater than four dwelling units, mobile-homes, and all commercial and industrial premises. 
"Container" means and includes a receptacle for refuse. 
"Contractor" means a person who enters into a contract with the city for the collection and disposal of refuse. 
"Disposal" means and includes treating and disposing of refuse and any product or residue arising from such treatment. 
"Garbage" means and includes all animal, vegetable and fruit waste matter resulting from the preparation of food in residential, commercial and industrial premises and resulting from the sale of food. 
"Premises" means and includes any lot or lots and the buildings or structures located thereon. 
"Refuse" means and includes garbage and rubbish as defined in this section. 
"Residential premises" means and includes all premises used for residential purposes with four or less dwelling units. 
"Rubbish" means and includes items generated from residential, commercial or industrial premises which are combustible, such as tree, shrub and grass trimmings, plants or flower garden waste, wood, paper, straw, packing materials, leather, rubber, clothing, bedding, books, magazines, newspapers, rags and all other similar articles which will burn upon contact; and items which are noncombustible such as ashes, broken crockery and glass, cinders, shells, bottles, tin cans, metals and other similar materials which ordinarily accumulate in a household or business and are discarded by the producer thereof. The term "rubbish" shall not include dead animals, manure or waste from any poultry yard or stable. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 1, 1-25-2011)  
13.16.030 - Refuse collection. 
A.  The city shall provide for the collection and disposal of refuse from all premises within the city at least once per calendar week. The city manager shall coordinate the routes and schedule for refuse collection. The city may enter into a contract for refuse collection and disposal which grants the contractor and the duly authorized agents of such contractor the exclusive right to collect and dispose of refuse from all residential, commercial, industrial and other facilities and premises located within the city for the duration of the contract. 
B.  Persons other than those duly authorized by the city shall not collect or dispose of refuse within the city except as authorized herein. 
C.  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a person from removing or providing for the removal of any bulky items not subject to weekly collection pursuant to Section 13.16.070. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 1, 1-25-2011)  
13.16.040 - Mandatory collection. 
Owners of residential premises within the city shall place any refuse accumulated on the premises throughout the calendar week in a container as described herein for collection on the day designated for pickup or after six p.m. the preceding day. Containers shall be placed along the curb fronting the premises unless the route for collection requires otherwise. All containers shall be removed to storage within twelve (12) hours after the container has been emptied. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 1, 1-25-2011)  
13.16.050 - Prohibition against scavenging. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the owner of a refuse container, or his employee or agent, or the employees or agents of the city's refuse collection and disposal contractor to tamper with, rummage in, disturb, interfere with, scavenge, move or remove any refuse container or any refuse or recyclable material from such container. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 1, 1-25-2011)  
13.16.060 - Hours of collection. 
Collection shall begin at six a.m. Collection may begin earlier at commercial premises if located greater than six hundred (600) feet from any residential premises. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 1, 1-25-2011)  
13.16.070 - Containers. 
All refuse accumulated at residential and commercial premises shall be deposited in receptacles approved by the city council. Separate containers may be required for the deposit of toxic substances. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 1, 1-25-2011)  
13.16.080 - Refuse not subject to weekly collection. 
Bulky items greater than four feet in length or sixty (60) pounds shall not be removed from residential premises during scheduled weekly collection. Such refuse includes but is not limited to discarded automobile parts, trees, logs, building materials, grass, sod and dirt. Owners and occupants of residential and commercial premises shall collect and dispose of bulky items accumulated on the premises as described herein at least once per calendar month to a disposal site as may be designated by the city. However, refuse generated from building and construction operations need not be removed from the premises until such operations have terminated. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 1, 1-25-2011)  
13.16.090 - Rates. 
Rates for collection and disposal shall be established by the city council by resolution. The city council may adopt a single resolution providing for an automatic annual adjustment in the rates charged by a contractor for collection and disposal services. Council, by contract, shall establish a formula for determining automatic annual adjustment in the rates charged by a contractor for collection and disposal services. The formula for determining automatic annual rate adjustments shall be based on consumer price indexes, and fuel costs for the twelve (12) months preceding adoption of the resolution establishing the automatic annual rate adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 1, 1-25-2011)  
13.16.100 - Mandatory collection fee. 
All owners of residential premises shall pay for the collection and disposal of refuse by a contractor pursuant to its contract with the city for refuse collection. Until such time as the city approves by resolution a billing and collection procedure, owners of residential premises shall be billed by the contractor providing refuse collection and disposal services to the premises. An exception from the mandatory collection fee may be granted to residential property owners based upon a determination by the city staff of undue hardship. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 1, 1-25-2011)  
13.16.110 - Trash burning. 
Persons shall not burn any refuse unless they have complied with the rules and regulations promulgated by the city, county and air pollution control district. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 1, 1-25-2011)  
13.16.120 - Throwing or scattering refuse. 
Persons shall not throw or scatter refuse in or upon alleys or rights-of-way within the city. Nor shall refuse be deposited below the surface of any premises which may endanger the public health or safety or constitute a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 1, 1-25-2011)  
13.16.130 - Recycling waste reduction program. 
The city shall provide through contractual provisions for recycling programs which have been recognized by city council as exemplary public policy and are necessary to be implemented by the laws established by the state of California. All contractors shall comply with existing state or local mandates for reduction of waste stream and promoting recycling per specific provisions of the contract. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 1, 1-25-2011)  
13.16.140 - Minimum contractual terms. 
A contract for refuse collection and disposal shall include the following provisions: 
A.  Public assistance. 
1.  Contractor shall maintain an office in the city of Lancaster or a location approved by the city manager deemed convenient for the residents/businesses. The office shall remain open from nine a.m. to five p.m. Monday through Friday. 
2.  Contractor shall provide toll free telephone service during office hours to assist persons located within the contractor's designated service area. Contractor shall maintain a log book to record complaints regarding collection service. The log book shall be available to the city manager and authorized city health officials upon demand. 
B.  Emergency service. An emergency service vehicle shall be available during office hours to respond to complaints or emergencies. 
C.  Collection procedures. Contractor shall adhere to the following collection procedures: 
1.  Collection shall be conducted in a manner which least interferes with traffic and the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
2.  Contractor shall collect refuse at least once per calendar week between the hours of six a.m. and eight p.m. 
3.  Refuse shall be collected from the curb fronting the premises unless the route for collection requires otherwise. 
4.  Refuse containers shall be returned in an upright position where the container was originally found and shall not be deposited in a sidewalk, adjoining property or right-of-way. 
5.  The contractor shall not be required to enter private property to collect refuse unless otherwise provided by the city manager or an agreement between the contractor and private party. 
D.  Instructions for Collection. Contractor shall distribute to all premises located within the geographic area serviced by contractor a list of instructions describing the manner in which refuse shall be collected and disposed by the contractor including the following: 
1.  The designated day for refuse collection at the premises and that such collection is mandatory for residential premises; 
2.  The type of refuse containers acceptable for collection of refuse and which containers shall be placed on the premises for collection and disposal service; 
3.  A list of refuse which shall not be collected during weekly collection; 
4.  A statement regarding the fee for collection established by the city council and notice that such fees are mandatory for residential property owners; 
5.  Any other information deemed appropriate by the city manager. 
E.  Non-collection. When refuse is not collected by the contractor, a tag must be fastened to such refuse stating the reason for non-collection. 
F.  Maintenance of Vehicles and Equipment. 
1.  All trucks and equipment used by a contractor pursuant to its contract with the city for refuse collection shall be maintained at all times in a safe and sanitary condition. Each truck shall be uniformly painted and numbered. Each piece of equipment shall display a sign indicating the name of the disposal company and its telephone number in lettering of at least three inches in height. 
2.  The contractor shall not use any equipment in the performance of a refuse contract with the city older than ten (10) years unless expressly approved by the city council. All vehicles and equipment shall be subject to inspection by city health officials and the city manager upon sufficient notice. 
3.  The refuse compartment of each vehicle used by the contractor for garbage collection shall be constructed of metal, shall be watertight and shall have a metal cover which covers at least fifty (50) percent of the refuse compartment. The remaining fifty (50) percent of the refuse compartment shall be covered by a tarpaulin or similar cover which is airtight and waterproof when the vehicle is transporting refuse to the disposal site. 
4.  Each vehicle shall contain a broom, shovel, and other necessary equipment for the immediate removal of any material spilled in the course of collection. 
G.  Insurance. 
1.  Contractor shall maintain adequate insurance covering all persons employed in connection with its contract for refuse collection as required by state workers' compensation laws. The contractor shall hold the city, its employees, and agents harmless from and against all liabilities arising from injuries sustained by employees of the contractor who are injured while performing services pursuant to its contract with the city for refuse collection and disposal. Evidence of insurance shall be maintained on file with the city clerk for the term of the contract. 
2.  Contractor shall maintain public liability insurance with a company licensed to do business in the state of California covering liabilities for injuries or deaths and property damage arising out of or in connection with the operation of its contract with the city for refuse collection. Said policy shall provided coverage in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for injuries including accidental death and no less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage or a combined limit policy of at least three million dollars ($3,000,000.00). 
H.  Miscellaneous. 
1.  The contract shall not be assignable, delegated or otherwise transferable unless such transfer is approved by the city council. 
2.  The contract shall specify the geographic area where the contractor shall collect refuse within the city. 
3.  The contractor shall comply with all applicable laws of the state of California and the provisions of this chapter in performing collection and disposal services. 
4.  The contract shall contain a termination clause permitting the city to terminate the contract in accordance with the procedure set forth therein. 
5.  Any refuse collection firm(s) granted an exclusive contract by the city council for such purpose shall thereupon have the exclusive right to collect all residential, industrial and commercial refuse generated in the city, subject only to the exceptions set forth herein. 
6.  Any firm furnishing such collection services to any residents/businesses in the city for at least three consecutive years prior to notification of the granting of said exclusive contract may continue to provide such services to said firm or firms for not more than a five-year period commencing upon the mailing of notice to such firm of the granting of said contract. Any such firm, operating after the granting of such an exclusive contract shall pay the same fee, and charge up to the maximum rates for its services as are prescribed for the contracting firm pursuant to its contract. 
I.  Performance bond. The contractor shall deposit with the city a performance bond, certificate of deposit, letter of credit or other similar instrument approved by the city guaranteeing the performance of any contract between the city and contractor. The amount of the bond shall be approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 1, 1-25-2011)  
Chapter 13.20 - UTILITY DISTRICTS  
Article I. - Underground Utility Districts 
 
13.20.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
"Commission" means the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California. 
"Person" means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, and their agents and employees. 
"Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures" means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. 
"Underground utility district" or "district" means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.20.030. 
"Utility" means and includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. 
(Prior code § 10-1.1)  
13.20.020 - Public hearing by council. 
The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings in accordance with the city's notice procedure. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Prior code § 10-1.2)  
13.20.030 - Council may designate underground utility districts by resolution. 
A.  If, after any such public hearing the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. 
B.  The council shall also make one or more of the following findings: 
1.  That such undergrounding will avoid or eliminate an unusually heavy concentration of overhead electric facilities; 
2.  The street or road right-of-way is extensively used by the general public and carries a heavy volume of pedestrian or vehicular traffic; 
3.  The street or road right-of-way passes through a civic area or public recreation area or an area of unusual scenic interest to the general public. 
C.  Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of funds, labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. 
(Prior code § 10-1.3)  
13.20.040 - Unlawful acts. 
Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 13.20.030, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when said overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as said overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 13.20.090, and for such reasonable time required to remove said facilities after said work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Prior code § 10-1.4)  
13.20.050 - Exception, emergency or unusual circumstances. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten (10) days, without authority of the council in order to provide emergency service. The council may grant special permission, on such terms as the council may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. 
(Prior code § 10-1.5)  
13.20.060 - Other exceptions. 
In any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.20.030, the following are exempted unless specifically included in the resolution: 
A.  Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer; 
B.  Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting; 
C.  Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited; 
D.  Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred (34,500) volts; 
E.  Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street; 
F.  Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services; 
G.  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts; 
H.  Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. 
(Prior code § 10-1.6)  
13.20.070 - Notice to property owners and utility companies. 
Within ten (10) days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.20.030, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by the resolution of the adoption thereof. The city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location. 
Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.20.030, together with a copy of the ordinance codified in this article, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. 
(Prior code § 10-1.7)  
13.20.080 - Responsibility of utility companies. 
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.20.030, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. 
(Prior code § 10-1.8)  
13.20.090 - Responsibility of property owners. 
A.  Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in Section 13.20.080 and the termination facility on or within said building or structure being served. If the above is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.20.030, the city engineer shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within ten (10) days after receipt of such notice. 
B.  The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner's name appears, and must be addressed to such owner's last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears, to General Delivery, City of Lancaster. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight (48) hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the city engineer shall within forty-eight (48) hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten (10) inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
C.  The notice given by the city engineer to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, and shall state that if said work is not completed within thirty (30) days after receipt of such notice, the city engineer will provide such required underground facilities in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefitted and become a lien upon such property. 
D.  If upon the expiration of the thirty (30) day period, the said required underground facilities have not been provided, the city engineer shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the city engineer may in lieu of providing the required facilities, authorize the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to said property. Upon completion of the work by the city engineer, he shall file a written report with the city council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which said time shall not be less than ten (10) days thereafter. 
E.  The city engineer shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner hereinabove provided for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment. 
F.  Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment. 
G.  If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the city engineer, and the city engineer is directed to turn over to the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of said properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and the assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which said assessment was not paid. This assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as said property taxes are due and payable, and if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per annum. 
(Prior code § 10-1.9)  
13.20.100 - Responsibility of the city. 
City shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.20.030. 
(Prior code § 10-1.10)  
13.20.110 - Extension of time. 
In the event that any act required by this article or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.20.030 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. 
(Prior code § 10-1.11)  
13.20.120 - Violation—Penalty. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of this requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offence for each day during any portion of which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable therefor as provided for in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 10-1.12)  
Article II. - Installation/Relocation for New/Expanded Development 
 
13.20.130 - Undergrounding of utilities. 
The city council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires that all permanent existing or proposed electric, communication, or similar or associated service(s) having a nominal voltage less than sixty-six thousand (66,000) volts be provided underground. 
(Prior code § 10-2.1)  
13.20.140 - Prohibition of new overhead utilities. 
In order to implement this undergrounding, no new permanent poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service not required for appropriate maintenance; facility upgrades; maintenance of structural integrity (i.e., guy wires); street lighting system; fire alarm devices; or traffic control apparatus shall be installed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article except as provided in Sections 13.20.160 and 13.20.190. 
(Prior code § 10-2.2)  
13.20.150 - Applicable to subdivisions. 
All utilities for on-site and distribution service(s) to all proposed subdivisions, building sites and structures shall be installed underground. The owner or developer is responsible for complying with the requirements of this section and shall make all the necessary arrangements as required by the serving utilities for the installation of such facilities. For the purpose of this section, surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal meter cabinets, and concealed ducts in underground system may be placed above ground. 
(Prior code § 10-2.3)  
13.20.160 - Developer to bear costs. 
When the approval of subdivisions, building sites and structures requires the improvement of public streets and such street improvements will result in the removal and/or relocation of existing electric, communication, or similar or associated utility service(s), the owner or developer shall bear the cost of undergrounding such utility service(s). The portion undergrounded shall extend to the first existing utility service pole beyond the limits of the proposed street improvements. This section shall not apply to any projects of four or less single-family residential lots or units or new building(s) on any lot which in total do not exceed fifty (50) percent of the floor area of all existing buildings prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article. 
(Prior code § 10-2.4)  
13.20.170 - Letter of compliance. 
Prior to the approval of any final map, parcel map or development plan, whichever occurs first, the owner or developer shall provide the city with a letter of compliance with Section 13.20.160 from the serving utility. 
(Prior code § 10-2.5)  
13.20.180 - Conversion of existing overhead to underground utilities. 
All existing overhead utility service(s) serving lot(s) not within the proposed development but served from utility lines which are required to be underground shall be converted by the developer to underground service. Nothing in this section shall require the developer to convert any on-site existing overhead service(s) to underground service on property not within the development. 
(Prior code § 10-2.6)  
13.20.190 - Hardship. 
The requirements of this article or the serving utility(ies) in unusual or hardship cases may be appealed to the city engineer. The city engineer in cooperation with the serving utility(ies) may grant exceptions to the strict application of this article if he finds that an unusual or hardship case exists. 
The city council from time to time shall establish a cost of undergrounding above which a hardship is applicable. In these cases the developer shall pay to the city up to this established cost. The city shall use these funds to underground facilities throughout the city. 
(Prior code § 10-2.7)  
Chapter 13.24 - WATER RECYCLING 
 
13.24.010 - Findings. 
The state policies described above are in the best interest of the city. The ordinance codified in this chapter is necessary to protect the common water supply of the region which is vital to public health and safety, and to prevent endangerment of public and private property. The city is highly dependent on limited imported water for domestic, agricultural and industrial uses. The reliability of the supply of imported water is uncertain. By developing and utilizing recycled water, the need for additional imported water can be reduced. In light of these circumstances, certain uses of potable water may be considered unreasonable where recycled water is available. Recycled water should be more readily available in seasons of drought when the supply of potable water for nonessential uses may be uncertain. 
(Ord. 841 § 1 (part), 2005)  
13.24.020 - Water recycling policy. 
It is the policy of the city that recycled water determined to be available pursuant to Section 13550 of the Water Code shall be used for nonpotable uses within the designated recycled water use areas set forth by the city wherever there is not an alternative higher or better use for the recycled water, its use is economically justified, financially and technically feasible, and consistent with legal requirements, preservation of public health, safety and welfare, and the environment. 
(Ord. 841 § 1 (part), 2005)  
13.240.030 - Definitions. 
The following terms are defined for purposes of the ordinance codified in this chapter: 
"Agricultural purposes" includes the growing of field and nursery crops, row crops, trees, and vines and the feeding of fowl and livestock. 
"Artificial lake" means a human-made lake, pond, lagoon, or other body of water that is used wholly or partly for landscape, scenic or noncontact recreational purposes. 
"Commercial office building" means any building for office or commercial uses with water requirements which include, but are not limited to, landscape irrigation, toilets, urinals and decorative fountains. 
"Recycled water distribution system" mean a piping system intended for the delivery of recycled water only and which is separate from any potable water distribution system. 
"Greenbelt areas" means a greenbelt area includes, but is not limited to, golf courses, cemeteries, parks and landscaping. 
"Industrial process water" means water used by any industrial facility with process water requirements which include, but are not limited to, rinsing, washing, cooling and circulation, or construction, including any facility regulated by the industrial waste discharge ordinance of the city. 
"Off-site facilities" means water facilities from the source of supply to the point of connection with the on-site facilities, including the water meter. 
"On-site facilities" means water facilities under the control of the owner, downstream from the water meter. 
"Potable water" means water which conforms to the federal, state and local standards for human consumption. 
"Public works director" means public works director shall mean the director of the city's public works department or designated representatives. 
"Recycled water" means water which, as a result of treatment of wastewater, is suitable for a direct beneficial use or controlled use that would not otherwise occur. (See Water Code Section 13050(n).) 
(Ord. 841 § 1 (part), 2005)  
13.24.040 - Water recycling master plan. 
A.  General. Upon adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the city shall prepare and adopt a water recycling master plan to define, encourage, and develop the use of recycled water within its boundaries. The master plan shall be periodically updated. 
B.  Contents of the Water Recycling Master Plan. The master plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Plants and Facilities. An evaluation of the location and size of present and future reclamation treatment plants, distribution pipelines, pump stations, reservoirs, and other related facilities, including cost estimates and potential financing methods. 
2.  Recycled Water Service Areas. A designation, based on the criteria set forth in Section 13.24.020 and the information derived from Section 13.24.040(B)(1) and 13.24.040(B)(2), of the areas within the boundaries of the city that can or may in the future, use recycled water in lieu of potable water. Recycled water uses may include, but are not limited to, the irrigation of greenbelt, school grounds, and agricultural areas, filling of artificial lakes, and appropriate industrial and commercial uses. 
3.  Mandatory Recycled Water Use. For each recycled water service area, evaluate whether greenbelt irrigation, school ground irrigation, agricultural irrigation, commercial office buildings, filling of artificial lakes, or industrial processes shall be limited to the use of recycled water. As appropriate, mandate construction of recycled water distribution systems or other facilities in new and existing developments for current or future recycled water use as a condition of any development approval or continued water service if future water recycling facilities are proposed in the master plan that could adequately serve the development, in accordance with the procedures described in Section 13.24.050. 
4.  Rules and Regulations. General rules and regulations governing the use and distribution of recycled water shall be kept on file with the city clerk and be available for review by any member of the public. 
(Ord. 841 § 1 (part), 2005)  
13.24.050 - Procedures. 
A.  Existing Potable Water Service. 
1.  Preliminary Determination. Based upon the master plan, upon the designation of each recycled water service area or the commencement of the design of new recycled water facilities, the public works director shall make preliminary determinations as to which existing potable water customers shall be converted to the use of recycled water. Each water customer shall be notified of the basis for a determination that conversion to recycled water service will be required, as well as the proposed conditions and schedule for conversion. 
2.  Notice. The notice of the preliminary determination, including the proposed conditions and time schedule for compliance, and a recycled water permit application shall be provided to the water customer. 
3.  Objections—Appeals. The water customer may file a notice of objection with the within (30) days after any notice of determination to comply is delivered or mailed to the customer, and may request reconsideration of the determination or modification of the proposed conditions or schedule for conversion. The objection must be in writing and specify the reasons for the objection. The preliminary determination shall be final if the customer does not file a timely objection. The public works director shall review the objection and shall confirm, modify or abandon the preliminary determination. Upon issuance of a final determination by the public works director, customer may appeal the determination to the city council in accordance with the uniform appeal procedure set forth in Chapter 2.44 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
B.  Development and Water Service Approvals. 
1.  Conditions. Upon application by a developer, owner or water customer (herein referred to as "applicant") for a new industrial, commercial, or residential subdivisions located within the designated recycled water use areas for which a tentative map or parcel map is required pursuant to Government Code Section 66426, the public works director shall review the master plan and make a preliminary determination whether the current or proposed use of the subject property is required to be served with recycled water or to include facilities designed to accommodate the use of recycled water in the future. Based upon such determination, use of recycled water and provision of recycled water distribution systems or other facilities for the use of recycled water, and application for a permit for such use may be required as a condition of approval of any such application, in addition to any other conditions of approval. 
2.  Alterations and Remodeling. On a case by case basis, upon application for a permit for the alteration or remodeling of multi-family, commercial or industrial structures (including, for example, commercial office buildings), the public works director shall review the master plan and make a preliminary determination whether the subject property shall be required to be served with recycled water or to include facilities designed to accommodate the use of recycled water in the future. Based upon such determination, use of recycled water and provision of recycled water distribution systems or other facilities for the use of recycled water, and application for a permit for such use, may be required as a condition of approval of the application. 
3.  Notice of Determination. A notice of the basis for the preliminary determination, proposed conditions of approval and schedule for compliance shall be provided to the applicant prior to approval of the development application. 
4.  Requested Service. On a case by case basis, upon application for a permit to use recycled water on a property not covered by subsections A(1), B(1), or B(2) above, the public works director shall review the master plan and make a determination whether the subject property shall be served with recycled water. Based upon such determination, the application for the permit shall be accepted and processed subject to subsection C below. 
C.  Recycled Water Permit Process. Upon a final determination by the public works director that a property shall be served with recycled water, or adoption of a condition of development approval requiring use or accommodation of the use of recycled water, the water customer, owner or applicant shall obtain a recycled water permit. 
1.  Permit Conditions. The permit shall specify the design and operational requirements for the applicant's water distribution facilities and schedule for compliance, based on the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Section 13.24.040(B) and shall require compliance with both the California Department of Health Services Wastewater Recycling Criteria (see California Code of Administrative Regulations, Title 22), and requirements of the regional water quality control board. 
2.  Plan Approval. Plans for the recycled and non recycled water distribution systems for the parcel shall be reviewed by the public works director and a field inspection conducted before the permit is granted. 
3.  Permit Issuance. Upon approval of plans the permit shall be issued. Recycled water shall not be supplied to a property until inspection by the public works director determines that the applicant is in compliance with the permit conditions. Recycled water service shall not commence within the designated recycled water use area in any service area of a private utility, as defined in Section 1502 of the Public Utilities Code, or to any service area of a public agency retail water supplier that is not a city, county or city and county, except in accordance with a written agreement between the recycled water producer and the private utility or public agency retail water supplier. 
D.  Temporary Use of Potable Water. At the discretion of the public works director, potable water may be made available on a temporary basis, until recycled water is available. Before the applicant receives temporary potable water, a water recycling permit, as described in Section 13.24.050(C), must be obtained for new on-site distribution facilities. Prior to commencement of recycled water service, an inspection of the on-site facilities will be conducted to verify that the facilities have been maintained and are in compliance with the recycled water permit and current requirements for service. Upon verification of compliance, recycled water shall be served to the parcel for the intended use. If the facilities are not in compliance, the applicant shall be notified of the corrective actions necessary and shall have at least thirty (30) days to take such actions prior to initiation of enforcement proceedings. 
E.  Recycled Water Rate. The rate charged for recycled water shall be established by resolution of the city council. Annually water rates shall be adjusted for inflationary factors using the Los Angeles Area (CPI) as published by the U.S. Department of Labor. 
(Ord. 841 § 1 (part), 2005)  
13.24.060 - Sanctions. 
A.  Public Nuisance. Discharge of wastes or the use of recycled water in any manner in violation of the ordinance codified in this chapter or of any permit issued hereunder is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the public works director. Any person creating such a public nuisance is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
B.  Injunction. Whenever a discharge of wastes or use of recycled water is in violation of the ordinance codified in this chapter or otherwise causes or threatens to cause a condition of nuisance, the public works director may seek injunctive relief as may be appropriate to enjoin such discharge or use. 
C.  Permit Revocation. In addition to any other statute or rule authorizing termination of water service, the public works director may revoke a permit issued hereunder if a violation of any provision of the ordinance codified in this chapter is found to exist or if a discharge of wastes or use of recycled water causes or threatens to cause a nuisance. 
D.  Penalty. Any owner and/or operator who violates the ordinance codified in this chapter shall, for each day of violation, or portion thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). In addition, water service to the property may be discontinued. 
(Ord. 841 § 1 (part), 2005)  
13.24.070 - Validity. 
If any provision of the ordinance codified in this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the ordinance codified in this chapter and the application of such provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. 841 § 1 (part), 2005) 

Title 14 - REDEVELOPMENT/ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 
Chapters: 
Chapter 14.04 - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 
Sections: 

14.04.010. - Purpose. 
    By adoption of this chapter, the city council desires to establish complete authority for the city to take all necessary actions to accomplish economic development of the city. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 1, 2-8-2011) 
14.04.020. - Authority. 
    A city may: 
(a)  From time to time prepare and carry out plans for the improvement, rehabilitation, and development of any property within the city for purposes of economic development. 
(b)  Acquire and sell or otherwise dispose of real or personal property for purposes of economic development. 
(c)  Disseminate information. 
(d)  Prepare applications for various federal programs and grants relating to economic development and plan and carry out such programs. 
(e)  Take all necessary actions to accomplish economic development of the city. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 1, 2-8-2011) 
10.04.030. - Financial assistance. 
    The city may accept financial assistance from public or private sources for purposes of redevelopment. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 1, 2-8-2011) 
14.04.040. - Other assistance. 
    The city may accept any other assistance from the state or federal government or any public or private source for any project within its area of operation. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 1, 2-8-2011) 
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
Chapter 15.04 - ADMINISTRATIVE CODE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1018, § 1, adopted December 13, 2016, repealed ch. 15.04, §§ 15.04.010-15.04.120, in its entirety; and enacted a new ch. 15.04 to read as set out herein. Former ch. 15.04 pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Ord. No. 994, § 1, adopted November 12, 2013. 

15.04.010 - California Building Code Chapter 1, Division II adopted by reference. 
A.  That certain building code known as the 2016 California Building Code, Chapter 1, Division II, incorporating by adoption the 2015 edition of the International Building Code with necessary California amendments, all published by the International Conference of Building Officials, and as herein amended, is hereby adopted by reference, and such code shall be and become the Lancaster Administrative Code for Buildings and Construction, to serve as the administrative, organizational and enforcement rules and regulations for the technical codes which regulate the site preparation and construction, alteration, moving, demolition, repair, use, occupancy and maintenance of buildings, structures and building service equipment. 
B.  One copy of said California Building Code 2016 Edition has been deposited in the office of the city clerk, and shall be at all times maintained by said clerk for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
15.04.020 - Definitions. 
    Section 101.4.8 of the California Building Code, Chapter 1, Division II, is hereby added to read as follows: 
101.4.8 Definitions. Whenever any of the names or terms defined in this section are used in this Code, each such name or term shall be deemed and construed to have the meaning ascribed to be in this section as follows: 
"Building Code" shall mean chapter 15.08 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
"Building Official" shall mean the Building Official of the City of Lancaster. 
"Code Enforcement Agency" or "Local Building Department" shall mean Building & Safety of the Department of Development Services of the City of Lancaster. 
"Electrical Code" shall mean Chapter 15.12 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
"Elevator Code" shall mean the 2016 California Elevator Safety Construction Code. 
"Energy Code" shall mean Chapter 15.28 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
"Existing Building Code" shall mean Chapter 15.36 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
"Fire Code" shall mean Chapter 15.32 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
"Green Building Standards Code" shall mean Chapter 15.34 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
"Historical Building Code" shall mean Chapter 15.30 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
"Jurisdiction" shall mean the City of Lancaster. 
"Mechanical Code" shall mean Chapter 15.16 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
"Plumbing Code" shall mean Chapter 15.20 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
"International Property Maintenance Code" shall mean Chapter 15.24 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
"Residential Code" shall mean Chapter 15.09 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
"Technical Codes" shall mean Chapters 15.08, 15.09, 15.10, 15.12, 15.16, 15.20, 15.22, 15.24, 15.28, 15.30, 15.32, 15.34 and 15.36 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
15.04.030 - Building & safety. 
    Section 103.1 of the California Building Code, Chapter 1, Division II, is hereby amended by to read as follows: 
103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. Building & Safety is hereby created within the Department of Development Services and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
15.04.040 - Duties and powers of the building official. 
    Section 104 of the California Building Code, Chapter 1, Division II, is hereby amended by adding subsection 104.12, as follows: 
104.12 Regulations. The Building Official is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
15.04.050 - Permit exempt. 
    Section 105.2 of the California Building Code, Chapter 1, Division II, is hereby amended by adding the following: 
"14. Minor repairs to roof covering which cumulatively totals 100 square feet or 10% of the roof area of any structure regulated by the technical codes, whichever is the least, in any 12 month period. The exemption of a permit shall not be construed to mean that the repairs shall not comply with Chapter 15 of the Building Code." 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
15.04.060 - Permits-Expiration. 
    Section 105.5 of the California Building Code, Chapter 1, Division II, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
105.5 Expiration. Except as set forth in subsection 105.5.1, every permit issued for property within the City of Lancaster shall expire by limitation and become null and void as follows: 
(i)  If work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days from the issuance date of the permit. 
(ii)  If work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days from the issuance date of the permit, such permit shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned. For purposes of this subsection, "suspended or abandoned" shall mean that the permittee has, for a period of 180 days or longer after commencing the work authorized by such permit, failed to make substantial progress toward completion of the work, as determined by the Building Official. Failure to schedule, undergo and/or pass a requisite interim or final inspection for a period of 180 days or longer since the issuance date of the permit or since the most recent interim inspection may be deemed to constitute a failure to make substantial progress toward completion of the work. The Building Official may, in his/her sole discretion, grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
(iii)  In the event of permit expiration, before work authorized pursuant to the expired permit can be commenced or recommenced, a new permit shall first be obtained (hereafter, a "renewal permit"). To obtain a renewal permit, the applicant may be required to resubmit plans and specifications, if deemed necessary by the Building Official and/or the City's Planning Director. The applicant must pay all applicable fees, including but not limited to a plan check fee and building permit fees, in the amount then established by resolution of the City Council. If renewal permits are applied for, a mandatory site inspection shall be performed by Building & Safety to determine that existing conditions and materials comport with this code. All work to be performed under a renewal permit must be performed in accordance with all applicable technical codes, regulations, laws and ordinances in effect on the date of issuance of the renewal permit. Renewal permits are subject to expiration as set forth in (ii), above. 
(iv)  In the event of permit expiration, any work performed under that permit is "unpermitted" as defined in Section 114.1 of this chapter, and is subject to the legalization provisions of section 114.5 of this chapter. 
105.5.1 Expiration - Unpermitted structures or grading. Notwithstanding any provision of section 105.5, if a building permit was issued in order to bring an unpermitted structure, unpermitted grading, or other unlawful, substandard or hazardous condition into compliance with any applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation, such permit shall expire by limitation and become null and void sixty (60) days after the issuance date of such permit, if the permittee has failed to make substantial progress toward completion of the work as determined by the Building Official. Failure to schedule, undergo and/or pass a requisite interim or final inspection for a period of 60 days since the issuance date of the permit or since the most recent interim inspection may be deemed to constitute a failure to make substantial progress toward completion of the work. The Building Official may, in his/her sole discretion, grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 60 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
15.04.070 - Standard plans. 
    Section 107 of the California Building Code, Chapter 1, Division II, is hereby amended by adding the following: 
107.6 Standard Plans. The Building Official may approve a set of plans for a building or structure as a "standard plan," provided that the applicant has made proper application, submitted complete sets of plans as required by this section, and paid the plan review fees required. 
Plans shall reflect laws and ordinances in effect at the time a permit is issued except as provided herein. Nothing in this section shall prohibit modifying the permit set of plans to reflect changes in laws and ordinances, which have become effective since the approval of the standard plan. The standard plan shall become null and void where the work required by such changes exceeds ten percent (10%) of the value of the building or structure. When it is desired to use an approved "standard plan" for an identical structure, the Building Official may require two plot plans and two duplicate plans to be submitted. Such duplicate plans shall be compared and stamped prior to permit issuance. All fees in effect at the time of permit issuance shall be paid prior to permit issuance. 
Standard plans shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of approval, or until the effective date of a Building Code change, whichever comes first. The Building Official may extend this period when no changes in codes or ordinances have occurred. Building permit applications based on standard plans approved prior to the effective date of a Building Code change are valid for a period of 180 days from the date of the application and may not be extended. Building permits issued on applications submitted prior to the effective date of a Building Code change are valid for a period of 180 days from the date of issuance and may not be extended. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
15.04.080 - Fees. 
    Section 109.2 of the California Building Code, Chapter 1, Division II, is hereby amended to read as following: 
109.2 Schedule of Permit fees. On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as adopted by resolution of the City Council of the City of Lancaster, as may be amended from time to time. 
109.6.1 Refund of Permit fees. 
¦ The Building Official shall not authorize the refund of any fee paid except upon the written application filed by the original permit holder. 
¦ No refunds shall be processed for expired permits, or projects that have been abandoned. Abandoned is defined as no work or inspections for 180 days. 
¦ No refunds shall be processed that have exceeded 360 days after the date of the payment. 
¦ The Building Official may authorize the refunding of not more than 80 percent of the plans examination fee paid when an application is withdrawn or cancelled prior to commencing any plan review. 
¦ The Building Official may authorize the refunding of not more than 80 percent of the permit inspection fee paid when a permit that has been issued withdrawn or cancelled by the original permittee before any inspection has been completed and the original permit and inspection card is returned. 
¦ Permit Issuance, Fire Protection, Development Impact, Strong Motion, and Green Building fees are not refundable (unless erroneously paid/collected). This is because the money has already been put to use. If the project was cancelled and/or the property sold, the new developer may receive credit towards Development Impact fees as approved by the City Engineer. 
¦ A processing fee will be applied to all refunds, in accordance with the schedule adopted by resolution of the City Council of the City of Lancaster, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
15.04.090 - Use or occupancy. 
    Section 111.1 of the California Building Code, Chapter 1, Division II, is hereby amended to read as following: 
111.1 Use and Occupancy. No building or structure, regardless of occupancy classification, shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing business or occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the Building Official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefore as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. 
Exception: Certificates of occupancy are not required for work exempt from permits under Section 105.2. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
15.04.100 - Service utilities. 
    Section 112 of the California Building Code, Chapter 1, Division II is hereby amended by adding the following: 
112.4 No building shall be occupied for any purpose until all permanent utilities have been installed and are fully functional. There shall be no exceptions without the express written consent of the Building Official. For purposes of this section, an off-grid energy system, as defined in Section 15.12.050 of the Lancaster Municipal Code, shall be deemed a permanent utility provided the system complies with said Section 15.12.050 and with all off-grid development standards approved by the Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 1, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 1064 , § 1, 5-14-2019) 
15.04.110 - Board of appeals. 
    Section 113 of the California Building Code, Chapter 1, Division II, is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
113 Appeals. Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations of the Building Official are limited to those enumerated in this section, and shall be filed, scheduled and conducted in accordance with this section. 
113.1 Scope. 
A.  Notwithstanding the provisions of the Technical Codes or the State Housing Law (commencing with Section 17910 of Chapter 1 of Division 13 of the Calif. Health and Safety Code), an appeal is limited to the following orders, decisions or determinations of the Building Official: 
(1)  Denials of the proposed use of alternative materials, design or method of construction, installation and/or equipment; 
(2)  Orders to Vacate and/or Not Enter a building, structure, or premises; however, such order shall not be stayed during the pendency of the appeal; 
(3)  Orders to Demolish a building or structure; however, an order to vacate that may be issued in conjunction with an Order to Demolish shall not be stayed during the pendency of the appeal; 
B.  The right of appeal shall not exist for determinations of the Building Official, or a designee thereof, that a violation of any provision of the Technical Codes exists in a building or structure, or portion thereof, or on any premises. 
113.2 Appeal Procedure. 
A.  Any person who is aggrieved by an order, decision or determination of the Building Official as provided in subsection 113.1 may contest said order, decision or determination by filing an appeal, in writing on a City approved form, with the City Clerk within ten (10) business days from the date of service of the order, decision or determination being appealed. The appeal must specify the basis for the appeal in detail, provide a mailing address and telephone number for the appellant, and include the applicable fee. If a timely appeal is not received by the City Clerk, the right to appeal is waived and the order, decision or determination of the Building Official is deemed final and binding. 
B.  Appeals shall be heard before an impartial hearing officer, designated by the City Manager or his/her designee. Only those matters or issues specifically raised in the written appeal shall be considered in the hearing. 
C.  If the appellant fails to appear, the hearing officer shall cancel the hearing and send a notice thereof to the appellant by first class mail to the address stated on the appeal form. A cancellation of a hearing due to non-appearance of the appellant shall constitute the appellant's waiver of the right to appeal. In such instances, the order, decision or determination of the Building Official is final and binding. 
D.  Appeal hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. The order, decision or determination of the Building Official shall be prima facie evidence of the violation. The appellant, and the Building Official or his/her designee shall have the opportunity to present relevant evidence and witness testimony. The appellant may represent himself/herself or be represented by anyone of his/her choice. The appellant may bring an interpreter to the hearing at his/her sole expense. 
E.  Within thirty calendar days following the appeal hearing, the hearing officer shall affirm, modify or rescind the order, decision or determination of the Building Official. A written decision shall be served on the appellant by first class mail to the address stated on the appeal form. Failure of an appellant to receive a properly addressed decision shall not invalidate any action or proceeding by the City. 
F.  Any person who is aggrieved by the decision of the hearing officer may appeal said decision to the Board of Appeals, which shall be comprised of members of the City Council and the Building Official, who shall be an ex officio member. An appeal shall be in writing, must be filed in the same manner, within the same time period, and contain the same information, as an appeal to hearing officer, as provided in Subsection A of this Section. A second appeal fee must accompany the written appeal. If a timely appeal is not received by the City Clerk, the decision of the hearing officer is deemed final and binding. Failure to appeal a decision to the Board of Appeals shall constitute a failure to exhaust the aggrieved person's administrative remedy. 
G.  Appeals before the Board of Appeals shall be conducted in the manner set forth in Chapter 2.44 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
113.3 Limitation on Authority of Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall have no authority to waive the technical requirements of the Building Code or other technical codes adopted in Title 15 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
113.4 Appeals of Actions Related to Access to Public Accommodation by Physically Handicapped Persons. The City Council shall have the authority to review decisions by the Building Official in enforcement of the requirements of the California Health & Safety Code, sections 19955 through 19959, related to access to public accommodation by physically handicapped persons. Appeals of such decisions shall be filed, scheduled and conducted in the manner set forth in Chapter 2.44 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
15.04.120 - Violations-Unlawful acts. 
    Subsection 114.1 of the California Building Code, Chapter 1, Division II, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
114.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish, occupy or maintain any building, structure, equipment, installation or land regulated by the Technical Codes, or cause or permit the same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of the Technical Codes. 
114.1.1 Unpermitted structures. No person shall own, use, occupy or maintain an unpermitted structure. For purposes of this section, "unpermitted structure" shall be defined as any building or structure, or portion thereof, or any electrical, plumbing, mechanical or other installation or fixture, that was erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, connected, installed, converted, demolished or equipped, at any point in time by any person, without the required permit(s) having first been obtained from the Building Official or with a valid permit as issued by the Building Official which subsequently expired and became null and void. 
114.1.2 Unpermitted grading. No person shall own, use, occupy or maintain unpermitted grading. For purposes of this section, "unpermitted grading" shall be defined as any land which has been excavated, cut, filled, graded, compacted or terraced, at any point in time by any person, without the required permit(s) having first been obtained from the Building Official or with a valid permit as issued by the building which subsequently expired and became null and void. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
15.04.130 - Violations-Violation penalties. 
    Subsection 114.4 of the California Building Code, Chapter 1, Division II, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
114.4 Violation Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of the Technical codes, or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who erects, constructs, alters, repairs or maintains a building, structure, installation or equipment, or excavates, cuts, fills, grades, compacts or maintains land in violation of approved construction documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the Technical Codes, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to the punishments set forth in Chapter 1.12 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
15.04.140 - Violations-Legalizing procedures. 
    Subsection 114 of the California Building Code, Chapter 1, Division II, is hereby amended by adding thereto Subsection 114.5, Procedure for legalizing unpermitted structures or grading, to read as follows: 
114.5 Procedure for legalizing unpermitted structures or grading. The procedures specified within subsections 114.5.1 through 114.5.6 shall be followed whenever an attempt is made to legalize an unpermitted structure or unpermitted grading. 
114.5.1 Permits. Any person who wishes to legalize an unpermitted structure or unpermitted grading, as defined in Subsections 114.1.1 and 114.1.2, shall obtain all applicable permits. Unpermitted structures and grading shall comply with all current Technical Code requirements and other required approvals pursuant to the Lancaster Municipal Code in order to be legalized. Permits obtained to legalize unpermitted structures or grading shall expire as set forth in Section 105.5.1 of this code. 
114.5.2 Plans. Prior to the issuance or granting of any permit to legalize an unpermitted structure, plans showing the plot plan, exterior elevations, existing structures, proposed structures and proposed finish materials shall be submitted to the Building Official and Planning Director, or their designees, for review and approval. 
114.5.3 Grading. Prior to the issuance or granting of any permit to legalize unpermitted grading, a grading and drainage plan showing the original grade and existing unpermitted grade on the premises the existing grade on adjoining properties, and a soils report shall be submitted to the Building Official for review and approval. 
114.5.4 Inspections. Unpermitted structures or unpermitted grading for which a permit has subsequently been obtained shall be subject to inspection by the Building Official in accordance with, and in the manner prescribed in, the Technical Codes. The Building Official may require the removal of finish materials in order to expose framing elements, electrical components, plumbing fixtures or mechanical systems, or may require the removal of fill, to verify that installation, construction or grading was performed in conformance with the Technical Codes. 
114.5.5 Investigation. Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this code has commenced on land or in connection with any type of structure without first obtaining said permit a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. For purposes of this section, "special investigation" shall include, but is not limited to, inspecting premises and structures, reviewing permit, license and other records of the City or other agencies, reviewing plans, taking photographs, engaging in conferences and communications with other officials of the City or other agencies, and engaging in conferences and communications with owners or other responsible persons concerning the unpermitted structure or grading. 
114.5.5.1 Fee. A special investigation fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of a permit for an unpermitted structure or unpermitted grading. The fee shall be equal to the amount of time expended by City officials in undertaking the special investigation, as defined in Section 114.5.5, charged at the hourly rate that has been established by resolution of the City Council for recovery of code enforcement reinspection fees. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor from any penalty prescribed by law. 
114.5.6 Unpermitted structures or grading which cannot be legalized. If the Planning Director determines that the City's zoning regulations prohibit legalization of any unpermitted structure, the structure shall be demolished or, if previously permitted, restored to its original approved condition, with all requisite permits, inspections and approvals. 
If the Building Official determines that an unpermitted structure cannot be made to conform to the current applicable Technical Code requirements, the structure shall be demolished or, if previously permitted, restored to its original approved condition, with all requisite permits, inspections and approvals. 
If the Building Official determines that unpermitted grading and/or lot drainage cannot be made to conform with current applicable Technical Code requirements, the land shall be fully restored to the condition that preceded the unpermitted grading, with all requisite permits, inspections and approvals. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
Chapter 15.08 - BUILDING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1018, § 2, adopted December 13, 2016, repealed ch. 15.08, §§ 15.08.010-15.08.040, in its entirety; and enacted a new ch. 15.08 to read as set out herein. Former ch. 15.08 pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Ord. No. 958, § 2, adopted January 11, 2011; Ord. No. 994, § 2, adopted November 12, 2013; Ord. No. 1009, § 1, adopted November 10, 2015. 

15.08.010 - California Building Code provisions adopted by reference. 
A.  That certain building code known and designated as volumes 1 and 2 of the 2016 California Building Code, including appendix C; appendix F; appendix G; appendix H; appendix I; and appendix J; incorporating by adoption the 2015 edition of the International Building Code with necessary California amendments, all published by the International Conference of Building Officials, and as herein amended, are hereby adopted by reference, and such codes shall be and become the Lancaster Building Code, regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, use, height, area and maintenance of all structures and certain equipment therein, and the grading of premises, and providing penalties for violation of such codes. 
B.  One copy of said 2016 California Building Code has been deposited in the office of the city clerk and shall be at all times maintained by said clerk for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 2, 12-13-2016) 
15.08.030 - Roof covering-Wood shakes and wood shingles. 
    Sections 1505.6, 1505.7, 1507.8, 1507.9 and Tables 1507.8,1507.8.5, 1507.8.7, 1507.9.6 and 1507.9.8 of the 2016 California Building Code and all references in any of the technical or administrative codes to said sections or to wood shakes and/or wood shingles, whether or not fire-rated, fire treated, or fire-retardant-treated or any similar terminology, are hereby deleted. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 2, 12-13-2016) 
Chapter 15.09 - RESIDENTIAL CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1018, § 3, adopted December 13, 2016, repealed ch. 15.09, §§ 15.09.010, 15.09.020, in its entirety; and enacted a new ch. 15.09 to read as set out herein. Former ch. 15.09 pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Ord. No. 958, § 4, adopted January 11, 2011 and Ord. No. 994, § 3, adopted November 12, 2013. 

15.09.010 - California Residential Code Provisions adopted by reference. 
A.  That certain residential code known and designated as the 2016 California Residential Code, including appendix H, appendix J, appendix K, appendix N and appendix S, incorporating by adoption the 2015 edition of the International Residential Code with necessary California amendments, all published by the International Conference of Building Officials, and as herein amended, are hereby adopted by reference, and such codes shall be and become the Lancaster Residential Code for Buildings and Construction regulating the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every detached one-and two-family dwelling, townhouse and certain equipment therein, and the grading of premises, and providing penalties for violation of such codes. 
B.  One copy of said 2016 California Residential Code has been deposited in the office of the city clerk, and shall be at all times maintained by said clerk for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 3, 12-13-2016) 
15.09.020 - Roof covering-Wood shakes and wood shingles. 
    Sections R905.7, R905.8, and Tables R905.7.4, R905.7.5(1)(2), R905.8.5, and R905.8.6 of the 2016 California Residential Code and all references in any of the technical or administrative codes to said sections or to wood shakes and/or wood shingles, whether or not fire-rated, fire treated, or fire-retardant-treated or any similar terminology, are hereby deleted. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 3, 12-13-2016) 
Chapter 15.12 - ELECTRICAL CODE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1018, § 5, adopted December 13, 2016, repealed ch. 15.12, §§ 15.12.010-15.12.040, in its entirety; and enacted a new ch. 15.12 to read as set out herein. Former ch. 15.12 pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Ord. No. 994, § 5, adopted November 12, 2013. 

15.12.010 - California Electrical Code adopted by reference. 
A.  That certain electrical code known and designated as the 2016 California Electrical Code, incorporating by adoption the National Electrical Code, 2014 Edition, by the National Fire Protection Association, with necessary California amendments, all published by BNI Publications, Inc., and as herein amended, is hereby adopted by reference, and such code shall be and become the Lancaster Electrical Code, regulating the installation, arrangement, alteration, repair, maintenance, use and operation of electrical wiring, connections, fixtures, equipment and other electrical appliances. 
B.  One copy of said 2016 California Electrical Code has been deposited in the office of the city clerk and shall be at all times maintained by said clerk for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 5, 12-13-2016) 
15.12.020 - Registered maintenance electricians. 
A.  In lieu of an individual permit for each installation or alteration, an annual permit may be issued to any person, firm or corporation regularly employing one or more registered maintenance electricians for the installation and maintenance of electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus, or equipment or premises owned or occupied by the applicant for the permit. The application for such annual permit shall be made in writing to the building official and shall contain a description of the premises upon which work is to be done under the permit. Within not more than fifteen (15) days following the end of each calendar month, the person, firm or corporation to which an annual permit is issued shall transmit to the building official a report of all electrical work which has been done under the annual permit during the preceding month. A fee specified in the fee schedule shall be paid for each annual registered maintenance electrician's permit at the time such permit is issued. In addition, fees shall be paid for all work installed under such a permit, in accordance with the fee schedule, at the time the work is inspected. 
B.  "Registered maintenance electrician" shall mean a person holding a valid certificate of registration as maintenance electrician issued by the county. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 5, 12-13-2016) 
15.12.030 - Dangerous electrical equipment. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, any electrical equipment existing in any type of occupancy which has any or all of the conditions or defects described as follows shall be deemed dangerous, and such equipment shall be replaced, repaired, reinstalled, reconstructed or removed: 
A.  The service panel(s) or sub-panel(s) show visual evidence of an overload. 
B.  The working space in front of any service panel or sub-panel as outlined in table 110.26(A)(1) is not properly maintained. 
C.  Live front panels are being maintained or used. 
D.  The fuses or circuit breakers are rated higher than those permitted by the Electrical Code. 
E.  The electrical conductor is in an unapproved raceway. 
F.  The electrical conductors from different classes of service are in a common raceway. 
G.  Drop cords greater than six feet in length are used to connect electrical appliances. 
H.  The electrical equipment is not properly grounded for the protection of the electrical equipment as determined by the use being made thereof. 
I.  The electrical equipment is broken, cracked, or not properly maintained to meet the standards existing at the time the equipment was approved. 
J.  The electrical equipment is unsafe for the use intended. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 5, 12-13-2016) 
15.12.040 - Solar photovoltaic systems. 
    Article 690 of the 2016 California Electrical Code is hereby amended by adding the following: 
690.15.1 Disconnecting Means for Multiple Arrays 
Where more than one array is combined to form a single output rated more than 50 volts and/or 10 amperes, a disconnecting means rated for the output shall be installed immediately adjacent to the combiner box on the output side. 
Exception: If the combiner box is located adjacent to the inverter(s), the disconnecting means as stated above shall not be required. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 5, 12-13-2016) 
15.12.050 - Stand-alone energy systems. 
(a)  General. Lancaster residents and business owners are permitted to construct and operate stand-alone electric energy systems, including, but not limited to, solar photovoltaic systems, fuel cell systems, battery systems, and wind electric systems, which can be disconnected from any and all utility grids and can operate with or without electrical energy storage ("Off-Grid Systems"). 
(b)  Compliance with State and Local Laws. Any and all such Off-Grid Systems must comply with all applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by state and local permitting authorities, including, but not limited to, those set forth in the California Electrical Code and the California Energy Code, as may be amended from time to time, as well as all off-grid development standards approved by the Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 1064 , § 2, 5-14-2019) 
Chapter 15.16 - MECHANICAL CODE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 958, § 6, adopted January 11, 2011, repealed and replaced ch. 15.16, § 15.16.010, in its entirety. Former ch. 15.16 pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Ord. No. 810; Ord. No. 890 § 5, adopted 2007 and Ord. No. 958, § 6, January 11, 2011. 

15.16.010 - California Mechanical Code adopted by reference. 
A.  That certain mechanical code known and designated as the 2016 California Mechanical Code, including appendix F, incorporating by adoption the Uniform Mechanical Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, with necessary California amendments, is hereby adopted by reference, and shall be and become the Lancaster Mechanical Code regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use and maintenance of heating, ventilating, cooling, refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other miscellaneous heating ventilating, and air conditioning appliances on premises within the city. 
B.  One copy of said 2016 California Mechanical Code has been deposited in the office of the city clerk and shall be at all times maintained by said clerk for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 994, § 6, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 1018, § 6, 12-13-2016) 
Chapter 15.20 - PLUMBING CODE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1018, § 7, adopted December 13, 2016, repealed ch. 15.20, §§ 15.20.010-15.20.050, in its entirety; and enacted a new ch. 15.20 to read as set out herein. Former ch. 15.20 pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Ord. No. 994, § 7, adopted November 12, 2013. 

15.20.010 - California Plumbing Code adopted by reference. 
A.  That certain plumbing code known and designated as the 2016 California Plumbing Code, incorporating by adoption the Uniform Plumbing Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, including appendices A, B, D, G, H and I with necessary California amendments, and as herein amended, is hereby adopted by reference, and such code shall be and become the Lancaster Plumbing Code regulating plumbing, drainage, building sewers, and private sewage disposal systems and prescribing conditions under which such work may be carried on within the city and providing for the issuance of permits. 
B.  One copy of said 2016 California Plumbing Code has been deposited in the office of the city clerk and shall be at all times maintained by said clerk for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 7, 12-13-2016) 
15.20.020 - Issuance of permits. 
A.  No permit shall be issued to any person to do or cause to be done any plumbing work regulated by this code unless such person is a duly licensed contractor as required by Chapter 9, Division 3 commencing with Section 7000 of the Business and Professions Code of the State of California except as otherwise provided herein. 
B.  Any permit required by this code may be issued to a person to do any plumbing work regulated by this code in a single-family dwelling used exclusively for living purposes, including common accessory and minor poultry or agricultural buildings in the event that such person is the bona fide owner of such dwelling and accessory buildings and that the same are occupied and used exclusively by or are designated to be occupied and used exclusively by said owner. An owner may be issued a permit for, or perform any plumbing work covered by this code on a duplex (maximum two units) where one unit is used and occupied exclusively by the bona fide owner. An owner or property manager shall not be issued a permit for, or perform any plumbing work regulated by this code on any rental or lease property except for a duplex (maximum two units) where one unit is exclusively used and occupied by the bona fide owner. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 7, 12-13-2016) 
Chapter 15.22 - SECURITY CODE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1018, § 8, adopted December 13, 2016, repealed ch. 15.22, §§ 15.22.010-15.22.170, in its entirety; and enacted a new ch. 15.22 to read as set out herein. Former ch. 15.22 pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Ord. No. 994, § 8, adopted November 12, 2013. 

15.22.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to set forth minimum standards of construction for resistance to unlawful entry. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 8, 12-13-2016) 
15.22.020 - Scope. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to enclosed groups B, F, M, R and S occupancies and enclosed private garages. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 8, 12-13-2016) 
15.22.030 - Limitations. 
    No provisions of this chapter shall require or be construed to require devices on exit doors or on sleeping room emergency exits contrary to the requirements specified in Chapter 10 and Section 310.4 of the California Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 8, 12-13-2016) 
15.22.040 - Alternate security provisions. 
    The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the use of any device or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this code when such alternate provides equivalent security based on a recommendation of the county sheriff or the city public safety office. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 8, 12-13-2016) 
15.22.050 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows: 
"Cylinder guard" is a protective metal device of hardened steel, or with a hardened steel insert, that covers or surrounds the exposed portion of the lock cylinder for the purpose of protecting the cylinder from wrenching, prying, cutting, driving through or pulling out by attack tools. 
"Deadbolt" is a bolt which has no automatic spring action and which is operated by a key cylinder, thumb-turn or lever, and is positively held fast when in the projected position. 
"Deadlocking latch" is a latch in which the latch bolt is positively held in the projected position by a guard bolt, plunger or auxiliary mechanism. 
"Latch" is a device for automatically retaining the door in a closed position upon its closing. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 8, 12-13-2016) 
15.22.060 - Tests: Sliding glass doors. 
    Panels shall be closed and locked. Tests shall be performed in the following order: 
15.22.061 Test A. With the panels in the normal position, a concentrated load of three hundred (300) pounds shall be applied separately to each vertical pull stile incorporating a locking device, at a point or the stile within six inches (152.4 mm) of the locking device, in the direction parallel to the plane of glass that would tend to open the door. 
15.22.062 Test B. Repeat test A while simultaneously adding a concentrated load of one hundred fifty (150) pound[s] to the same area of the same stile in a direction perpendicular to the plane of glass toward the interior side of the door. 
15.22.063 Test C. Repeat test B with the one hundred fifty (150) pound[s] (667.2 N) force in the reversed direction toward the exterior side of the door. 
15.22.064 Tests D, E, and F. Repeat tests A, B and C with the movable panel lifted upwards to its full limit within the confines of the door frame. 
15.22.065 Identification. Sliding glass door assemblages subject to the provisions of this section shall bear a label or other approved means of identification indicating compliance with these tests. The label shall be a type authorized through a recognized testing agency which provides periodic follow-up inspection service. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 8, 12-13-2016) 
15.22.070 - Tests: Sliding glass windows. 
    Sash shall be closed and locked. Tests shall be performed in the following order: 
15.22.071 Test A. With the sliding sash in the normal position, a concentrated load of one hundred fifty (150) pounds shall be applied separately to each sash member incorporating a locking device, at a point on the sash member within six inches (152.4 mm) of the locking device, in the direction parallel to the plane of glass that would tend to open the window. 
15.22.072 Test B. Repeat test A while simultaneously adding a concentrated load of seventy-five (75) pounds to the same area of the same sash member in the direction perpendicular to the plane of glass toward the interior side of the window. 
15.22.073 Test C. Repeat test B with the seventy-five (75) pounds of force in the reversed direction toward the exterior side of the window. 
15.22.074 Tests D, E and F Repeat tests A, B and C with the movable sash lifted upwards to its full limit within the confines of the window frame. 
15.22.075 Identification. Sliding glass window assemblages subject to the provisions of this section shall bear a label or other approved means of identification indicating compliance with these tests. The label shall be a type authorized through a recognized testing agency which provides periodic follow up inspection service. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 8, 12-13-2016) 
15.22.080 - Doors: General. 
    A door forming a part of the enclosure of a dwelling unit or of an area occupied by one tenant of a building shall be constructed, installed, and secured as set forth in Sections 15.22.090, 15.22.110 and 15.22.120, when such door is directly reachable or capable of being reached from a street, highway, yard, court, passageway, corridor, balcony, patio, breezeway, private garage, portion of the building which is available for use by the public or other tenants, or similar area. A door enclosing a private garage with an interior opening leading directly to a dwelling unit shall also comply with said Sections 15.22.090, 15.22.100, 15.22.110 and 15.22.120. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 8, 12-13-2016) 
15.22.090 - Doors: Swinging doors. 
15.22.091 Swinging wooden doors which are operable from the inside without the use of a key shall be of one of the following constructions or shall be of a construction having equivalent forced entry resistance: 
15.22.091.1 Solid core doors not less than one and three-eighths inches (35 mm) in thickness. 
15.22.091.2 Wood panel type doors with panels fabricated of lumber not less than one and three-eighths inches (34.9 mm) thick, provided shaped portions of the panels are not less than one-fourth-inch (6.4 mm) thick. Individual panels shall not exceed 300 square inches (0.19 m 2 ) in area. Stiles and rails shall be of solid umber with overall dimensions of not less than one and three-eighths inches (35 mm) in thickness and three inches (76 mm) in width. Mullions shall be considered a part of adjacent panels unless sized as required here in for stiles and rails, except mullions not over eighteen (18) inches (457 mm) long may have an overall width of not less than two inches (51 mm). Carved areas shall have a thickness of not less than three-eighths-inch (9.5 mm). Dimensional tolerances published in recognized industry standards may be utilized. 
15.22.091.3 Hollow core doors or doors less than one and three-eighths inches (35 mm) in thickness, either of which are covered on the inside face with 16-gauge sheet metal attached with screws at six inches (152 mm) maximum centers around the perimeter. Lights in doors shall be as set forth in Sections 15.22.140 and 15.22.150. 
15.22.092 A single swinging door, the active leaf of a pair of doors, and the bottom leaf of Dutch doors shall be equipped with a deadbolt and a latch. If a key-locking feature is incorporated in the latching mechanism, a dead latch shall be used. The deadbolt and latch may be activated by one lock or by individual locks. Deadbolts shall contain hardened inserts, or the equivalent, so as to repel cutting tool attack. The deadbolt lock or locks shall be key operated from the exterior side of the door and engaged or disengaged from the interior side of the door by a device not requiring a key, tool or excessive force. 
Exceptions: 
1.  The latch may be omitted from doors in group B occupancies. 
2.  In other than residential occupancies, locks maybe key operated, or otherwise operated from the inside when not prohibited by Chapter 10 of the California Building Code or other laws and regulations. 
3.  A swinging door of greater than five feet (1,524 mm) width may be secured as set forth in Section 15.22.110. 
4.  In residential occupancies, doors not required by Section 310.4 or 1004.1 of the California Building Code may be equipped with security type hardware which requires a key to release from the interior side of the door if the sleeping rooms are protected with a fire warning system as set forth in Section 310.9 of the California Building Code and an automatic sprinkler system as required by Section 903.2.8 of the California Building Code. 
A straight deadbolt shall have a minimum throw of one-inch (25.4 mm) and the embedment shall not be less than five-eighths-inch (15.9 mm) into the holding device receiving the projected bolt. A hook shape or expanding lug deadbolt shall have a minimum throw of three-fourth-inch (19 mm) All deadbolts of locks which automatically activate two or more deadbolts shall embed at least one-half-inch (12.7 mm), but need not exceed three-fourth-inch (19 mm), into the holding devices receiving the projected bolts. 
15.22.093 The inactive leaf of a pair of doors and the upper leaf of Dutch doors shall be equipped with a deadbolt or deadbolts as set forth in Section 6709.2. 
Exceptions: 
1.  The bolt or bolts need not be key operated, but shall not be otherwise activated, from the exterior side of the door. 
2.  The bolt or bolts may be engaged or disengaged automatically with the deadbolt or by another device on the active leaf or lower leaf. 
3.  Manually operated hardened bolts that are at the top and bottom of the leaf and which embed a minimum of one-half-inch (12.7 mm) into the device receiving the projected bolt may be used when not prohibited by Chapter 10 or other laws and regulations. 
15.22.094 Doorstops on wooden jambs for in swinging doors shall be of one-piece construction with the jamb or joined by a rabbet. 
15.22.095 Non removable pins shall be used in pin type hinges which are accessible from the outside when the door is closed. 
15.22.096 Cylinder guards shall be installed on cylinder locks for deadbolts whenever the cylinder projects beyond the outside face of the door or is otherwise accessible to attack tools. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 8, 12-13-2016) 
15.22.100 - Doors: Sliding glass doors. 
    Sliding glass doors shall be equipped with locking devices and shall be so installed that, when subjected to tests specified in Section 15.22.060, they remain intact and engaged. Movable panels shall not be rendered easily openable or removable from the frame during or after the tests. Cylinder guards shall be installed on all mortise or rim type cylinder locks installed in hollow metal doors whenever the cylinder projects beyond the face of the door or is otherwise accessible to gripping tools. Locking devices installed on sliding glass doors providing the exit required by Section 1003 or providing for the emergency escape or rescue required by Section 310.4 shall be releasable from the inside without the use of a key, tool or excessive force. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 8, 12-13-2016) 
15.22.110 - Doors: Overhead and sliding doors. 
    Metal or wooden overhead and sliding doors shall be secured with a deadbolt lock, padlock with a hardened steel shackle, or equivalent when not otherwise locked by electric power operation. Locking devices, when installed at the jamb of metal or wooden overhead doors, shall be installed on both jambs when such doors exceed nine feet (2,743 mm) in width. Metal or wooden sliding doors exceeding nine feet (2,743 mm) in width and provided with a jam blocking device shall have the door side opposite the lock restrained by a guide or retainer. Cylinder guards shall be installed on all mortise or rim type cylinder locks installed in hollow metal doors whenever the cylinder projects beyond the face of the door or is otherwise accessible to gripping tools. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 8, 12-13-2016) 
15.22.120 - Doors: Metal accordion grate or grille-type doors. 
    Metal accordion grate or grille type doors shall be equipped with metal guides at top and bottom, and a cylinder lock or padlock and hardened steel shackle shall be provided. Cylinder guards shall be installed on all mortise or rim type cylinder locks installed in hollow metal doors whenever the cylinder projects beyond the face of the door or is otherwise accessible to gripping tools. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 8, 12-13-2016) 
15.22.130 - Lights: general. 
    A window, skylight or other light forming a part of the enclosure of a dwelling unit or of an area occupied by one tenant of a building shall be constructed, installed and secured as set forth in Sections 15.22.140 and 15.22.150, when the bottom of such window, skylight or light is not more than sixteen (16) feet (4,877 mm) above the grade of a street, highway, yard, court, passageway, corridor, balcony, patio, breezeway private garage, portion of the building which is available for use by the public or other tenants, or similar area. A window enclosing a private garage with an interior opening leading directly to a dwelling unit shall also comply with Sections 15.22.140 and 15.22.150. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 8, 12-13-2016) 
15.22.140 - Lights: material. 
    Lights within forty (40) inches (1,016 mm) of a required locking device on a door when in the closed and locked position and openable from the inside without the use of a key, and lights with a least dimension greater than six inches (152 mm) but less than forty-eight (48) inches (1,219 mm) in groups B, F, M and S occupancies, shall be fully tempered glass, laminated glass of at least one-fourth-inch (6.4 mm) thickness, approved burglary resistant material, or guarded by metal bars, screens or grilles in an approved manner. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 8, 12-13-2016) 
15.22.150 - Lights: Locking devices. 
15.22.151 Locking devices installed on windows providing the emergency egress required by Section 310.4 shall be releasable from the inside without use of a key, tool or excessive force. 
15.22.152 Sliding glass windows shall be provided with locking devices that, when subject to the tests specified in Section 15.22.070, remain intact and engaged. Movable panels shall not be rendered easily openable or removable from the frame during or after the tests. 
15.22.153 Other openable windows shall be provided with substantial locking devices which render the building as secure as the devices required by this section. In groups B, F, M and S occupancies, such devices shall be a glide bar, bolt, cross bar, and/or padlock with hardened steel shackle. 
15.22.154 Special. Louvered windows, except those above the first story in group R occupancies which cannot be reached without a ladder, shall be of material or guarded as specified in Section 15.22.140, and individual panes shall be securely fastened by mechanical fasteners that require a tool for removal and are not accessible on the outside when the window is in the closed position. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 8, 12-13-2016) 
15.22.160 - Other openings: General. 
    Openings, other than doors or lights, which form a part of the enclosure, or portion thereof, housing a single occupant, and the bottom of which is not more than sixteen (16) feet (4,877 mm) above the grade of a street, highway, yard, court, passageway, corridor, balcony, patio, breezeway or similar area, or from a private garage, or from a portion of the building which is occupied, used or available for use by the public or other tenants, or an opening enclosing a private garage attached to a dwelling unit with openings therein, shall be constructed, installed and secured as set forth in Section 15.22.170. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 8, 12-13-2016) 
15.22.170 - Hatchways, scuttles and similar openings. 
15.22.171 Wooden hatchways of less than one and three-fourths-inch-thick (44 mm) solid wood shall be covered on the inside with 16-gage sheet metal attached with screws at six-inch-maximum (152 mm) centers around perimeter. 
15.22.172 The hatchway shall be secured from the inside with a slide bar, slide bolt, and/or padlock with a hardened steel shackle. 
15.22.173 Outside pin type hinges shall be provided with non-removable pins or a means by which the door cannot be opened through removal of hinge pins while the door is in the closed position. 
15.22.174 Other openings exceeding ninety-six (96) square inches (0.062 m 2 ) with a least dimension exceeding eight inches (203 mm) shall be secured by metal bars, screens or grilles in an approved manner. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 8, 12-13-2016) 
Chapter 15.24 - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1018, § 9, adopted December 13, 2016, repealed ch. 15.24, §§ 15.24.010-15.24.190, in its entirety; and enacted a new ch. 15.24 to read as set out herein. Former ch. 15.24 pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Ord. No. 994, § 9, adopted November 12, 2013. 

15.24.010 - International Property Maintenance Code provisions adopted by reference. 
A.  That certain property maintenance code known and designated as of the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code, including appendix A, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, as herein amended, is hereby adopted by reference, and such codes shall be and become the International Property Maintenance Code of Lancaster, regulating the use and maintenance of all existing structures, premises and certain equipment therein, and providing penalties for violation of such codes. 
B.  One copy of said 2015 Property Maintenance Code has been deposited in the office of the city clerk and shall be at all times maintained by said clerk for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 9, 12-13-2016) 
15.24.020 - Title. 
    Section 101.1 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the International Property Maintenance Code of Lancaster, hereinafter referred to as "this chapter." 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 9, 12-13-2016) 
15.24.030 - Application of other codes. 
    Section 102.3 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
102.3 Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations of a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the Lancaster Building Code, Lancaster Residential Code, Lancaster Energy Code, Lancaster Fire Code, Lancaster Zoning Code, Lancaster Plumbing Code, Lancaster Mechanical Code and Lancaster Electrical Code. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 9, 12-13-2016) 
15.24.040 - Enforcement authority. 
    Section 103.1 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
103.1 Enforcement Authority. The Building Official of the City of Lancaster shall be the "code official" as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 9, 12-13-2016) 
15.24.050 - Deputies. 
    Section 103.3 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
103.3 Deputies. Building inspectors, code enforcement officers, public safety officers and other City personnel designated by the City Manager and/or the Building Official are hereby appointed as deputies of the Building Official for purposes of enforcement of this chapter, and are authorized to undertake such investigation, inspection and enforcement actions as necessary to enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 9, 12-13-2016) 
15.24.060 - Fees. 
    Section 103.5 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
103.5 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under this chapter shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as adopted by resolution of the City Council of the City of Lancaster as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 9, 12-13-2016) 
15.24.070 - Duties and powers of the code official. 
    Section 104 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended by adding subsection 104.7, to read as follows: 
104.7 Regulations. The code official is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 9, 12-13-2016) 
15.24.080 - Violations. 
    Section 106 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
106 Violations. It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any requirement of this chapter. Any person violating this chapter is subject to the penalty, administrative and abatement provisions set forth in Chapters 1.12, 1.16 and 8.28 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 9, 12-13-2016) 
15.24.090 - Notices and orders. 
    Section 107 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
107 Notices and orders. Whenever the code official determines that there has been a violation of this chapter or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, he/she may give notice in a manner that comports with the Lancaster Administrative Code, Lancaster Dangerous Buildings Code, other applicable provisions of the Lancaster Municipal Code, and/or the State Housing Law (commencing with Section 17910 of the California Health & Safety Code). 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 9, 12-13-2016) 
15.24.100 - Unsafe structures and equipment. 
    Section 108.1.1 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
108.1.1 Unsafe structures. An unsafe structure is one that is found to be dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains unsafe equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or complete collapse is possible. A vacant structure that is not adequately secured against entry is hereby deemed unsafe. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 9, 12-13-2016) 
15.24.110 - Appeals. 
    Section 111 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby repealed in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
111 Appeals. Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations of the Building Official are limited to those enumerated in Chapter 15.04 of this code, and shall be filed, scheduled and conducted in accordance with the provisions set forth in said Chapter 15.04. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 9, 12-13-2016) 
15.24.120 - Terms defined in other codes. 
    Section 201.3 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this chapter and are defined in the Lancaster Building Code, Lancaster Fire Code, Lancaster Zoning Code, Lancaster Plumbing Code, Lancaster Mechanical Code or Lancaster Electrical Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as stated in those codes. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 9, 12-13-2016) 
15.24.130 - Definitions. 
    Section 201.6 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby added to read as follows: 
201.6 Definitions. Whenever any of the names or terms defined in this section is used in this Code, each such name or term shall be deemed and construed to have the meaning ascribed to be in this section as follows: 
"Building Code" shall mean chapter 15.08 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
"Code Official" shall mean the Building and Safety Official of the City of Lancaster. 
"Electrical Code" shall mean Chapter 15.12 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
"Elevator Code" shall mean the 2016 California Elevator Safety Construction Code. 
"Energy Code" shall mean Chapter 15.28 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
"Fire Code" shall mean Chapter 15.32 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
"Green Building Standards Code" shall mean Chapter 15.34 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
"Historical Building Code" shall mean Chapter 15.30 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
"Jurisdiction" shall mean the City of Lancaster. 
"Mechanical Code" shall mean Chapter 15.16 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
"Plumbing Code" shall mean Chapter 15.20 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
"Property Maintenance Code" shall mean Chapter 15.24 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
"Residential Code" shall mean Chapter 15.09 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
"Technical Codes" shall mean Chapters 15.08, 15.09, 15.10, 15.12, 15.16, 15.20, 15.22, 15.24, 15.28, 15.30, 15.32 and 15.34 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 9, 12-13-2016) 
15.24.140 - General. 
    Section 202 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended by amending the definitions of "owner" and "person" and by adding the definition of "responsible person," as follows: 
202 General definitions. 
Owner. Any person having legal title to, or who leases, rents, occupies or has charge, control or possession of, any real property in the City, and/or the personal property thereon, including all persons shown as owners on the last equalized assessment roll of the Los Angeles County Assessor's Office. Owners include persons with powers of attorney, executors of estates, trustees, court appointed administrators, conservators, guardians or receivers. 
Person. Any individual, partnership of any kind, corporation, limited liability company, association, joint venture or other organization or entity, however formed, as well as trustees, heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, or any combination of such persons. "Person" also includes any public entity or agency that acts as an owner in the City. 
Responsible Person. Any person, whether as an owner as defined herein, or otherwise, that allows, causes, creates, maintains or permits a violation of this code, by any act or the omission of any act or duty. The actions or inactions of a responsible person's agent, employee, representative or contractor may be attributed to that responsible person. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 9, 12-13-2016) 
15.24.150 - Weeds. 
    Section 302.4 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
302.4 Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of six (6) inches. All noxious weeks shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plans and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers, fruits and/or vegetables. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 9, 12-13-2016) 
15.24.160 - Insect screens. 
    Section 304.14 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
304.14 Insect screens. Every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of minimum 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. 
Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 9, 12-13-2016) 
15.24.170 - Heating and air conditioning facilities. 
    Section 602 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
602 Heating and Air Conditioning Facilities 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 9, 12-13-2016) 
15.24.180 - Facilities required. 
    Section 602.1 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
602.1 Facilities required. Heating and air conditioning facilities shall be provided in structures as required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 9, 12-13-2016) 
15.24.190 - Residential occupancies. 
    Section 602.2.1 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby added as follows: 
602.2.1 Residential occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with air conditioning facilities at all times, capable of maintaining a maximum room temperature of 80ºF in all habitable rooms. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 9, 12-13-2016) 
15.24.200 - Heat and air conditioning supply. 
    Section 602.3 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units shall supply heat at all times to maintain a minimum temperature of 68º F (20º C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 9, 12-13-2016) 
15.24.210 - Air conditioning supply. 
    Section 602.3.1 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby added as follows: 
602.3.1 Air conditioning supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units shall supply air conditioning at all times, to maintain a maximum temperature of 80º F in all habitable rooms, 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 9, 12-13-2016) 
15.24.220 - Occupiable work spaces. 
    Section 602.4 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat at all times to maintain a minimum temperature of 65º F (18º C) during the period the spaces are occupied. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions. 
2.  Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 9, 12-13-2016) 
15.24.230 - Mechanical equipment. 
    Section 603.1 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
603.1 Mechanical appliances All mechanical appliances, fireplaces, evaporative coolers, solid fuel-burning appliances, cooking appliances and water heating appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be capable of performing the intended function. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 9, 12-13-2016) 
Chapter 15.25 - USE OF PLACARDS 

15.25.010 - Intent. 
    This chapter establishes standard placards to be used to indicate the condition of a structure and its suitability for continued occupancy following an earthquake or other emergency or natural disaster. The chapter further authorizes the building official and his or her authorized representatives to post the appropriate placard at each entry point to a building or structure upon completion of a safety assessment. 
(Ord. No. 973, § 1, 1-24-2012) 
15.25.020 - Application of provisions. 
    The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all buildings and structures of all occupancies regulated by the City of Lancaster. The city council may extend the provisions as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 973, § 1, 1-24-2012) 
15.25.030 - Definitions. 
    "Authorized safety evaluator" means an authorized city representative who is a certified post-disaster safety assessment program evaluator. 
    "Building official" means the building official of the City of Lancaster and/or his or her authorized designee. 
    "Code" means the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
    "Person" means and includes any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, association or other organization or entity. 
    "Safety assessment" is a visual, non-destructive examination of a building or structure for the purpose of determining its condition and suitability for continued occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 973, § 1, 1-24-2012) 
15.25.040 - Placards. 
A.  Three placards shall be used to designate the condition and permissible continued occupancy of buildings or structures, as follows: 
1.  "INSPECTED - Lawful Occupancy Permitted" shall be posted on any building or structure wherein no apparent structural hazard has been found. This placard is not intended to mean that there is no damage to the building or structure. 
2.  "RESTRICTED USE" shall be posted on each building or structure that has sustained damage such that occupancy must be limited, in area and/or time, in order to protect life safety. 
The authorized safety evaluator shall indentify on the placard the type of damage observed, in general terms, and shall clearly and concisely identify the restrictions on continued occupancy. 
3.  "UNSAFE - Do Not Enter or Occupy" shall be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged such that continued occupancy poses a threat to life safety. A building or structure that has been posted with this placard shall not be entered, occupied or used at any time, for any purpose, without prior written authorization by the building official. 
Authorized safety evaluators or other authorized designees of the building official shall be authorized to enter these buildings at any time. This placard is not to be used or considered as a demolition order. 
The authorized safety evaluator shall identify on the placard and will note in general terms the type of damage observed. 
B.  This ordinance number, and the address and phone number of the Lancaster Building and Safety Division shall be permanently affixed to each placard. 
(Ord. No. 973, § 1, 1-24-2012) 
15.25.050 - Enforcement. 
    City building inspectors, code enforcement officers, and Los Angeles County Sheriff's deputies are authorized to enforce the restrictions identified on a placard in any manner authorized by law, including but not limited to the abatement provisions set forth in Chapter 8.28 of this Code, to cause the premises to be vacated and secured to ensure conformance with the placard restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 973, § 1, 1-24-2012) 
15.25.060 - Violations. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to enter, occupy or use a building or structure, or portion thereof, at a time or in a manner that does not conform to the restrictions identified on a placard, except as follows: 
1.  A person may enter a building or structure, or portion thereof, with the prior written authorization of the building official. Such entry must be in full conformance with the restrictions set forth in the written authorization. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person, other than the building official, to remove, alter, deface or cover a placard that has been posted on a building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 973, § 1, 1-24-2012) 
Chapter 15.28 - ENERGY CODE[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 958, § 11, adopted January 11, 2011, repealed and replaced ch. 15.28, § 15.28.010, in its entirety. Former ch. 15.28 pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Ord. No. 810; Ord. No. 890 § 9, adopted 2007 and Ord. No. 958, § 10, 1-11-2011. 

15.28.010 - California Energy Code provisions adopted by reference. 
A.  That certain energy code known as the 2016 California Energy Code, including appendix 1-A, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, is hereby adopted by reference, and such code shall be and become the Lancaster Energy Code, regulating the construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, conversion, use, occupancy and maintenance of all structures and certain equipment therein and providing penalties for violation of such codes. 
B.  One copy of said 2016 California Energy Code has been deposited in the office of the city clerk and shall be at all times maintained by said clerk for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 994, § 11, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 1018, § 10, 12-13-2016) 
15.28.020 - Implementation of solar energy systems. 
    Subchapter 2 of the California Energy Code is hereby amended by adding Section 110.11 to read as follows: 
SECTION 110.11
MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS 
(a)  Purpose and intent. It is the purpose and intent of this section to provide standards and procedures for builders of new dwelling units to install solar energy systems in an effort to achieve energy savings and greater usage of alternative energy. It is intended that each dwelling unit owner or tenant shall be the beneficiary of achieved energy savings. 
(b)  Applicability. These specific standards are applicable for all new dwelling units with a building permit issuance date on or after January 1, 2014. 
Exception: Accessory dwelling units. 
c.  Provision of solar energy systems. 
1.  A builder shall provide solar energy systems for new detached single family homes in accordance with the energy generation requirements as listed in Section 17.08.060 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. It is intended that no individual installed system shall produce less than two (2) watts per square foot of each home built by the builder. For example a two thousand (2,000) square foot home would require builder to install a four (4) kW system. A builder may also adjust the amount of solar installed after demonstrating to the building official that the zero net energy requirements can be met with the installation of a smaller system. 
2.  Installation of solar energy systems is required for all new single family detached homes within a production subdivision. A builder may also meet the solar requirement by paying a solar mitigation fee based on the square footage of the living space of each home that is built. 
3.  Builders shall demonstrate through building plan check their intention to meet the solar zero net energy requirement. 
4.  Builders shall build solar energy systems on model homes, reflective of the products that will be offered to homebuyers. 
5.  If a tract is built in phases, the solar energy generation requirement shall be fulfilled for each phase, or release of homes. 
6.  Solar energy systems shall meet the development standards and guidelines as described in the Lancaster Zoning Code. 
7.  Solar energy systems for multi-family developments may be provided on rooftops, or on solar support/shade structures. 
8.  Accessory dwelling units (ADU) are exempt from the zero net energy requirements. 
9.  New single family residential units that comply with the zero net energy requirements shall not be required to comply with the landscaping and irrigation requirements of Section 17.08.110.A.12 and Section 8.30.040.B of the Lancaster Municipal Code with respect to the rear yard area. 
(d)  Alternative methods of compliance. If site-specific situations make it impractical for a developer to meet the requirements of this section, the developer may propose an alternative method of compliance with the intent of this section. An alternative method of compliance shall be approved where the Building Official finds that the proposed alternative is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 994, § 11, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 1018, § 10, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 1020, § 1, 2-14-2017) 
Chapter 15.30 - HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 958, § 12, adopted January 11, 2011, repealed and replaced ch. 15.30, § 15.30.010, in its entirety. Former ch. 15.28 pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Ord. No. 810; Ord. No. 890 § 9, adopted 2007 and Ord. No. 958, § 10, 1-11-2011. 

15.30.010 - California Historical Building Code provisions adopted by reference. 
A.  That certain historical building code known and designated as the 2016 California Historical Building Code, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, is hereby adopted by reference, and such code shall be and become the Lancaster Historical Building Code, regulating the enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, use, height, area and maintenance of all qualified historical structures and certain equipment therein and providing penalties for violation of such codes. 
B.  One copy of said California Historical Building Code 2016 Edition has been deposited in the office of the city clerk, and shall be at all times maintained by said clerk for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 994, § 12, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 1018, § 12, 12-13-2016) 
Chapter 15.32 - FIRE CODE[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1018, § 13, adopted December 13, 2016, repealed ch. 15.32, §§ 15.32.010-15.32.050, in its entirety; and enacted a new ch. 15.32 to read as set out herein. Former ch. 15.32 pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Ord. No. 994, § 13, adopted November 12, 2013. 

15.32.010 - Los Angeles County Fire Code adopted by reference. 
A.  That certain fire code known and designated as the 2017 County of Los Angeles Fire Code, incorporating by adoption the 2016 California Fire Code, including appendix B of the California Fire Code, appendix C of the California Fire Code, appendix J of the 2016 California Fire Code, appendix K, and appendix L, all published by the International Conference of Building Officials, as herein amended, is hereby adopted by reference and such code shall be and become the Lancaster Fire Code which prescribes regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion within the city. 
B.  One copy of said County of Los Angeles Fire Code 2017 Edition has been deposited in the office of the city clerk, and shall be at all times maintained by said clerk for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 13, 12-13-2016) 
15.32.020 - Board of appeals. 
Section 103.1.4 of the Los Angeles County Fire Code, Appeals, is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
103.1.4 Appeals. Appeals shall be filed, scheduled and conducted in the manner set forth in Chapter 15.04 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 13, 12-13-2016) 
15.32.030 - Definitions and abbreviations. 
    Article 2 of the Los Angeles County Fire Code, Definitions and Abbreviations, is hereby added or amended to whenever any of the names or terms defined in this section are used in this Code, and each such name or term shall be deemed and construed to have the meaning ascribed to be in this section as follows: 
"Building Code" shall mean chapter 15.08 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
"Building Official" shall mean the Building Official of the City of Lancaster. 
"Garage" is a building or portion thereof in which a motor vehicle containing flammable or combustible liquids or gas in its tank or an electric vehicle with a rechargeable storage battery, fuel cell, photovoltaic array, or other sources of electric current is stored, repaired, charged (electric vehicle only) or kept. 
"Garage, Private" is a building or portion of a building not more than 1,000 square feet in area in which a motor vehicle containing flammable or combustible liquids or gas in its tank or an electric vehicle with a rechargeable storage battery, fuel cell, photovoltaic array, or other sources of electric current is stored, repaired, charged (electric vehicle only) or kept. 
"Governing Body" shall mean Lancaster City Council. 
"Jurisdiction" shall mean the City of Lancaster. 
"Mechanical Code" shall mean chapter 15.16 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
"Plumbing Code" shall mean chapter 15.20 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 13, 12-13-2016) 
15.32.040 - Obstruction of fire apparatus access roads. 
    Section 503.4 shall read as published in the 2016 California Fire Code without Los Angeles County amendments. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 13, 12-13-2016) 
15.32.050 - Traffic calming devices. 
    Section 503.4.1 shall be deleted in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 13, 12-13-2016) 
Chapter 15.34 - GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 958, § 14, adopted January 11, 2011, repealed and replaced ch. 15.34, § 15.34.010, in its entirety. Former ch. 15.34 pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Ord. No. 958, § 13, adopted January 11, 2011. 

15.34.010 - California Green Building Standards Code provisions adopted by reference. 
A.  That certain Green Building Standards Code known and designated as the 2016 California Green Building Standards Code, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, is hereby adopted by reference, and such codes shall be and become the Lancaster Green Building Standards Code, regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, use, height, area and maintenance of all structures and certain equipment therein and providing penalties for violation of such codes. 
B.  One copy of said California Green Building Standards Code 2016 Edition has been deposited in the office of the city clerk, and shall be at all times maintained by said clerk for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 994, § 14, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 1018, § 14, 12-13-2016) 
Chapter 15.36 - EXISTING BUILDING CODE 

15.36.010 - California Existing Building Code provisions adopted by reference. 
A.  That certain existing building code known and designated as the 2016 California Existing Building Code, incorporating by adoption the 2015 edition of the International Existing Building Code with necessary California amendments, all published by the International Conference of Building Officials, and as herein amended, is hereby adopted by reference, and such codes shall be and become the Lancaster Existing Building Code, regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, use, height, area and maintenance of all structures and certain equipment therein, and the grading of premises, and providing penalties for violation of such codes. 
B.  One copy of said 2016 California Existing Building Code has been deposited in the office of the city clerk and shall be at all times maintained by said clerk for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 15, 12-13-2016) 
15.36.020 - Enforcement authority. 
    Section 103.1 of the Existing Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
103.1 Enforcement Authority . The Building Official of the City of Lancaster shall be the "code official" as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 15, 12-13-2016) 
15.36.030 - Deputies. 
    Section 103.3 of the Existing Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
103.3 Deputies. Building inspectors, code enforcement officers, public safety officers and other City personnel designated by the City Manager and/or the Building Official are hereby appointed as deputies of the Building Official for purposes of enforcement of this chapter, and are authorized to undertake such investigation, inspection and enforcement actions as necessary to enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 15, 12-13-2016) 
15.36.040 - Permits-Expiration. 
    Section 105.5 of the Existing Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
105.5 Expiration. Except as set forth in subsection 105.5.1, every permit issued for property within the City of Lancaster shall expire by limitation and become null and void as follows: 
(i)  If work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days from the issuance date of the permit. 
(ii)  If work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days from the issuance date of the permit, such permit shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned. For purposes of this subsection, "suspended or abandoned" shall mean that the permittee has, for a period of 180 days or longer after commencing the work authorized by such permit, failed to make substantial progress toward completion of the work, as determined by the Building Official. Failure to schedule, undergo and/or pass a requisite interim or final inspection for a period of 180 days or longer since the issuance date of the permit or since the most recent interim inspection may be deemed to constitute a failure to make substantial progress toward completion of the work. The Building Official may, in his/her sole discretion, grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
(iii)  In the event of permit expiration, before work authorized pursuant to the expired permit can be commenced or recommenced, a new permit shall first be obtained (hereafter, a "renewal permit"). To obtain a renewal permit, the applicant may be required to resubmit plans and specifications, if deemed necessary by the Building Official and/or the City's Planning Director. The applicant must pay all applicable fees, including but not limited to a plan check fee and building permit fees, in the amount then established by resolution of the City Council. If renewal permits are applied for, a mandatory site inspection shall be performed by Building & Safety to determine that existing conditions and materials comport with this code. All work to be performed under a renewal permit must be performed in accordance with all applicable technical codes, regulations, laws and ordinances in effect on the date of issuance of the renewal permit. Renewal permits are subject to expiration as set forth in (ii), above. 
(iv)  In the event of permit expiration, any work performed under that permit is "unpermitted" as defined in Section 114.1 of this chapter, and is subject to the legalization provisions of section 114.5 of this chapter. 
105.5.1 Expiration - Unpermitted structures or grading. Notwithstanding any provision of section 105.5, if a building permit was issued in order to bring an unpermitted structure, unpermitted grading, or other unlawful, substandard or hazardous condition into compliance with any applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation, such permit shall expire by limitation and become null and void sixty (60) days after the issuance date of such permit, if the permittee has failed to make substantial progress toward completion of the work as determined by the Building Official. Failure to schedule, undergo and/or pass a requisite interim or final inspection for a period of 60 days since the issuance date of the permit or since the most recent interim inspection may be deemed to constitute a failure to make substantial progress toward completion of the work. The Building Official may, in his/her sole discretion, grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 60 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 15, 12-13-2016) 
15.36.050 - Fees. 
    Section 108.2 of the Existing Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
108.2 Schedule of permit fees. On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as adopted by resolution of the City Council of the City of Lancaster, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 15, 12-13-2016) 
15.36.060 - Use and occupancy. 
    Section 110.1 of the Existing Building Code is hereby amended by adding a new subsection 110.1.1 to read as follows: 
110.1.1 Use and occupancy - utilities. No building or portion thereof shall be occupied for any purpose in the absence of all requisite properly installed and fully functional permanent utilities. There shall be no exceptions without the express written consent of the Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 15, 12-13-2016) 
15.36.070 - Board of appeals. 
    Section 112 of the Existing Building Code is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
112 Appeals. Appeals of orders, decisions or determinations of the Building Official are limited to those enumerated in Chapter 15.04 of this code, and shall be filed, scheduled and conducted in accordance with the provisions set forth in said Chapter 15.04. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 15, 12-13-2016) 
15.36.080 - Violations-Unlawful acts. 
    Section 113.1 of the Existing Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
113.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish, occupy or maintain any building, structure, equipment, installation or land regulated by the Technical Codes, or cause or permit the same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of the Technical Codes. 
113.1.1 Unpermitted structures. No person shall own, use, occupy or maintain an unpermitted structure. For purposes of this section, "unpermitted structure" shall be defined as any building or structure, or portion thereof, or any electrical, plumbing, mechanical or other installation or fixture, that was erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, connected, installed, converted, demolished or equipped, at any point in time by any person, without the required permit(s) having first been obtained from the Building Official or with a valid permit as issued by the Building Official which subsequently expired and became null and void. 
113.1.2 Unpermitted grading. No person shall own, use, occupy or maintain unpermitted grading. For purposes of this section, "unpermitted grading" shall be defined as any land which has been excavated, cut, filled, graded, compacted or terraced, at any point in time by any person, without the required permit(s) having first been obtained from the Building Official or with a valid permit as issued by the building which subsequently expired and became null and void. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 15, 12-13-2016) 
15.36.090 - Violations-Violation penalties. 
    Section 113.4 of the Existing Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
113.4 Violation Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter or any Technical Code, or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who erects, constructs, alters, repairs or maintains a building, structure, installation or equipment, or excavates, cuts, fills, grades, compacts or maintains land in violation of approved construction documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter or any Technical Code, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to the punishments set forth in Chapter 1.12 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 15, 12-13-2016) 
15.36.100 - Violations-Legalizing procedures. 
    Section 113 of the Existing Building Code is hereby amended by adding subsection 113.5 to read as follows: 
113.5 Procedure for legalizing unpermitted structures or grading. The procedures specified within subsections 113.5.1 through 113.5.6 shall be followed whenever an attempt is made to legalize an unpermitted structure or unpermitted grading. 
113.5.1 Permits. Any person who wishes to legalize an unpermitted structure or unpermitted grading, as defined in Subsections 113.1.1 and 113.1.2, shall obtain all applicable permits. Unpermitted structures and grading shall comply with this chapter and all current Technical Code requirements and other required approvals pursuant to the Lancaster Municipal Code in order to be legalized. Permits obtained to legalize unpermitted structures or grading shall expire as set forth in Section 105.5.1 of this chapter. 
113.5.2 Plans. Prior to the issuance or granting of any permit to legalize an unpermitted structure, plans showing the plot plan, exterior elevations, existing structures, proposed structures and proposed finish materials shall be submitted to the Building Official and Planning Director, or their designees, for review and approval. 
113.5.3 Grading. Prior to the issuance or granting of any permit to legalize unpermitted grading, a grading and drainage plan showing the original grade and existing unpermitted grade on the premises the existing grade on adjoining properties, and a soils report shall be submitted to the Building Official for review and approval. 
113.5.4 Inspections. Unpermitted structures or unpermitted grading for which a permit has subsequently been obtained shall be subject to inspection by the Building Official in accordance with, and in the manner prescribed in, this chapter and/or the applicable Technical Codes. The Building Official may require the removal of finish materials in order to expose framing elements, electrical components, plumbing fixtures or mechanical systems, or may require the removal of fill, to verify that installation, construction or grading was performed in conformance with the Technical Codes. 
113.5.5 Investigation. Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this code has commenced on land or in connection with any type of structure without first obtaining said permit a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. For purposes of this section, "special investigation" shall include, but is not limited to, inspecting premises and structures, reviewing permit, license and other records of the City or other agencies, reviewing plans, taking photographs, engaging in conferences and communications with other officials of the City or other agencies, and engaging in conferences and communications with owners or other responsible persons concerning the unpermitted structure or grading. 
113.5.5.1 Fee. A special investigation fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of a permit for an unpermitted structure or unpermitted grading. The fee shall be equal to the amount of time expended by City officials in undertaking the special investigation, as defined in Section 113.5.5, charged at the hourly rate that has been established by resolution of the City Council for recovery of code enforcement reinspection fees, as may be amended from time to time. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor from any penalty prescribed by law. 
113.5.6 Unpermitted structures or grading which cannot be legalized. If the Development Services director or his/her designee determines that the City's zoning regulations prohibit legalization of any unpermitted structure, the structure shall be demolished or, if previously permitted, restored to its original approved condition, with all requisite permits, inspections and approvals. 
If the Building Official determines that an unpermitted structure cannot be made to conform to the current applicable Technical Code requirements, the structure shall be demolished or, if previously permitted, restored to its original approved condition, with all requisite permits, inspections and approvals. 
If the Building Official determines that unpermitted grading and/or lot drainage cannot be made to conform with current applicable Technical Code requirements, the land shall be fully restored to the condition that preceded the unpermitted grading, with all requisite permits, inspections and approvals. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 15, 12-13-2016) 
15.36.110 - Unsafe building and equipment-Notice. 
    Section 115 of the Existing Building Code is hereby amended by deleting subsections 115.3 and 115.4 and adding a new subsection 115.3 to read as follows: 
115.3 Notices and orders. Whenever the code official determines that there has been a violation of this chapter or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, he/she may give notice in a manner that comports with the Lancaster Administrative Code, the Lancaster International Property Maintenance Code, Chapter 8.28 or other applicable provisions of the Lancaster Municipal Code, and/or the State Housing Law (commencing with Section 17910 of the California Health & Safety Code). 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 15, 12-13-2016) 
15.36.120 - Existing structures. 
    Chapter 3 of the Existing Building Code is hereby amended by adding section 324 to read as follows: 
324 Repairs to buildings and structures damaged by the occurrence of a natural disaster or fire 
324.1 Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide a defined level of repair for buildings damaged by a natural disaster in the City of Lancaster when a formal state of emergency has been proclaimed. This section shall also apply when an individual building has been damaged by fire or other disaster. 
324.2 General. Required repair levels shall be based on the ratio of the estimated value of the repairs required to restore the structural members to their pre-event condition to the estimated replacement value of the building or structure. 
324.3 Structural Repairs. When the damage ratio does not exceed 0.10 (10 percent), buildings and structures, except essential service facilities, shall at a minimum be restored to their pre-event condition. 
When the damage ratio is greater than 0.10 (10 percent) but less than 0.5 (50 percent), buildings and structures, except essential service facilities, shall have the damaged structural members including all critical ties and connections associated with the damaged structural members, all structural members supported by the damaged member, and all structural members supporting the damaged members repaired and strengthened to bring them into compliance with the force levels and connection requirements of the Building Code. These criteria shall apply to essential service facilities when the damage ratio is less than 0.30 (30 percent). 
Exception: 
For buildings with rigid diaphragms where the above-required repair and strengthening increases the rigidity of the resisting members, the entire lateral-force-resisting system of the building shall be investigated. When, in the opinion of the Building Official, an unsafe or adverse condition has been created as a result of the increase in rigidity, the condition shall be corrected. 
When the damage ratio is greater than 0.5 (50 percent), buildings and structures, except essential service facilities, shall at a minimum have the entire building or structure strengthened to comply with the force levels and connection requirements of the Building Code. This criteria shall apply to essential service facilities when the damage ratio is greater or equal to 0.3 (30 percent). 
324.4 Nonstructural Repairs to Light Fixtures and Suspended Ceilings. Under all damage ratios, when light fixtures and the suspension system of suspended ceilings are damaged, the damaged light fixtures and ceiling suspension systems shall be repaired to fully comply with the requirements of this code. In buildings and structures where suspended ceiling systems are present, undamaged light fixtures and ceiling suspension systems shall have the additional support and bracing, provided that is required in this code. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 15, 12-13-2016) 
Chapter 15.38 - REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE 

15.38.010 - California Referenced Standards Code provisions adopted by reference. 
A.  That certain referenced standards code known and designated as the 2016 California Referenced Standards Code, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, is hereby adopted by reference, and such codes shall be and become the Lancaster Referenced Standards Code, regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, use, height, area and maintenance of all structures and certain equipment therein and providing penalties for violation of such codes. 
B.  One copy of said California Referenced Standards Code 2016 Edition has been deposited in the office of the city clerk, and shall be at all times maintained by said clerk for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 1018, § 15, 12-13-2016) 
Chapter 15.40 - BUILDING NUMBERS 
Article 1. - Numbering System 

15.40.010 - Adoption by reference of the county house numbering and mobilehome numbering system. 
    The house numbering and mobilehome numbering system ordinance of the county of Los Angeles, known as Ordinance No. 1325, is adopted by reference. All references to the county of Los Angeles and the county engineer have been replaced, respectively, with references to the city of Lancaster and the public works director of the city. 
(Ord. 686 § 1, 1995: prior code § 8-5.1) 
15.40.020 - General provisions. 
    Unless the provision or the context otherwise requires, the general provisions, rules of construction, and definitions in this and the following sections shall govern the construction of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 8-5.2) 
15.40.030 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "Board" means the city council of the city of Lancaster. 
    "City" means the city of Lancaster. 
    "Mobilehome" means a vehicle designed and equipped for human habitation, and for being drawn by a motor vehicle. 
    "Mobilehome park" means any area or tract of land where: 
1.  One or more mobilehome lots are rented or leased or held out for rent or lease to accommodate mobilehomes used for human habitation; or 
2.  Two or more mobilehome lots are in the lawful possession of separate persons and are used by such persons to accommodate mobilehomes used for human habitation. 
    "Public works director" means the public works director of the city of Lancaster. 
    "Road" means and includes both a city highway and a private street, road or access way. 
    "Section" means a section of this chapter unless some other ordinance or a statute is specifically mentioned. 
    Shall, May. Shall is mandatory. May is permissive. 
    Singular includes the plural and the plural the singular. 
(Ord. 686 § 2, 1995; prior code § 8-5.3) 
15.40.040 - Division of city into districts. 
    The public works director shall divide the city into one or more districts in order that he may, whenever requested to do so by the city council, establish numbers to be allotted along any road in any part of the city. 
(Ord. 686 § 4, 1995: prior code § 8-5.5) 
15.40.050 - Establishment of house numbers. 
    The public works director, whenever so requested by the board, shall establish the house numbers along any road in the city and the numbers so established, when adopted and approved by the board, shall be the official numbers for such road. 
(Ord. 686 § 5, 1995: prior code § 8-5.6) 
15.40.060 - Mobilehome parks. 
A.  Filing Plans. Prior to March 1, 1974 or not less than thirty (30) days after the establishment of a mobilehome park, whichever last occurs, the owner or proprietor of a mobilehome park shall file with the public works director a plan (which may be a rough plan not drawn to scale) showing: 
1.  The mobilehome lots including dimensions thereof; 
2.  The access ways thereto including dimensions, angles and radii required to reconstruct the configuration of such access way; 
3.  The names or numbers of the access ways; 
4.  The number assigned to each mobilehome lot; 
B.  Mobilehome Numbers. On each access way odd numbers in consecutive order shall be assigned on one side and even numbers in consecutive order shall be assigned on the other side. Mobilehome parks completed and operative as of April 6, 1981, shall not be required to modify existing systems. 
C.  Action by Public Works Director. Upon receipt of the plan provided for by this chapter, the public works director shall examine the same and determine whether or not the proposed numbering of the mobilehome lots will facilitate the finding of the occupants of the mobilehomes parked thereon, whether the names of the access ways will duplicate the names of nearby roads or other access ways to such an extent as to cause confusion. He may make such changes in the plan as he finds necessary in order that the location of the occupants of the mobilehome park may be ascertained. He shall return the plan as submitted or as amended by him as the case may be showing his approval of the plan to the owner or proprietor of the mobilehome park. 
D.  Compliance with Plan. Within ten (10) days after receiving the approved plan from the public works director, the owner or proprietor of the mobilehome park shall post legible signs in letters or figures not less than three inches in height at the end of, and at each intersection of, the access ways showing the names or numbers thereof and either place the number assigned to each mobilehome in such a position on the mobilehome to be plainly visible from the access way, such number to be not less than four inches in height, or notify in writing the occupant of each mobilehome to do so. Such number shall be of sufficient color contrasting with the background to make the signs, letters or figures clearly identifiable during daylight or hours of darkness. 
E.  General Regulations. The owner or proprietor of a mobilehome park shall: 
1.  Post at the entrance thereof a central directory which shall show the layout of the access ways and the numbering system of the mobilehome park; 
2.  Affix on the mobilehome, house, or other structure occupied by the manager of the mobilehome park in such a position as to be clearly visible from the access way, a sign in letters not less than four inches in height, reading "Office," "Manager" or some other word indicating the same. 
(Ord. 686 § 6, 1995: prior code § 8-5.7) 
15.40.070 - Notification of, and duty of, occupants. 
A.  Notification by Public Works Director. The public works director shall notify all owners of property or persons in possession of property along any road upon which official numbers have been established pursuant to Sections 15.40.050 and 15.40.060 of this chapter, of the numbers so assigned. 
    If the public works director finds that no number has been affixed to any mobilehome in a mobile-home park for which a number has been assigned by an approved plan or that the number affixed is not the number so assigned, he shall so notify the occupant of such mobilehome of the number assigned thereto. 
B.  Duties of Owners and Occupants. Within ten (10) days after the owner or occupant of any property along a road for which official numbers have been assigned or the occupant of any mobilehome for which a number has been assigned has been notified as required by this chapter of the number so assigned he shall: 
1.  Remove any existing number which is not the number assigned; 
2.  Place the number assigned in digits not less than four inches in height upon the property, residence, structure or mobilehome in such a position and in contrasting color as to be plainly visible from the road or access way. 
(Ord. 686 § 7, 1995: prior code § 8-5.8) 
15.40.080 - Apartment house plans, posting of plans. 
    The owner or proprietor of an apartment house consisting of six or more dwelling units shall post at or near the primary entrance to the building or buildings a brief descriptive diagram which clearly indicates the numerical, alphabetical or identification pattern or layout showing the location of each dwelling unit, including floor levels and access patterns. 
(Prior code § 8-5.9) 
15.40.090 - Design specifications for numbers on buildings. 
    All apartment houses, commercial buildings, industrial buildings and all businesses shall have address numbers eight inches in height on a contrasting background. 
(Prior code § 8-5.10) 
15.40.100 - Applicability. 
    These provisions shall be applicable to all new buildings, all changes of occupancies, all new tenant improvements and new business. 
(Prior code § 8-5.11) 
15.40.110 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate, neglect, or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than thirty dollars ($30.00), or by imprisonment in the county jail for not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 686 § 3, 1995: prior code § 8-5.4) 
Article 2. - Number Painting 

15.40.120 - Painting of house numbers. 
    All persons, firms and corporations engaged in the painting of house numbers on street curbs in the city shall comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. 722 § 2 (part), 1996) 
15.40.130 - License required. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in the painting of house numbers on street curbs in the city without first having obtained a business license pursuant to Chapter 5.04 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 722 § 2 (part), 1996) 
15.40.140 - Paint requirements. 
    Persons, firms and corporations engaged in the painting of house numbers pursuant to this article shall use a paint acceptable to and approved by the code enforcement division of the city's community development department. Prior to painting house numbers, the person, firm or corporation shall submit a sample of his/her/its paint, or a receipt therefor, to the code enforcement division of the city's community development department. 
(Ord. 722 § 2 (part), 1996) 
15.40.150 - Numbering specifications. 
    All house numbering pursuant to this article shall conform to the house numbering maps maintained by the city engineer. House numbers shall be painted in black on a white background and shall be preferably four inches in height, but in no event less than three inches in height. Persons, firms and corporations engaged in the painting of house numbers pursuant to this article shall submit stencils to the code enforcement division of the city's community development department for review and approval prior to engaging in any house number painting. 
(Ord. 722 § 2 (part), 1996) 
15.40.160 - Property owner permission required. 
    Prior to painting the number for a house, the person, firm or corporation engaged in the painting shall obtain the express written consent of the property owner on a form approved by the city. 
(Ord. 722 § 2 (part), 1996) 
15.40.170 - Areas of operation. 
    Persons, firms and corporations engaged in the painting of house numbers on street curbs shall keep the city continually apprised of the dates and locations of his/her/its proposed operations and shall obtain the prior approval of the city before conducting painting operations in a particular area. 
(Ord. 722 § 2 (part), 1996) 
15.40.180 - Advertising materials. 
    All advertising materials and solicitations for house number painting shall indicate the price of the number painting service, or in the case of nonprofit entities the amount of the requested donation, and shall clearly state that the painting of house numbers on street curbs is not required by the city. Persons, firms and corporations engaged in the painting of house numbers on street curbs shall submit samples of all advertising materials and solicitations to the code enforcement division of the city's community development department for approval prior to use. 
(Ord. 722 § 2 (part), 1996) 
15.40.190 - Insurance. 
    Persons, firms and corporations engaged in the painting of house numbers pursuant to this article shall obtain insurance as required by the city and shall provide proof of such insurance to the code enforcement division of the city's community development department prior to undertaking the painting of any house numbers hereunder. 
(Ord. 722 § 2 (part), 1996) 
Chapter 15.44 - CLEARING PERMITS 

15.44.010 - Clearing permit. 
    A person shall not clear or grub any lot exceeding one-half acre within the city without first obtaining a clearing permit from the city. No such permit shall be required in the event that a grading permit has been issued with respect to the property. 
(Prior code § 8-7.1) 
15.44.020 - Findings and decision. 
    An application for a clearing permit shall not be approved unless the building and engineering services department of the city determines that the proposed development will not result in significant blowing dust or erosion of top soil. 
(Prior code § 8-7.2) 
15.44.030 - Violation-Penalty. 
    A person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Conviction shall be punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.12 of this code or an order to restore the native vegetation removed in violation of this chapter or the denial of a clearing permit from the city for a period of five years from the date of conviction or any combination of the penalties herein. Exception: A person shall be exempt from this section in the event they are required to remove vegetation at the request of the Los Angeles County fire department, flood control district or any other governmental agency. 
(Prior code § 8-7.3) 
Chapter 15.45 - SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS 

15.45.010 - Title and Purpose. 
    The purpose of the Small Residential Rooftop Solar Energy System Ordinance, from which this chapter is derived, is to adopt an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes 2014) to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This chapter encourages the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the City, and expanding the ability of property owners to install solar energy systems. This chapter allows the City to achieve these goals while protecting public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 9-22-2015) 
15.45.020 - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases as used in this section are defined as follows: 
    "Electronic submittal" means the utilization of one (1) or more of the following: 
1.  E-mail 
2.  Internet 
3.  Facsimile 
    "Small residential rooftop solar energy system" means all of the following: 
1.  A solar energy system that is no larger than ten (10) kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty (30) kilowatts thermal. 
2.  A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the City and paragraph (iii) of subdivision (c) of Section 714 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time. 
3.  A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling. 
4.  A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the authority having jurisdiction. 
    "Solar energy system" has the same meaning set forth in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subdivision (a) of Section 801.5 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 9-22-2015) 
15.45.030 - Duties of the Building Official. 
A.  Section 65850.5 of the California Government Code provides that in developing an expedited permitting process, the city, county, or city and county shall adopt a checklist of all requirements with which small rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to develop and adopt such checklist. 
B.  The checklist shall be published on the city's internet website. The applicant may submit the permit application and associated documentation to the City's building official by personal, mailed, or electronic submittal together with any required permit processing and inspection fees. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 9-22-2015) 
15.45.040 - Permit Review and Inspection Requirements. 
A.  Prior to submitting an application, the applicant shall: 
1.  Verify to the applicant's reasonable satisfaction through the use of standard engineering evaluation techniques that the support structure for the small residential rooftop solar energy system is stable and adequate to transfer all wind, seismic, and dead and live loads associated with the system to the building foundation; and 
2.  At the applicant's cost, verify to the applicant's reasonable satisfaction using standard electrical inspection techniques that the existing electrical system including existing line, load, ground and bonding wiring as well as main panel and subpanel sizes are adequately sized, based on the existing electrical system's current use, to carry all new photovoltaic electrical loads. 
B.  For a small residential rooftop solar energy system eligible for expedited review, only one (1) inspection shall be required, which shall be done in a timely manner. If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized; however the subsequent inspection need not conform to the requirements of this subsection. 
C.  An application that satisfies the information requirements in the checklist, as determined by the building official, shall be deemed complete. Upon receipt of an incomplete application, the building official shall issue a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance. 
D.  Upon confirmation by the building official of the application and supporting documentation being complete and meeting the requirements of the checklist, the building official shall administratively approve the application and issue all required permits or authorizations. Such approval does not authorize an applicant to connect the small residential rooftop energy system to the local utility provider's electricity grid. The applicant is responsible for obtaining such approval or permission from the local utility provider. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 9-22-2015) 
Chapter 15.46 - ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS 

15.46.010 - Title and Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to promote and encourage the use of electric vehicles, in accordance with California Government Code Section 65850.7, by creating an expedited, streamlined permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations, while promoting public health and safety and preventing specific adverse impacts in the installation and use of such charging stations. 
( Ord. No. 1034, § 1, 10-10-2017 ) 
15.46.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Electric vehicle charging station" or "charging station" means any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, as it reads on the effective date of this chapter, and delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle. 
B.  "Specific, adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
C.  "Electronic submittal" means the utilization of one or more of the following: 
1.  Electronic mail or email. 
2.  The Internet. 
3.  Facsimile. 
( Ord. No. 1034, § 1, 10-10-2017 ) 
15.46.030 - Duties of the Building Official. 
    Consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the building official shall: 
A.  Implement an expedited, streamlined permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations; 
B.  Adopt a checklist of all requirements with which electric vehicle charging stations shall comply with in order to be eligible for expedited review, which shall be based on the "Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist" of the "Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook" of the Governor's Office of Planning and Research; 
C.  Ensure that the expedited, streamlined permitting process and checklist shall be published on the city's website. 
( Ord. No. 1034, § 1, 10-10-2017 ) 
15.46.040 - Permit Review and Inspection Requirements. 
A.  Prior to submitting an application for processing, the applicant shall verify that the installation of an electric vehicle charging station will not have specific, adverse impacts to public health and safety and building occupants. Verification by the applicant includes but is not limited to: electrical system capacity and loads; electrical system wiring, bonding and overcurrent protection; building infrastructure affected by charging station equipment and associated conduits; areas of charging station equipment and vehicle parking. Upon filing the application, the applicant shall pay a permit application fee as established by resolution adopted by the city council as amended from time to time. 
B.  A permit application that satisfies the information requirements in the City's adopted checklist shall be deemed complete and be promptly processed. Upon confirmation by the building official that the permit application and supporting documents meet the requirements of the city adopted checklist, and is consistent with all applicable laws and health and safety standards, the building official shall, consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, approve the application and issue all necessary permits. Such approval does not authorize an applicant to energize or utilize the electric vehicle charging station until final inspection and approval of the installation of the station has been granted by the city. If the building official determines that the permit application is incomplete, he or she shall issue a written correction notice to the applicant, detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance. 
C.  If the building official makes a finding based on substantial evidence that the electric vehicle charging station could have a specific adverse impact upon the public health or safety, as defined in this chapter, the city may require the applicant to apply for a use permit. 
D.  Consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the building official shall allow for electronic submittal of permit applications covered by this section and associated supporting documentations. In accepting such permit applications, the building official shall also accept electronic signatures on all forms, applications, and other documentation in lieu of a wet signature by any applicant. 
( Ord. No. 1034, § 1, 10-10-2017 ) 
15.46.050 - Electric Vehicle Charging Station Installation Requirements. 
A.  Electric vehicle charging station equipment shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing laboratories, such as Underwriters Laboratories, and rules of the public utilities commission or a municipal electric utility company regarding safety and reliability. 
B.  Installation of electric vehicle charging stations and associated wiring, bonding, disconnecting means and overcurrent protective devices shall meet the requirements of Article 625 and all applicable provisions of the California Electrical Code. 
C.  Installation of electric vehicle charging stations shall be incorporated into the load calculations of all new or existing electrical services and shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code. Electric vehicle charging equipment shall be considered a continuous load. 
D.  Anchorage of either floor-mounted or wall-mounted electric vehicle charging stations shall meet the requirements of the California Building or Residential Code as applicable per occupancy, and the provisions of the manufacturer's installation instructions. Mounting of charging stations shall not adversely affect building elements. 
( Ord. No. 1034, § 1, 10-10-2017 ) 
Chapter 15.52 - FLOOD CONTROL 

15.52.010 - Adoption by reference of county regulations. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, Ordinance No. 1549 and Ordinance No. 5468, as amended and in effect on February 21, 1978, of the county of Los Angeles, being the "Interference with Flood Control Works" Ordinances of the county of Los Angeles are adopted by reference as the "Interference with Flood Control Works" Ordinances of the city of Lancaster. 
(Prior code § 3-8.1) 
15.52.020 - Public record. 
    Three copies of said Ordinance No. 1549 and Ordinance No. 5468 of the county of Los Angeles, as amended and in effect on February 21, 1978, have been deposited in the office of the city clerk of the city of Lancaster, and shall be at all times maintained by said clerk for use and examination by the public. 
(Prior code § 3-8.2) 
15.52.030 - Definitions. 
    Whenever any of the following names or terms are used in said Ordinance No. 1549 or Ordinance No. 5468 of the county of Los Angeles, as amended, each name or term shall be deemed or construed to have the meaning ascribed to it in this section as follows: 
    "Board of supervisors" means the city council of the city of Lancaster. 
    "Chief engineer" means the city engineer of the city of Lancaster. 
    "County" or "county of Los Angeles" or "unincorporated area" means the city of Lancaster. 
(Prior code § 3-8.3) 
15.52.040 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion thereof during which such violation continues and shall be punishable therefor as herein provided. 
(Prior code § 3-8.4) 
Chapter 15.56 - TRIP REDUCTION AND TRAVEL DEMAND MEASURES 

15.56.010 - Definitions. 
    The following words or phrases shall have the following meanings when used in this chapter: 
    "Alternative transportation" means the use of modes of transportation other than the single passenger motor vehicle, including but not limited to carpools, vanpools, buspools, public transit, walking and bicycling. 
    "Applicable development" means any development project that is determined to meet or exceed the project size threshold criteria contained in Section 15.56.030 of this chapter. 
    "Buspool" means a vehicle carrying sixteen (16) or more passengers commuting on a regular basis to and from work with a fixed route, according to a fixed schedule. 
    "The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)" means a statute that requires all jurisdictions in the state of California to evaluate the extent of environmental degradation posed by proposed development. 
    "Carpool" means a vehicle carrying two to six persons commuting together to and from work on a regular basis. 
    "Developer" means the builder who is responsible for the planning, design and construction of an applicable development project. A developer may be responsible for implementing the provisions of this chapter as determined by the property owner. 
    "Development" means the construction or addition of new building square footage. Additions to buildings which existed prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter and which exceeds the thresholds defined in Section 13.56.030 shall comply with the applicable requirements but shall not be added cumulatively with existing square footage; existing square footage shall be exempt from these requirements. All calculations shall be based on gross square footage. 
    "Employee parking area" means the portion of total required parking at a development used by on-site employees. Unless specified in the city/county zoning/building code, employee parking shall be calculated as follows: 
Type of Use Percent of Total 
Required Parking 
Devoted to Employees Commercial 30 Office/professional 85 Industrial/manufacturing 90  
    "Preferential parking" means parking spaces designated or assigned, through use of a sign or painted space markings for carpool and vanpool vehicles carrying commute passengers on a regular basis that are provided in a location more convenient to a place of employment than parking spaces provided for single-occupant vehicles. 
    "Property owner" means the legal owner of a development who serves as the lessor to a tenant. The property owner shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of this chapter either directly or by delegating such responsibility as appropriate to a tenant and/or his agent. 
    "South Coast Air Quality Management District" (SCAQMD) means the regional authority appointed by the California State Legislature to meet federal standards and otherwise improve air quality in the South Coast Air Basin (the nondesert portions of Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside and San Bernardino Counties). 
    "Tenant" means the lessee of facility space at an applicable development project. 
    "Transportation demand management (TDM)" means programs of incentives, services and policies. TDM addresses alternatives to single-occupant vehicle such as carpooling and vanpooling, and changes in work schedules that move trips out of the peak period or eliminate them altogether (as is the case in telecommuting or compressed workweeks). 
    "Trip reduction" means reduction in the number of work-related trips made by single-occupant vehicles. 
    "Vanpool" means a vehicle carrying seven or more persons commuting together to and from work on a regular basis, usually in a vehicle with a seating arrangement designed to carry seven to fifteen (15) adult passengers, and on a prepaid subscription basis. 
    "Vehicle" means any motorized form of transportation, including but not limited to automobiles, vans, buses and motorcycles. 
(Prior code § 3-17.1) 
15.56.020 - Review of transit impacts. 
    Prior to approval of any development project for which an environmental impact report (EJR) will be prepared pursuant to the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) or based on a local determination, regional and municipal fixed-route transit operators providing service to the project shall be identified and consulted with. Projects for which a notice of preparation (NOP) for a draft EIR has been circulated pursuant to the provisions of CEQA prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall be exempted from its provisions. The "Transit Impact Review Worksheet," contained in the Los Angeles County Congestion Management Program Manual, or similar worksheets, shall be used in assessing impacts. Pursuant to the provisions of CEQA, transit operators shall be sent a NOP for all contemplated Ems and shall as part of the NOP process, be given opportunity to comment on the impacts of the project, to identify recommended transit service or capital improvements which may be required as a result of the project, and to recommend mitigation measures which minimize automobile trips on the CMP network. Impacts and recommended mitigation measures identified by the transit operator shall be evaluated in the draft environmental impact report prepared for the project. Related mitigation measures adopted shall be monitored through the mitigation monitoring requirements of CEQA. Phased development projects, development projects subject to a development agreement, or development projects requiring subsequent approvals, need not repeat this process as long as no significant changes are made to the project. It shall remain at the discretion of the lead agency to determine when a project is substantially the same and therefore covered by a previously certified EIR. 
(Prior code § 3-17.2) 
15.56.030 - Transportation demand and trip reduction 
measures. 
A.  Applicability of Requirements. 
1.  Prior to approval of any development project, the applicant shall make provision for, as a minimum, all of the following applicable transportation demand management and trip reduction measures. 
2.  This chapter shall not apply to projects for which a development application has been deemed "complete" by the city pursuant to Government Code Section 65943, or for which a notice of preparation for a DEIR has been circulated or for which an application for a building permit has been received, prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
3.  All facilities and improvements constructed or otherwise required shall be maintained in a state of good repair. 
B.  Development Standards. 
1.  Nonresidential development of twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet or more shall provide the following to the satisfaction of the city: 
a.  A bulletin board, display case, or kiosk displaying transportation information located where the greatest number of employees are likely to see it. Information in the area shall include, but is not limited to, the following: 
i.  Current maps, routes and schedules for public transit routes serving the site; 
ii.  Telephone numbers for referrals on transportation information including numbers for the regional ridesharing agency and local transit operators; 
iii.  Ridesharing promotional material supplied by commuter-oriented organizations; 
iv.  Bicycle route and facility information, including regional/local bicycle maps and bicycle safety information; 
v.  A listing of activities available for carpoolers, vanpools, bicyclists, transit riders and pedestrians at the site. 
2.  Nonresidential development of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet or more shall comply with subsection (B)(1) of this section and shall provide all of the following measures to the satisfaction of the city: 
a.  Not less than ten (10) percent of employee parking area shall be located as close as is practical to the employee entrance(s), and shall be reserved for use by potential carpool/vanpool parking vehicles, without displacing handicapped and customer parking needs. This preferential carpool/vanpool parking area shall be identified on the site plan upon application for building permit, to the satisfaction of city. A statement that preferential carpool/vanpool spaces for employees are available and a description of the method for obtaining such spaces must be included on the required transportation information board. Spaces will be signed/striped as demand warrants; provided that at all times at least one space for projects of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet and two spaces for projects over one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet will be signed/striped for carpool/vanpool vehicles. 
b.  Preferential parking spaces reserved for vanpools must be accessible to vanpool vehicles. When located within a parking structure, a minimum vehicle interior clearance of seven feet two inches shall be provided for those spaces and access ways to be used by such vehicles. Adequate turning radii and parking space dimensions shall also be included in vanpool parking areas. 
c.  Bicycle racks or other secure bicycle parking shall be provided to accommodate four bicycles per the first fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of nonresidential development and one bicycle per each additional fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of nonresidential development. Calculations which result in a fraction of 0.5 or higher shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. A bicycle parking facility may also be a fully enclosed space or locker accessible only to the owner or operator of the bicycle, which protects the bike from inclement weather. Specific facilities and location (e.g., provision of racks, lockers or locked room) shall be to the satisfaction of the city. 
3.  Nonresidential development of one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet or more shall comply with subsections (B)(1) and (2) of this section, and shall provide all of the following measures to the satisfaction of the city: 
a.  A safe and convenient zone in which vanpool and carpool vehicles may deliver or board their passengers; 
b.  Sidewalks or other designated pathways following direct and safe routes from the external pedestrian circulation system to each building in the development; 
c.  If determined necessary by the city to mitigate the project impact, bus stop improvements must be provided. The city will consult with the local bus service providers in determining appropriate improvements. When locating bus stops and/or planning building entrances, entrances must be designated to provide safe and efficient access to nearby transit stations/stops; 
d.  Safe and convenient access from the external circulation system to bicycle parking facilities on-site. 
4.  Residential development of all sizes shall provide the following to the satisfaction of the city: 
a.  A bulletin board, display case or kiosk displaying transportation information located in the main sales office where greatest number of residents are likely to see it. Information in the area shall include, but is not limited to the following: 
i.  Current maps, routes and schedules for public transit routes serving the site; 
ii.  Telephone number for referrals on transportation information including numbers for the regional ridesharing agency and local transit operators; 
iii.  Ridesharing promotional material supplied by commuter-oriented organizations; 
iv.  Bicycle route and facility information, including regional/local bicycle maps and bicycle safety information; 
v.  A listing of activities available for carpoolers, vanpools, bicyclists, transit riders and pedestrians at the site. 
(Prior code § 3-17.3) 
15.56.040 - Monitoring. 
    The provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be included in the development approval process for all developments which require discretionary approvals. Monitoring to ensure compliance with this chapter shall occur prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Prior code § 3-17.4) 
15.56.050 - Enforcement. 
A.  Where the requirements of this chapter conflict with the requirements of any other ordinance, the most restrictive requirements shall apply. 
B.  Where the requirements of this chapter have been violated, enforcement shall be in accordance with Chapters 1.08 and 1.12 of this code. 
(Prior code § 3-17.5) 
Chapter 15.60 - HOUSING MORTGAGE FINANCE PROGRAM 

15.60.010 - Establishment. 
    The city establishes a home mortgage finance program (the "program") pursuant to the Act, approves the Rules and Regulations Establishing Eligibility Criteria for Lending Institutions and the Rules and Regulations Establishing Eligibility Criteria for Mortgagors, copies of which are on file with the city clerk and determines to issue revenue bonds pursuant to said Act to provide funds for the Program. 
(Prior code § 8-6.1) 
15.60.020 - Purpose. 
    The city finds and declares that the program will service the public purposes of increasing the housing supply and of providing financing for decent, safe and sanitary housing which is affordable by people on the lower end of the purchasing spectrum. 
(Prior code § 8-6.2) 
15.60.030 - Authorization. 
    The proper officers of the city are authorized and directed to take all actions necessary or appropriate to implement the program in accordance with the Act. The provisions of the chapter, being necessary for the welfare of the city and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect its purposes. 
(Prior code § 8-6.3) 
Chapter 15.64 - DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES 

15.64.010 - Purpose and intent. 
    The city council of the city finds that new development of land within the city imposes increased demands on the city's capital improvements and operational service requirements. This chapter establishes the urban structure program for the adoption and administration of development impact fees by the city for the benefit of the citizens whereby as a condition to the issuance of a building permit by the city the property owner or laud developer will be required to pay development impact fees or provide other consideration to the city for the purpose of defraying the costs of public expenditures for capital improvements and operational services which will benefit such new development The development impact fees established herein shall be imposed in an amount based upon a unit of measurement, including but not limited to, the gross square footage, number of acres, number of lane miles, number of residential dwelling units, or some similarly fair and reasonable basis in order to finance such capital improvement and operational services, the demand for which is generated by new development in the city. New development impact fees shall not exceed the cost of providing capital improvements and operational services for which the need is attributable to those development projects that pay the fees. 
(Prior code § 2-5.70) 
15.64.020 - Definitions. 
    Unless the context shall require otherwise, the definitions set forth in this section shall apply to the following terms as used in this chapter: 
    "Building permit" means the permit required for new construction and additions pursuant to this title. The term "building permit," as used herein, shall not be deemed to include permits required for remodeling, rehabilitation, or other improvements to an existing structure or rebuilding a damaged or destroyed structure, provided there is no increase in gross floor area of commercial or industrial development or in the number of dwelling units in residential developments resulting therefrom. 
    "Capital improvements" means any and/or all of the public facilities and infrastructure improvements including acquisition of land, design and construction, equipping and installing, and related capital costs which are to be financed in whole or in part by the imposition of development impact fees. 
    "Capital improvements program" means the city's annually updated program indicating the approximate mate location, size, time schedule and estimates of cost for public facilities and improvements. 
    "City" means the City of Lancaster. 
    "Commercial development" means any development designated or intended to be occupied or used for retail commercial, nonretail commercial, general business or other commercial purposes, including sleeping rooms in hotels and motels with or without kitchens or kitchen facilities. It does not mean repair or replacement of a commercial building which has been accidentally damaged or destroyed by natural causes or human activity provided there is no increase in the floor area of the building. 
    "Council" means the city council of the city. 
    "Department" means the community development department of the city. 
    "Development" or "development project" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real property, the use of any principal structure or land, or any other activity that requires issuance of a building permit. 
    "Development impact fees" means any monetary exaction, other than a tax or special assessment, which is charged to an applicant in connection with approval of a development project for the purpose of defraying all or a portion of the cost of capital improvements and operational services related to the development project, subject to the exceptions set forth in California Government Code Section 66000 et seq. 
    "Industrial development" means any development designed or intended for manufacturing, processing, research, warehousing or similar uses. It does not mean repair or replacement of an industrial building which has been accidentally damaged or destroyed by natural causes or human activity provided there is no increase in the floor area of the building. 
    "Operational services" means public services and maintenance which are to be financed in whole or in part by the imposition of development impact fees. 
    "Report" means the Urban Structure Documentation Report of the Urban Structure Program which the city council approved on March 1, 1993 and as amended on August 24, 1999, pursuant to the provisions of California Government Code Section 66000 et seq., which report is on file with the city clerk of the city. 
    "Residential development" means any development consisting of dwelling units as defined in Title 17. It does not mean: 
1.  Any addition to an existing single-family home; or 
2.  Repair or replacement of a residential building which has been accidentally damaged or destroyed by natural causes or human activity provided there is no increase in the number of dwelling units; or 
3.  New construction of a single-family dwelling unit on a lot or parcel of land with an area of not less than two acres which was created prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 764 § 1, 1999; prior code § 2-5.71) 
15.64.030 - Development impact fees. 
    In order to implement the goals, objectives, policies and specific actions of the general plan of the city, the capital improvement program and the city's annually adopted budget; to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the city's population; to mitigate impacts of new development on the level of service capacity in existing facilities; and to ensure that the burdens of financing capital improvements and operational services are borne by the development projects benefited thereby, and except as otherwise expressly set forth elsewhere in this municipal code, every person constructing any new residential, commercial or industrial development shall pay to the city prior to issuance by the city of a building permit the development impact fees set forth herein below and such other development impact fees as the city council may adopt by resolution or ordinance as necessary and appropriate from time to time. 
(Ord. 794 § 1 (part), 2001: Prior code § 2-5.72) 
15.64.040 - Street improvements fee. 
A.  To mitigate the additional traffic burdens created by new development to the city's arterial and collector street system, a street improvements fee will be imposed on all new development in the city to finance the costs of street improvements, including acquisition, widening and reconstruction, street landscaping, intersection improvements and freeway interchange improvements. 
B.  The city manager may authorize the deferred payment of the nonresidential traffic impact fees required by this Section 15.64.040 if the city manager determines that a development complies with all requirements for such deferred payments as set forth in Chapter 15.77 of this Title 15. 
(Ord. 794 § 1, (part) 2001: Prior code § 2-5,72.1) 
15.64.050 - Traffic signalization fee. 
A.  To mitigate additional burdens created by new development to the city's traffic problems beyond the financial ability of the city to control, a traffic signalization fee will be imposed on all new development in the city to finance the costs of traffic signalization improvements. 
B.  The city manager may authorize the deferred payment of the nonresidential traffic signalization fee required by this Section 15.64.050 if the city manager determines that a development complies with all requirements for such deferred payments as set forth in Chapter 15.77 of this Title 15. 
(Ord. 794 § 1, (part) 2001: Prior code § 2-5.72.2) 
15.64.060 - Drainage/flood control improvements fee. 
A.  In order to implement the goals, objectives, policies and specific actions of the Lancaster general plan and the city's master plan of drainage, and to mitigate the stormwater runoff impacts caused by new development, a drainage/flood control improvements fee will be imposed on all new development in the city pursuant to Article II of Chapter 13.04. 
B.  The city manager may authorize the deferred payment of the nonresidential drainage fees required by this Section 15.64.060 if the city manager determines that a development complies with all requirements for such deferred payment that are set forth in Chapter 15.77 of this Title 15 
(Ord. 794 § 1, (part) 2001: Prior code § 2-5.72.3) 
15.64.070 - Water improvements fee. 
    To serve new development with adequate supplies of potable water, a water improvements fee will be imposed on all new development in the city. The water improvements fee shall provide funding of capital improvements, including pump stations, water reservoir facilities, wells, treatment facilities, waterlines, and other related improvements to ensure a continuing supply of potable water. 
(Prior code § 2-5.72.4) 
15.64.080 - Sewage treatment improvements fee. 
    To mitigate additional burdens placed on the city's existing sewage treatment systems created by new development, a sewage treatment improvements Fee will be imposed on all new development in the city to pay for the development's fair share of the cost of certain capital improvements. The sewage treatment improvements fee shall provide funding for land acquisition design and construction of sewage treatment plant improvement and expansions, wastewater interceptors and other related improvements. 
(Prior code § 2-5.72.5) 
15.64.090 - Park acquisition fee. 
    To mitigate the impacts of new residential development on the availability of open space land and park and recreational facilities, a park acquisition fee will be imposed on all new residential development in the city. 
(Prior code § 2-5.72.6) 
15.64.100 - Park development fee. 
    To mitigate the impacts of new residential development on the availability of open space land and park and recreational facilities, a park development fee will be imposed on all new residential development in the city. The park development fee shall provide funds for the development of park, recreation and arts facilities. 
(Ord. 732 § 1, 1997: prior code § 2-5.72.7) 
15.64.110 - Administrative offices fee. 
    To mitigate the burdens and increased demand for providing administrative facilities needed to serve new development and to support the well-being and general welfare of the city's residents and businesses, an administrative offices fee will be imposed on all new development in the city. The administrative offices fee shall be used to finance land acquisition, design, construction, equipping and related capital costs for administrative facilities. 
(Prior code § 2-5.72.8) 
15.64.120 - Corporate yard facilities fee. 
    To mitigate the burdens and increased demand for governmental services created by new development and to provide adequate public services and support to the city's growing population. a corporate yard facilities fee will be imposed on all new development in the city. The corporate yard facilities fee shall be used to finance land acquisition, design. construction, equipping and related capital costs for municipal storage and equipment repair facilities. 
(Prior code § 2-5.72.9) 
15.64.130 - Sheriff's substation facilities fee. 
    To provide adequate public services and to protect the safety, well-being and general welfare of the city's growing population, a sheriffs substation facilities fee will be imposed on all new development in the city. The sheriff's substation facilities fee shall be used to finance land acquisition, design, construction, equipping and related capital costs for sheriff substation facilities. 
(Prior code § 2.5.72.10) 
15.64.140 - Library facilities fee. 
    To provide adequate public services and to support the well-being and general welfare of the city's growing population, a library facilities fee will be imposed on all new development in the city. The library facilities fee shall be used to finance land acquisition, design, construction, equipping and related capital costs for local library facilities. 
(Prior code § 2-5.72.12) 
15.64.150 - Service and maintenance operations fee. 
    To provide adequate public services and to support the well-being and general welfare of the city's growing population. a service and maintenance operations fee will be imposed on all new development in the city. The service and maintenance operations fee shall be used to finance the annual costs for providing service and maintenance of and to infrastructure and facilities. 
(Prior code § 2-5.72.13) 
15.64.160 - Resolution establishing the amount of development impact fees. 
    The city council shall by resolution establish and periodically adjust the amount of the development impact fees specified in this chapter, which resolution(s) shall be consistent with the requirements of Assembly Bill 1600 (Chapter 927 Statutes 1989) as set forth in California Government Code Section 66000, et seq. and shall include the following: 
A.  Identify the purpose of the fee; 
B.  Identify the use to which the fee will be put; 
C.  Determine how there is a reasonable relationship between the fee's use and the type of development project on which the fee is imposed; 
D.  Determine how there is a reasonable relationship between the need for the public facility and the type of development project on which the fee is imposed; and 
E.  Determine how there is a reasonable relationship between the specific amount of the fee imposed on a development project and the cost of the needed public facilities attributable to that development project. 
(Prior code § 2-5.73) 
15.64.170 - Determination of fees. 
    Upon the receipt by the department of an informal request or of an application by a property owner or land developer for any development action, the department shall determine and give written notice to the property owner or land developer of the applicability of this chapter to said development, the amount, if any, of developable land to which such approval relates and the amount of the fee(s) payable pursuant to the resolution(s) adopted pursuant to Section 15.64.160, which may be expressed in terms of a formula. The department need not give written notice to the property owner or land developer for informal requests or in the event that it determines that no fee relating to such development is payable pursuant to this chapter and the resolution(s). 
(Prior code § 2-5.74) 
15.64.180 - Payment of fees. 
    After the adoption by the city council of a resolution establishing the amounts of the development impact fees, no building permit shall be issued and no development shall be permitted on any land within the city unless and until the development impact fees relating to such development and established by the resolution(s) adopted pursuant to Section 15.64.160 has been paid unless a determination has been made by the department that no fee is payable pursuant to this chapter. Development impact fees payable in connection with mobilehome park development shall be paid by the property owner or land developer prior to issuance by the city of off-site improvement permits. With respect to residential developments, the requirement that a property owner or land developer pay the development impact fees prior to the issuance of a building permit is imposed pursuant to Government Code Section 66007(b). 
(Ord. 688 § 1, 1995: prior code § 2-5.75.1) 
15.64.190 - Delinquency, penalty and interest. 
    If construction of any residential, commercial or industrial development is commenced without payment of the applicable development impact fees herein set forth and without obtaining a building permit therefor, such fees shall become delinquent at the time such construction is commenced. There shall be added to such delinquent fees a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent, which shall thereupon become payable. The fees and penalty shall bear interest at the rate of 0.833 percent per month or portion thereof until paid, but in no event shall such interest exceed the maximum rate of interest permitted by law. Such action shall also be subject to payment of building permit fees and penalties as established by the city council. 
(Prior code § 2-5.75.2) 
15.64.200 - Administration of development impact fees. 
    All of the fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited into separate specific amounts for capital improvements and operational services of the city. These funds and any interest earnings thereon shall be used solely for the purposes specified for funds of such account and solely for the financing of capital improvements and operational services or to reimburse the city for capital improvements and operational services funded or constructed in whole or in part by the city. 
(Prior code § 2-5.75.3) 
15.64.210 - Consideration in lieu of fee- Credits. 
A.  The provision of Sections 15.64.030 and 15.64.170 to the contrary notwithstanding, upon application by a property owner or land developer, the city council may accept consideration in lieu of the development impact fees required pursuant to this chapter, provided: 
1.  The city council, upon recommendation of the city staff, finds that the substitute consideration proposed has a value equal to or greater than such fee; and 
2.  The substitute consideration is in a form acceptable to the city council. 
B.  A property owner or land developer may elect to construct capital improvement(s). If the property owner or land developer elects to construct such improvement(s), the property owner or land developer must enter into an agreement with the city prior to issuance of any building permit by the city. The agreement must establish the estimated cost of the improvement(s), the schedule for initiation and completion of the improvement(s), a requirement that the improvement(s) be completed to city standards, and such other terms and conditions as deemed necessary by the city. 
C.  A property owner, land developer, commercial or industrial enterprise may be entitled to a waiver, reduction, or deferral in the street improvement fees established in Section 15.64.040, the traffic signalization fees established in Section 15.64.050 and the drainage/flood control improvement fees established in Section 15.64.060 if the city manager determines that a development will contribute a significant amount of sales tax to the city, will create a substantial number of jobs, or will enhance the city's quality of life or produce other desirable benefits to the community, commercial or industrial enterprise. 
(Ord. 733 § 1, 1997: prior code § 2-5.76) 
15.64.220 - Development impact fee nonexclusive. 
    The development impact fees established herein are additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other requirements imposed by the city on the development of land or the issuance of building permits. The development impact fee(s) are intended to be consistent with and to further the goals, objectives, policies and specific actions of the general plan of the city; the report; and other city policies, ordinances and resolutions by which the city seeks to ensure the provision of public facilities and services in conjunction with the development of land. In no event shall a property owner or land developer be obligated to pay for capital improvements and operational services in an amount in excess of the amount calculated pursuant to this chapter and the resolution(s) adopted pursuant to Section 15.64.160; provided, however, a property owner or land developer may be required to pay, pursuant to city ordinances, regulations or policies for other public facilities and services, including, without limitation, subdivision improvements and other fees associated with development. 
(Prior code § 2-5.77) 
15.64.230 - Appeals. 
A.  If the property owner or land developer for any development project feels that the development impact fee(s) assessed to his or her development do not accurately reflect the project's fiscal impacts, the property owner or land developer may, at his or her own expense, undertake an independent financial analysis of the development project, per the requirements of the "Guidelines For Independent Analysis" contained within the report. Such financial analysis shall be submitted to the department for review. The department may recommend the original development impact fee(s), as derived by the urban structure program model established by the report, is accurate and will apply to the project; the independent analysis and estimate of the development impact fee(s) are accurate and will apply to the project; a negotiated estimate of the development impact fee(s) is agreed upon to apply to the project; or that additional information and further study is required from the property owner or land developer. Any property owner or land developer aggrieved by the determinations of the department hereunder may appeal said determinations pursuant to the uniform appeal procedure set forth in Chapter 2.44. B. If the city council finds and determines that the amount of the development impact fee(s) deposited exceeds the amount of the development impact fee(s) required by the development project, the difference shall be reimbursed to the property owner or the land developer. 
C.  If the notice of appeal is accompanied by a cash deposit in an amount equal to the development impact fee(s) due as calculated by department, the chief building official shall issue the building permit. The filing of an appeal shall not stay the collection of the development impact fee(s). 
(Prior code § 2-5.78) 
Chapter 15.66 - BIOLOGICAL IMPACT FEE 

15.66.010 - Purpose and intent. 
    The city council finds that new development of land within the city results in an incremental effect on biological resources, including loss of habitat and reduction in total numbers of flora and fauna on a regional basis. This chapter establishes the adoption, collection, administration, and use of a biological impact fee to mitigate the long-term incremental impact of additional new development. Further, in recognizing the regional nature of such impacts and the need for regional mitigation for them, as well as the statutory authority over biological resources granted to various federal and state agencies by law, this chapter establishes the basis for such impact fees, conditions under which they are reduced or waived, and the situations under which such fees shall terminate. 
(Ord. 848 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2005) 
15.66.020 - Basis of impact fee. 
    The city council expressly finds that the biological impact fee is expressly adopted for the purpose of mitigating biological impacts on a regional basis. Therefore, the establishment of such fee shall be based on expected regional effects from new development and fees necessary to contribute the city's "fair share" to mitigate such impacts on a regional basis. In establishing the criteria listed in Section 15.66.070 of this chapter, it is the intent of the city council that such fees may be expended either within or outside the city limits in order to achieve the goal of regional mitigation. 
(Ord. 848 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2005) 
15.66.030 - Adoption of impact fee. 
    The city council shall adopt the biological impact fee by resolution. In accordance with Section 15.66.020 of this chapter, this fee shall be based on the city's expected "fair share" to mitigate regional impacts of new development. 
(Ord. 848 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2005) 
15.66.040 - Applicability of impact fee. 
    The biological impact fee shall be applicable to all new development of vacant land and payable as follows: 
A.  Land Subdivisions. All new subdivisions, as defined in Chapter 16 of the Lancaster Municipal Code, shall pay the biological impact fee prior to city council approval of a final subdivision map. 
B.  New Development Approvals. New development which requires approval of a conditional use permit, site plan review, or a director's review, or which require the approval of the director of community development under a specific plan or other ordinance, shall pay the biological impact fee prior to issuance of a grading permit on the property. 
C.  Request for Approval Extensions. Subdivisions and development projects which were approved prior to the adoption of the biological impact fee shall be required to pay the biological impact fee as a condition of any requested time extension allowed by the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 848 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2005) 
15.66.050 - Exceptions. 
    The biological impact fee shall not be applicable in the following situations: 
A.  Agricultural Production. The biological impact fee shall not apply to the use of property for agricultural production, since such use does not permanently convert vacant land to development. Such exception shall not apply, however, to approvals for processing or warehousing facilities which constitute development of vacant property. 
B.  Temporary Uses. The biological impact fee shall not apply to uses which are temporary in nature, including but not limited to, seasonal sales lots, temporary outdoor events, and similar activities provided that the director of community development has determined that such temporary use will not permanently convert vacant land to development. 
C.  Expansion of Existing Buildings and Uses on Developed Property. The biological impact fee shall not apply to the expansion of existing buildings or uses on developed property, where the director of community development has determined that such expansion will not intrude into significant areas of vacant land. 
D.  Development on Existing Residential Parcels. The biological impact fee shall not apply to the development of new residential uses on existing legally created parcels. Such exception shall not apply to situations where a legally created parcel is further subdivided, which shall pay the impact fee in accordance with Section 15.66.040(A) of this chapter. 
E.  Fee Precluded by Development Agreement. The biological impact fee shall not apply where an adopted development agreement specifically prohibits its imposition. 
(Ord. 848 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2005) 
15.66.060 - Reduction or waiver of biological impact fee. 
    Development subject to the biological impact fee may have such fee reduced or waived under the following circumstances: 
A.  Development Projects Subject to Statutory Permits by a State or Federal Agency. When a development project is required by state or federal statute to obtain a permit from regulatory agency other than the city including, but not limited to an incidental take permit from the United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) or the California Department of Fish and Game (CDFG), a streambed alteration permit from the CDFG, or similar permit, the biological impact fee established by this chapter may be reduced or waived as follows: 
1.  The development project is required to provide mitigation in the form of land or fees as a condition of the permit, and the applicant provides proof that such fees have been paid or land acquired. 
2.  In cases where the mitigation fees paid or the cost of the land acquisition does not exceed the adopted biological impact fee, the development project shall pay the biological impact fee minus the other mitigation costs. 
3.  In cases where the mitigation fees paid or the cost of the land acquisition exceeds the adopted biological impact fee, the biological impact fee is waived. 
B.  Separate Agreement with State or Federal Agency. When a development project has entered into a separate agreement not covered under subsection A of this section with a state or federal agency for the purpose of mitigating the biological effect of that project through the payment of fees, acquisition of land, or other means, and the state or federal agency has expressly stated that such agreement fully mitigates the biological effects of the development project, the biological impact fee shall be waived. 
(Ord. 848 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2005) 
15.66.070 - Administration of fee and allowable uses. 
    All biological impact fees shall be held in a separate account and shall only be expended upon an affirmative vote of a majority of the city council specifying the amount and use of such fees. Such fees shall only be expended for the following purposes: 
A.  Acquisition of Mitigation Land. Fees may be expended for the purpose of acquiring, or paying a third party for the acquisition of, land for the permanent conservation of habitat or species. Such acquisition may include land outside of the city of Lancaster; however, it is the intent of this chapter that any such lands contain habitat or species that will compensate for the incremental loss of same within the city limits. In identifying such acquisition sites, the city may consult with the USFWS or CDFG for assistance. 
B.  Restoration of Habitat. Fees may be expended for the purpose of restoring habitat within identified permanent conservation areas. 
C.  Environmental Education. Fees may be expended for the purpose of funding environmental education, provided that the city council finds that such efforts will contribute to a long-term improvement in the regional environment by increasing public awareness of the biological resources of the region. 
D.  Other Uses. Fees may be expended for other uses provided that the city council finds that such use will meet the intent of this chapter. The city council expressly finds that assignment of such fees to a group with the authority to administer a regional conservation plan, such as the proposed West Mojave coordinated management plan, is within the intent of this chapter. 
(Ord. 848 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2005) 
15.66.080 - Termination of biological impact fee. 
    The city council shall terminate the biological impact fee at such time as the city becomes subject to a habitat conservation plan or other regional plan that meets the intent of this chapter. 
(Ord. 848 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2005) 
Chapter 15.68 - FUNDING FOR INTERIM CLASSROOMS AND SCHOOL DISTRICT FACILITIES 

15.68.010 - Title and purpose. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Interim School Facilities' Financing Ordinance of the City of Lancaster." The purpose of this chapter is to establish a method of providing interim classrooms and related facilities for school districts having conditions of overcrowding within one or more attendance areas. 
(Prior code § 2-5.33) 
15.68.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context: 
    "Attendance area" means that portion of a school district, with identifiable boundaries determined by the school board, from which children residing within these boundaries would normally be assigned to attend a specified school in the district. 
    "Certificate of completion" means a written notice to the office of the city engineer that a developer has paid fees as required by this chapter and/or has made land available as required by this chapter. 
    "Conditions of overcrowding" means that the total enrollment of a school, including enrollment from proposed development, exceeds the capacity of such school as determined by the governing body of the district and confirmed by the city council. 
    "Developer" means any person, association, firm, corporation and other business entity, or public agency installing or constructing a residential development. 
    "Dwelling unit" means one or more rooms in a building or portion thereof, or one or more rooms in a mobilehome, designed, intended to be used, or used for occupancy by one family for living and sleeping quarters and containing only one kitchen. 
    "Family" means a person or persons living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit. 
    "Mobilehome space" means any space, including each space within a mobilehome park, designed for parking a mobilehome on a temporary, semipermanent or permanent basis. 
    "Reasonable methods for mitigating conditions of overcrowding" include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Agreements between a developer and the affected school district whereby temporary-use buildings will be leased to the school district for an interim period, or whereby temporary-use buildings owned by the school will be used; 
2.  The availability of funds, the use of which would not impair the normal functioning of educational programs; 
3.  The use of funds which could be made available from the sale of surplus school district property. For purposes of this subsection, "property" means both real and personal; 
4.  The use of school district property for temporary-use buildings; 
5.  The use of other schools in the district not having overcrowded conditions. 
    "Residential development" means a project containing one or more dwelling units. 
(Prior code § 2-5.34) 
15.68.030 - Notice of overcrowding conditions. 
    When the governing body of a school district, which operates, in whole or in part, within the incorporated area of the city, notifies the city council that conditions of overcrowding exist within one or more attendance areas within the district, such notice shall be in writing and contain the following: 
A.  Clear and convincing evidence upon which the finding of "overcrowding" is based; 
B.  Clear and convincing evidence that such overcrowding will impair the normal functioning of educational programs; 
C.  The reasons why such overcrowding conditions exist; 
D.  The reasonable methods of mitigating conditions of overcrowding that were evaluated, and the reasons why such mitigating methods are unfeasible; 
E.  A statement that no other feasible method for mitigation of the conditions exists; 
F.  A description of the geographic boundaries of the overcrowded attendance area or areas; 
G.  Such other information as may be required by the city council. 
(Prior code § 2-5.35) 
15.68.040 - Concurrence by the city council. 
    After the receipt of a notice complying with the provisions of Section 15.68.030, the city council shall determine whether it concurs with such a school district's findings, except in the instance of eastside school district and Lancaster school district wherein the city council has already adopted a resolution confirming the overcrowded situation. In the event the city council determines to conduct a public hearing, such hearing shall be set within sixty (60) days after the filing of the notice of overcrowding conditions. In making such determination, the council may receive and rely on any other evidence submitted by the school district or any other interested person. Evidence of continued overcrowding shall be submitted to the city council in the same manner set forth in Section 15.68.030 in the annual audit report as defined in Section 15.68.150. 
(Prior code § 2-5.36) 
15.68.050 - Restriction on approval of development. 
    When the city council concurs with a school district's findings that conditions of overcrowding exist within an attendance area, it shall notify the office of the city engineer and the department of community development of such concurrence and of the geographical boundaries of such attendance area. Upon receipt of such notification by the council, the office of city engineer shall not issue a building permit, or in the case of an installation of a mobilehome or the construction of a mobilehome park, a utility permit (for example, electrical, sewer, plumbing, construction, etc.) within the attendance area until it has received a written "certificate of completion" from the affected school district. In the case of a conversion of an apartment building restricted to adults only to a condominium, no tentative map shall be approved without a condition requiring the developer to enter into an agreement with the school district providing compliance with this chapter in the event said restriction is removed. The agreement shall require the developer to comply with this part's requirements at the time a building permit is applied for, or, if no building permit is required, prior to the sale of any unit. 
(Prior code § 2-5.37) 
15.68.060 - Exemptions. 
    This section shall not apply to projects involving the following: 
A.  Senior citizen housing approved, financed and/or subsidized by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, and residential development restricted to adults only; provided, the developer enters into a written agreement with the affected school district requiring that the developer will make land available pursuant to Section 15.68.120, or pay fees in lieu thereof pursuant to Section 15.68.110 when and if such restrictions cease during a period the school district has overcrowded conditions within the attendance area that the development is located; 
B.  The conversion of existing apartment buildings to condominiums, except where such apartment buildings were restricted to "adults only" and said restrictions are removed when the conversion takes place; 
C.  Alterations; 
D.  Remodeling or renovations which do not result in additional dwelling units. 
(Prior code § 2-5.38) 
15.68.070 - School district schedule. 
    Following the concurrence and decision by the city council that an overcrowded condition exists in an attendance area, the governing body of the involved school district shall submit within sixty (60) days a schedule specifying how it will use the land or fees, or both, to solve the conditions of overcrowding, and a detailed analysis of how the school district will alleviate said conditions. The schedule shall include the school sites to be used, the classroom facilities to be made available, and the times when such facilities will be available. In the event the governing body of the school district cannot meet the schedule and projections of when such conditions will be alleviated, it shall submit modifications to the city council and the reasons for the modification. 
(Prior code § 2-5.39) 
15.68.080 - Payment of fees-Land made available. 
    In an attendance area where the city council has concurred in a finding of overcrowding conditions, the developer of a proposed residential development, as a condition of obtaining a building permit, or in the case of an installation of a mobilehome or the construction of a mobilehome park, a utility permit (for example, electrical, sewer, plumbing, construction, etc.), shall pay fees in accordance with the provisions of Section 15.68.110 or make land available in accordance with the provisions of Section 15.68.120. The land to be made available or the amount of fees to be paid, or both, shall bear a reasonable relationship and will be limited to the needs of the community for interim elementary and/or high school classrooms and related facilities and shall be reasonably related and limited to the need for schools caused by the development. Such land or fees shall be used only for the purpose of providIng interim elementary or high school classrooms and related facilities. 
(Prior code § 2-5.40) 
15.68.090 - Payment of fees in small developments. 
    Only the payment of fees may be required in residential developments containing fifty (50) dwelling units or less. In instances where the total development exceeds fifty (50) dwelling units, the decision to pay fees or to make land available and for what period of time, or a combination thereof shall be made by the school district in consultation with the developer. 
(Prior code § 2-5.41) 
15.68.100 - Compliance requirements. 
A.  Where the payment of fees is required, they shall be collected by the school district prior to the issuance of a building permit, or in the case of an installation of a mobilehome or the construction of a mobilehome park, a utility permit (for example, electrical, sewer, plumbing, construction, etc.). Upon receipt of payment, the school district shall issue its certificate of completion of requirements under this chapter for interim school facilities' financing. 
B.  Where land is to be made available, the developer shall provide a recordable written agreement to the school district which grants to the school district exclusive use of the land acceptable to the school district for an interim period. This written agreement shall be provided to the school district prior to the issuance of a building permit, or in the case of an installation of a mobilehome or the construction of a mobilehome park, a utility permit (for example, electrical, sewer, plumbing, construction, etc.). Upon receiving the recordable agreement, the school district shall issue its certificate of completion. 
C.  If the school district determines that the requirement for land or use fees in lieu thereof would result in an inequitable duplication of land or fees previously provided by the developer or his predecessors in interest, the school district shall adjust the requirement to the extent necessary to eliminate such duplications. 
(Prior code § 2-5.42) 
15.68.110 - Fees. 
    Beginning with thirty (30) days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, fees as set forth in Resolution No. 84-38 shall be required. Every year on July 1st the amount of each fee set forth in Resolution No. 84-38 shall be increased or decreased by a percentage equal to the percentage change in the cost of living as shown by the California Consumer Price Index for all items determined by the California Department of Industrial Relations, between (A) the first day of the quarter of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and (B) the April 1st preceding date of increase or decrease. 
(Prior code § 2-5.43) 
15.68.120 - Land. 
    Beginning with thirty (30) days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the following land donation schedule shall apply: 
A.  The length of time the land is needed shall be determined by the school district. 
B.  A computation shall be made to determine the total fees which would be assessed if the total exaction were to be fees. 
C.  The fair market value of the interim use of the site(s) designated shall be determined as the higher of two appraisals presented by professional appraisers. The appraisers shall be selected by the school district and if the developer does not concur with the district's selection of appraiser, the district shall select one and developer shall select one from a list of five names provided by the district. Appraisers shall be members of the American Institute of Real Estate Appraisers. 
    The fair market value of the interim use shall be determined by the condition of the land at the time of donation. 
D.  In the event the fair market value of the interim use of the land to be made available exceeds the amount computed in Section 15.68.110, the district shall pay the developer the difference. 
E.  In the event the fair market value of the interim use of the land to be made available is less than the amount computed in Section 15.68.110, the developer shall pay the difference to the district in fees. 
(Prior code § 2-5.44) 
15.68.130 - Consistency with the general plan. 
    When land is to be made available to the school district, said district shall submit the proposal to the department of community development for a determination of whether the general plan provides for the location of public schools and whether the proposal is consistent with the general plan. 
(Prior code § 2-5.45) 
15.68.140 - Agreement for fee distribution. 
    Where two separate school districts operate schools in overlapping attendance areas where the city council concurs that overcrowding conditions exist for both school districts, the governing bodies of the affected school districts shall determine the distribution of revenue from the fees levied pursuant to this chapter within thirty (30) days from the date of concurrence by the council. In the event the school districts fail to agree on distribution of fees within thirty (30) days, the county superintendent of schools shall determine the apportionment of fees within a second thirty (30) day period. 
(Prior code § 2-5.46) 
15.68.150 - Reports. 
A.  Any school district receiving funds or land pursuant to this chapter shall maintain a separate account for any fees paid and disposition of land received and shall file a report with the council specifying the following: 
1.  The balance in the account at the end of the previous fiscal year; 
2.  The facilities based, purchased or constructed during the previous fiscal year; 
3.  The attendance areas that will continue to be overcrowded when the fall term begins; 
4.  When and where conditions of overcrowding will no longer exist; 
5.  A detailed analysis of what the school district is doing to alleviate the overcrowded conditions. 
B.  Such report shall be filed by October 15th of each year and shall be filed more frequently at the request of the council. 
(Prior code § 2-5.47) 
15.68.160 - Termination. 
    As soon as overcrowding conditions cease to exist the school district shall immediately notify the city council of such fact. Upon receiving such notice the council shall cease the requirement of fees or land required by this chapter. In the event the school district has money from fees previously paid in its interim school facility account after overcrowding conditions cease to exist, it shall apply such fees to mitigate future overcrowded conditions in the same attendance area for which the fees were collected; provided, however, in the event overcrowded conditions do not occur in said attendance area within five years from the date overcrowded conditions cease to exist, such fees may be applied to relieve overcrowded conditions in other attendance areas within the district. 
(Prior code § 2-5.48) 
15.68.170 - Procedures. 
    The city council may, from time to time, issue procedures and guidelines to provide for the administration and implementation of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 2-5.49) 
Chapter 15.72 - PARK-IN-LIEU FEES 

15.72.010 - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases whenever used in this ordinance shall be construed as defined in this section: 
    "Bedroom" means a room intended to be furnished with a bed and intended primarily for sleeping. 
    "City" means the city of Lancaster, California. 
    "Construct" means the putting together, assembling, erecting or altering of construction materials, components, or modules into a structure, or portion of a structure, and includes reconstructing, enlarging or altering any structure. Construct also includes the moving and locating of a building, or portions thereof, onto a lot or parcel of land, and also includes the improvement of land as a mobilehome park. 
    "Dwelling unit" means a separate single-family habitation structure or unit containing a bedroom or bedrooms and shall include: 
1.  A single-family dwelling; 
2.  Each separate apartment or habitation unit comprising a multiple-dwelling structure or condominium; and 
3.  Each space or pad designed and allocated to accommodate a mobilehome within a mobilehome park. 
    "Mobilehome park" means any area or tract of land where one or more mobilehome lots are rented or leased or held out for rent or lease to accommodate mobilehomes used for human habitation. 
    "Mobilehome space" means any area or portion of a mobilehome park designated, designed or used for the occupancy of one mobilehome on a temporary, semipermanent or permanent basis. 
    "Person" means any domestic or foreign corporation, firm, association, syndicate, joint stock company, partnership of any kind, joint venture or common law trust, society, club or individual. 
(Prior code § 2-5.53) 
15.72.020 - Applicability. 
    Each person who constructs any dwelling unit or units as defined in this chapter containing bedrooms in the city shall pay a fee or dedicate land in lieu of the payment of the fee and/or dedication of land as provided for in Resolution No. 85-56, as it may be amended, adopted in conjunction herewith. All fees and/or dedications pursuant to said resolution shall be deposited or dedicated to the city as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 2-5.54) 
15.72.030 - Exemptions. 
    The fee imposed under this chapter shall not apply to the following: 
A.  Enlargement, remodeling and/or alteration of a building; 
B.  Reconstruction of a building which was damaged or destroyed by earthquake, fire, flood, or other cause over which the owner has no control (provided that compliance with any building code or other ordinance requirement of the city shall not be deemed a cause over which the owner has no control). If the number of dwelling units in the building is increased, then the fee imposed under this chapter shall apply to such increased number of dwelling units; 
C.  Replacement of any building on the same lot, if construction of the new building is commenced within twelve (12) months from the date the previous building was substantially removed from the lot. 
(Prior code § 2-5.55) 
15.72.040 - Payment of fee. 
    Any fee and/or dedication of land required to comply with any provision(s) of this chapter shall be paid prior to the issuance of any building permit for construction of any dwelling unit or mobilehome space. Such fee shall be paid to the city. Land dedication of parcels not within the project may be considered at the discretion of the city. 
(Prior code § 2-5.56) 
15.72.050 - Refund of fee. 
    A fee paid under this chapter for the construction of a new dwelling unit which is not built is refundable. A refund shall be made upon application of the property owner to the city and upon owner's showing that the construction of a new dwelling unit has not been commenced and the building permit issued therefor has expired, has been canceled, or has been revoked. Application must be made within one year from the cancellation, expiration or revocation of the building permit, provided, however, no refund shall be made when a dwelling unit is damaged or destroyed. In addition, no refund shall be made for mobilehome spaces upon final approval of the construction permit for a mobilehome park. In no case shall any refund exceed ninety (90) percent of the total fee collected to offset costs incurred by the city for administering this fee. 
(Prior code § 2-5.57) 
15.72.060 - Credit of open space. 
    No credit shall be given for private open space in a residential development. 
(Prior code § 2-5.58) 
Chapter 15.76 - FIRE PROTECTION FEES 

15.76.010 - Purpose and intent. 
    The city council of the city finds that new development of land within the city imposes increased demands on the city's public facility infrastructure and service requirements. This chapter is intended to establish a fire protection fee for fire protection and emergency medical services pursuant to the agreement between the Consolidated Fire Protection District of Los Angeles County ("district") and the city of Lancaster ("city") for the adoption and administration of the developer fee by the city for the benefit of the district whereby as a condition to the issuance of a building permit by the city the owner or land developer will be required to pay a fire protection fee or provide other considerations to the district for the purpose of defraying the costs of public expenditures for fire protection and emergency medical services and facilities which will benefit such new development. The development impact fee established herein shall be imposed in an amount based upon the gross square footage of new residential and nonresidential development or some similarly fair and reasonable basis in order to finance facilities, the demand for which is generated by new development in the city. Fire protection fees shall not exceed the cost of providing capital improvements for which the need is substantially attributable to those development that pay the fees. 
(Prior code § 2-5.60) 
15.76.020 - Definitions. 
    Unless the context shall require otherwise, the definitions set forth in this section shall apply to the following terms as used in this chapter: 
    "Building permit" means the permit required for new construction and additions pursuant to this title. The term "building permit," as used herein, shall not be deemed to include permits required for remodeling, rehabilitation, or other improvements to an existing structure or rebuilding a damaged or destroyed structure, provided there is no increase in gross floor area of commercial or industrial development or in number of dwelling units resulting therefrom. 
    "Capital improvement plan" means the capital improvement plan entitled developer fee detailed fire station plan dated May 1991, as may be revised, prepared by the district and adopted by resolution of the county of Los Angeles or such similar comprehensive plan adopted by resolution of the city council of the city which identifies specific capital improvements to be undertaken, and indicates the approximate location, size, time of availability, and estimates of cost for all facilities or improvements to be financed with fire protection fees and other necessary features. 
    "Capital improvements" means any and/or all of the public facilities, including acquisition of land, design and construction, improvements, equipping, and installing of same and which facilities are identified in the capital improvements plan to be financed in whole or in part by the imposition of a fire protection fee: 
    "City" means the city of Lancaster. "Council" means the city council of the city. "Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real property, the use of any principal structure or land, or any other activity that requires issuance of the building permit. 
    "District" means the consolidated fire protection district of Los Angeles County. 
    "Fire protection fee" means any monetary exaction, other than a tax or special assessment, which is charged to an applicant in connection with approval of a development project for the purpose of defraying all or a portion of the cost of public facilities for fire protection and emergency medical services related to the development project, subject to the exceptions set forth in California Government Code Section 66000 et seq. 
(Prior code § 2-5.61) 
15.76.030 - Fire protection fees. 
    In order to implement the goals and objectives of the general plan of the city, to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the city's population, to mitigate impacts of new development of the level of fire service capacity in existing facilities, and to ensure that the burdens of financing capital improvements may be borne by all of the development projects benefited thereby, every person constructing any new residential, commercial or industrial development shall pay fire protection fees to the district prior to issuance by the city of a building permit. The fire protection fee shall be used to finance capital improvements. Imposition of fire protection fees identified in this chapter is dependent upon adoption by the council of a capital improvement plan. 
(Prior code § 2-5.62) 
15.76.040 - Resolution approving capital improvement plan and establishing the amount of fire protection fees. 
A.  The council shall by resolution: 
1.  Adopt the capital improvements plan identifying by category the specific capital improvements to be financed in whole or in part by fire protection fees; and 
2.  Establish the amount of the fire protection fees specified in this chapter, which resolution shall be consistent with the requirements of Assembly Bill 1600 (Chapter 927 Statutes 1987) as set forth in California Government Code Section 66000, et seq. and shall include the following: 
a.  Identify the purpose of the fee, 
b.  Identify the use to which the fee will be put, 
c.  Determine how there is a reasonable relationship between the fee's use and the type of development project on which the fee is imposed, 
d.  Determine how there is a reasonable relationship between the need for the public facility and the type of development project on which the fee is imposed, and 
e.  Determine how there is a reasonable relationship between the specific amount of the fee imposed on a development project and the cost of the needed public facilities attributable to that development project. 
B.  The city council may by resolution amend the capital improvements plan and/or the fire protection fees upon completion of studies by the district or the city or upon determination of the availability of funds or financing to pay the cost of the capital improvements. 
(Prior code § 2-5.63) 
15.76.050 - Payment of fees. 
A.  After the adoption by the council of a resolution establishing the amounts of the fire protection fees, no building permit shall be issued and no development shall be permitted on any land within the city, unless and until the fire protection fees relating to such development and established by the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 15.76.040 have been paid in that amount or provision has been made for such payment to the satisfaction of the district, unless (i) a determination has been made by the district and the city department of public works that no fee is payable pursuant to this chapter, or (ii) the city manager has authorized the deferral of such fees in accordance with this Section 15.76.050. 
B.  The city manager may authorize the deferred payment of the nonresidential fire facilities impact fee required by this Section 15.76.050 if the city manager determines that a development complies with all requirements for such deferred payment as set forth in Chapter 15.77 of this Title 15. 
(Ord. 794 § 2, 2001: Prior code § 2-5.64) 
15.76.060 - Administration of fire protection fees. 
    All of the fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited into a separate capital improvement account of the district. These funds and any interest earnings thereon shall be used solely for the purposes specified for funds of such account and solely for the financing of capital improvements identified in the capital improvements plan adopted pursuant to this chapter, or to reimburse the district for those identified improvements constructed by the district with funds advanced by the district from other sources. 
(Prior code § 2-5.65) 
15.76.070 - Annual review of fire protection fees. 
    The district shall annually review and may, in its discretion, propose an adjustment to the capital improvement plan and in the amount of fire protection fees established by a resolution pursuant to Section 15.76.040. The adjustments proposed by the district shall be submitted to the city at least thirty (30) days prior to the close of the city's fiscal year for consideration by the city council. 
(Prior code § 2-5.66) 
15.76.080 - Consideration in lieu of fee-Credits. 
A.  The provisions of Sections 15.76.030 and 15.76.050 to the contrary notwithstanding, upon application by an owner or land developer, the council may accept consideration in lieu of the fire protection fees required pursuant to this chapter, provided: 
1.  The city council, upon recommendation to the district, finds that the substitute consideration proposed has a value equal to or greater than such fee; 2. The substitute consideration is in a form acceptable to the district. 
B.  A developer or property owner may elect to construct a capital improvement listed in the capital improvements plan. If the developer or owner elects to construct such improvement, the developer or property owner must enter into an agreement with the district prior to issuance of any building permit by the city. The agreement must establish the estimated cost of the improvement, the schedule or initiation and completion of the improvement, a requirement that the improvement be completed to district and city standards, and such other terms and conditions as deemed necessary by the district. 
(Prior code § 2-5.67) 
Chapter 15.77 - DEFERRED PAYMENT OF CERTAIN DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES AND FIRE PROTECTION FEES 

15.77.010 - Findings and intent. 
    The city council finds and determines that numerous social services of benefit to the community are provided by tax-exempt organizations that develop nonresidential buildings and structures within the city. The city council further finds and determines that the implementation of policies and procedures that authorize qualified tax-exempt organizations to defer the payment of certain development impact fees and fire protection fees required under Chapters 15.64 and 15.76 of this Title 15 will have the salutary effect of expediting the construction of new nonresidential developments that will be used in whole or in part to provide social services for the benefit of residents of this community. 
(Ord. 794 § 3, (part), 2001) 
15.77.020 - Eligibility for the deferred payment of development impact fees and fire protection fees. 
A.  The payment of development impact fees required under Sections 15.64.040, 15.64.050, and 15.64.060 of this Title 15 for nonresidential developments and the payment of fire protection fees required under Sections 15.76.030. may be deferred for a period not to exceed 5 years from the date that such fees would otherwise be payable if the developer meets the following requirements: 
1.  The developer is a tax-exempt organization duly qualified as such by the Internal Revenue Service and by the California Franchise Tax Board. 
2.  The developer will, upon completion and occupancy of the proposed nonresidential development, use buildings or structures within that development for the purpose of providing to residents of the city, on a nondiscriminatory basis, social services that fall within one or more of the following categories: 
a.  Health care services, 
b.  Parenting services, 
c.  Marriage counseling services, 
d.  Substance abuse counseling and services, 
e.  Pre-school or day-care services, 
f.  Programs and services benefiting the economically-disadvantaged, 
g.  Youth services and activities, 
h.  Senior services and activities. 
3.  The developer submits to the city manager an application for the deferred payment of development impact fees that contains, at a minimum, the information specified below in Section 15.77.030, and complies with all other applicable requirements of this chapter. 
B.  The city manager is authorized to determine the eligibility of any tax-exempt organization for the deferred payment of development impact fees and fire protection fees as provided for in this chapter; provided, however, that the city manager's determination of ineligibility will be subject to appeal to the city council by the applicant. 
(Ord. 794 § 3, (part), 2001) 
15.77.030 - Application for the deferred payment of development impact fees. 
A.  A developer meeting the threshold requirements of Section 15.77.020 may submit to the city manager, on a form to be provided by the city, an application for the deferred payment of development impact fees and fire protection fees as authorized by Section 15.77.020. This application, at a minimum, will require the following information: 
1.  The full legal name, address, and employer identification number of the tax-exempt organization that is the developer of the proposed nonresidential development; 
2.  The name, address, and telephone number of the principal representative of the tax-exempt organization; 
3.  The names, addresses, and titles of the officers, directors, trustees, etc., of the tax-exempt organization; 
4.  A description of the proposed nonresidential development, the nature and amount of development impact fees and fire protection fees that are requested to be deferred, and the requested deferral period, not to exceed 5 years; 
5.  Documents that evidence the formation of the tax-exempt organization and its status as a corporation, partnership, trust, limited liability company, unincorporated association, or other form of entity; 
6.  Copies of exempt organization determination letters issued by the Internal Revenue Service and by the California Franchise Tax Board; 
7.  A detailed narrative description of the current activities and programs of the tax-exempt organization, as well as the social service programs or activities that will be provided to residents of the city following completion and occupancy of the proposed nonresidential development. With regard to such proposed social service programs or activities, the following additional information should be provided: 
a.  The hours, financial resources, personnel, and space that will be allocated to these programs or activities, 
b.  The manner in which the exempt purpose of the tax-exempt organization will be served by these programs or activities, 
c.  The manner in which the availability of these programs or activities will be brought to the attention of the residents of the city, 
d.  A statement that describes any limitations or restrictions on participation in these programs or activities by residents of the city and, if so, how participants will be selected, 
e.  Whether participants in these programs or activities will be required to pay a fee or charge and, if so, how these fees or charges will be determined and in what amounts. 
8.  A statement that the applicant will submit annually to the city, on a form to be provided by the city, a report confirming that the social service programs or activities described in the original application are being provided and, if modified, a description of those modifications; 
9.  A statement that the applicant will, as a condition of the deferred payment of any development impact fees and fire protection fees, enter into an agreement with the city that sets forth the respective rights and obligations of the parties relating to the deferred payment of those fees, including the applicant's obligation to provide to the city adequate security for payment, as required by the provisions of Section 15.77.040; 
10.  The application must be signed under penalty of perjury by an officer, employee, or authorized agent of the tax-exempt organization. 
B.  Within thirty (30) days after the submission of a complete application containing the information specified above in paragraph A, the city manager will make a determination whether to authorize the deferred payment of development impact fees and fire protection fees as requested by the applicant. If such authorization is granted, it will become effective on the date specified in the agreement between the city and the applicant that sets forth the respective rights and obligations of the parties relating to the deferred payment of the development impact fees and fire protection fees. 
(Ord. 794 § 3, (part), 2001) 
15.77.040 - Security for payment of development impact fees and fire protection fees. 
A.  No authorization by the city manager of the deferred payment of development impact fees or fire protection fees under the provisions of this chapter will become effective until the city has received from the applicant adequate security for the ultimate payment of those deferred fees. 
B.  The form of security for ultimate payment of deferred development impact fees and fire protection fees by a qualified tax-exempt organization will be specified in the agreement between the city and the tax-exempt organization and may consist of any one or a combination of the following, as may be determined by the City Attorney after consultation with the applicant's principal representative: 
1.  A payment bond, issued by an admitted surety insurer as defined in Section 995.120 of the California Code of Civil Procedure, in a principal sum up to the full amount of the deferred development impact fees and fire protection fees; 
2.  A deposit with the city of negotiable bonds or an irrevocable letter of credit; 
3.  A promissory note secured by a deed of trust on the property owned by the applicant where the proposed development is to be located; 
4.  A personal guarantee of payment by one or more individuals who are determined to have the financial capability to satisfy such a guarantee; 
5.  Such additional form of security for payment as will adequately protect the interests of the city in collecting the full amount of the deferred development impact fees and fire protection fees. 
(Ord. 794 § 3, (part), 2001) 
15.76.050 - Payment of fees. 
    After the adoption by the council of a resolution establishing the amounts of the fire protection fees, no building permit shall be issued and no development shall be permitted on any land within the city unless and until the fire protection fees relating to such development and established by the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 15.76.040 have been paid in the amount or provision has been made for such payment to the satisfaction of the district or unless a determination has been made by the district and the city department of public works that no fee is payable pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 2-5.64) 
15.76.060 - Administration of fire protection fees. 
    All of the fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited into a separate capital improvement account of the district. These funds and any interest earnings thereon shall be used solely for the purposes specified for funds of such account and solely for the financing of capital improvements identified in the capital improvements plan adopted pursuant to this chapter, or to reimburse the district for those identified improvements constructed by the district with funds advanced by the district from other sources. 
(Prior code § 2-5.65) 
15.76.070 - Annual review of fire protection fees. 
    The district shall annually review and may, in its discretion, propose an adjustment to the capital improvement plan and in the amount of fire protection fees established by a resolution pursuant to Section 15.76.040. The adjustments proposed by the district shall be submitted to the city at least thirty (30) days prior to the close of the city's fiscal year for consideration by the city council. 
(Prior code § 2-5.66) 
15.76.080 - Consideration in lieu of fee- Credits. 
A.  The provisions of Sections 15.76.030 and 15.76.050 to the contrary notwithstanding, upon application by an owner or land developer, the council may accept consideration in lieu of the fire protection fees required pursuant to this chapter, provided: 
1.  The city council, upon recommendation to the district, finds that the substitute consideration proposed has a value equal to or greater than such fee; 
2.  The substitute consideration is in a form acceptable to the district. 
B.  A developer or property owner may elect to construct a capital improvement listed in the capital improvements plan. If the developer or owner elects to construct such improvement, the developer or property owner must enter into an agreement with the district prior to issuance of any building permit by the city. The agreement must establish the estimated cost of the improvement, the schedule or initiation and completion of the improvement, a requirement that the improvement be completed to district and city standards, and such other terms and conditions as deemed necessary by the district. 
(Prior code § 2-5.67) 
15.76.090 - Fire protection fee nonexclusive. 
    The fire protection fees established herein are additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other requirements imposed by the city on the development of land or the issuance of building permits. The fire protection fee is intended to be consistent with and to further the objectives and policies of the general plan of the city, the capital improvements plan, and other city policies, ordinances and resolutions by which the city seeks to insure the provision of public facilities and services in conjunction with the development of land. In no event shall a property owner be obligated to pay for capital improvements in an amount in excess of the amount calculated pursuant to this chapter and the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 15.76.040; provided, however, a property owner or developer may be required to pay, pursuant to city ordinances, regulations or policies for other public improvements, including, without limitation subdivision improvements and development impact fees. 
(Prior code § 2-5.68) 
Title 16 - SUBDIVISIONS 
Chapter 16.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Article I. - General Provisions 

16.04.010 - Title. 
    This title shall be known as, and may be cited as, the subdivision ordinance of the city of Lancaster. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (100.010), 1994) 
16.04.020 - Purpose and intent. 
    This title is adopted to regulate the division of land within the city and to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act concerning design, improvement and survey of subdivisions, the form and content of all required maps, and the procedure to be followed in securing the official approval of the city regarding such maps. No land shall be subdivided and developed in a manner which is inconsistent with the general plan, any specific plan, any other ordinance or this title. The regulations set forth are determined to be necessary in order to achieve the following purposes: 
A.  To implement the general plan of the city, hereinafter referred to as the general plan, which has been adopted by the city council as the long-range, comprehensive guide to the physical and environmental development of the city; 
B.  To provide lots of sufficient size and appropriate design for the purposes for which they are to be used; 
C.  To ensure that streets are designed in accordance with the provisions of the city general plan and the adopted master plan of complete streets. 
D.  To preserve the natural assets of the city and to create new beauty through superior subdivision design, to provide a means for encouraging orderly development of hillside areas of the city by relating the number and distribution of dwelling units to the topographical, geological, and hydrological conditions so that the terrain will suffer minimum disfigurement by scarring and that any danger to life and property will be minimized; 
E.  To provide for water supply and distribution, sewage disposal, storm drainage, and other utilities, whether publicly or privately owned, in the manner necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and convenience; 
F.  To ensure that the cost of providing rights-of-way and improvements for vehicular and pedestrian movement, utilities, and public areas needed to serve new developments are borne by the subdivider rather than by the property owners in the city at large; 
G.  To promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (100.020), 1994; Ord. No. 1036, § 1, 10-24-2017 ) 
16.04.030 - Authority. 
    The ordinance codified in this title is adopted to supplement and implement the Subdivision Map Act, Section 66410 et seq. of the Government Code of the state of California. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (100.030), 1994) 
16.04.040 - Severability. 
    If any provision of this title or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held or declared to be invalid by competent authority, only those portions so held or declared are suspended, and the remainder of this title and the application of such provision or provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (100.040), 1994) 
16.04.050 - Violations and penalties. 
    Violation of this title which is not also prohibited by the Subdivision Map Act or by any other state statute shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine, or by both fine and imprisonment, as specified by Sections 1.08.010, 1.08.020, 1.12.010 and 1.12.020 of this code. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (100.050), 1994) 
16.04.060 - Definitions. 
    The definitions established in this section shall supplement the definitions set forth in the Subdivision Map Act and shall apply wherever such terms are used in this title, whether or not such terms are capitalized. 
    "Acreage" means a parcel of land which is not a lot, as defined in this title, and those areas where a legal subdivision has not been previously approved or where a legal subdivision has declared such parcel as acreage. 
    "Alley" means a public or private right-of-way less than forty (40) feet wide which affords a means of vehicular access to the side or rear of properties abutting a street or highway. 
    "Arterial street" means a public street which carries the major flow of traffic passing through or adjoining a subdivision and to which the access of traffic entering or crossing from adjoining property, intersecting roads, and streets may be controlled. 
    "City" means the city of Lancaster. 
    "City council" means city council of the city. 
    "City engineer" means the city engineer of the city. The functions of the city engineer may be performed by the director of public works. 
    "Collector street" means a public street which connects local streets with arterial streets with intersections normally spaced at a minimum of three hundred (300) feet. Access may be regulated or controlled for safety. The required right-of-way widths are fifty-one (51) feet mid-block and some additional widening may be provided at high-volume driveways. 
    "Condominium conversion" means the creation of separate ownership interests in an existing building. 
    "County recorder" means the Los Angeles County recorder. 
    "Cul-de-sac" means a local street which connects to another public street only at one end and is not planned for later extension. 
    "Dedication" means the transfer by a subdivider to a public entity of title to real property or an interest therein, or of an easement or right in real property, the transfer of facilities, the installation of improvements, or any combination of these. 
    "Department" means the department of community development of the city. 
    "Development review committee" or "DRC" means the committee established by this title, and composed of representatives from city departments and contract agencies appointed by the respective department head, that review projects including, but not limited to, tentative tract maps and parcel maps. The DRC shall review such projects for consistency with the general plan, this title, Title 17, and any other applicable city ordinances, standards, guidelines or policies. 
    "Director" means the director of community development of the city. 
    "Director of public works" means the director of public works of the city of Lancaster. 
    "Environmental impact report" or "EIR" means a report complying with the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), Public Resource Code Section 21000 et seq. and its implementing guidelines. 
    "Freeway" means a street of which the primary function is to accommodate through vehicular traffic. No land use access or parking or pedestrian use is permitted. Grade separated interchanges with expressways or arterial streets may occur at a minimum of one-mile intervals. The right-of-way for a freeway shall have a minimum width of three hundred (300) feet; however, the final determination for the right-of-way shall be as required by Caltrans. 
    "General plan" means the adopted general plan of the city and all subsequent amendments thereto. 
    "Improvement plan" means an engineering plan prepared by a registered civil engineer showing the location and construction details of the streets, alleys, drainage facilities, sanitary sewers, water mains and their pertinent structures and other on-site and off-site improvements required for a subdivision, as specified in Chapter 16.24. 
    "Industrial/commercial street" means a public street with a roadway section able to facilitate two to four through travel lanes. Access is provided by at-grade intersections normally spaced at one-eighth-mile intervals with number and spacing of driveways controlled. Some traffic movements may be restricted or controlled. On-street parking is generally prohibited. Right-of-way widths vary from eighty (80) feet at mid-block locations, widening up to one hundred five (105) feet for intersections and driveways. 
    "Industrial cul-de-sac" means a public street of which the primary function is to provide access to adjoining property. The number and spacing of driveways is generally controlled and on-street parking may be limited. Intersections are normally spaced at a minimum of three hundred eighty (380) feet and rights-of-way are normally sixty-six (66) feet wide. 
    "Local street" means a public street of which the primary function is to provide direct access to abutting residential property. Intersections have a minimum spacing of one hundred fifty (150) feet and right-of-way widths are normally forty-seven (47) feet for local residential streets. 
    "Lot" means a parcel of real property, lawfully created in accordance with the laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation, which is shown as a single lot in a lawfully recorded subdivision, a lawfully recorded record of survey map, or clearly described in an approved parcel map waiver. 
    "Lot line adjustment" means a relocation, realignment or rotation of an existing lot line between two or more parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added to one or more adjacent parcels and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not created and which is approved by the director and the director of public works as specified in Chapter 16.48. 
    "Major arterial" means a public street with a roadway section able to accommodate four to six through travel lanes. The primary function of a major arterial is to provide traffic movement and secondarily land access. Access is provided by at-grade intersections normally spaced at one-quarter-mile intervals, with direct access limited to major traffic generators. Some traffic movements may be restricted or controlled. On-street parking is normally prohibited. Right-of-way widths vary from one hundred (100) feet at mid-block locations, widening up to one hundred thirty (130) feet for intersections and driveways. Major arterials are normally spaced at one-mile intervals. 
    "Merger" means the combining of two or more contiguous parcels of land under one ownership into one parcel as specified in Chapter 16.44. 
    "Municipal code" means the municipal code of the city. 
    "Planning commission" means the planning commission of the city. 
    "Private street" means any street which is not a public street. 
    "Public street" means a street for which the right-of-way is owned by the city or offered to and accepted by the city for dedication to the public. 
    "Regional arterial" (formally "peripheral loop") means a public street with a roadway section able to accommodate six to eight through travel lanes. The primary function of a regional arterial is for traffic movement. Access is provided by at-grade intersections normally spaced at one-quarter or one-half mile intervals with direct access limited to major traffic generators. Some traffic movements may be restricted or controlled. On-street parking is restricted or controlled. Right-of-way widths vary from one hundred twenty (120) feet at mid-block locations, widening up to one hundred fifty (150) feet for intersections and driveways. 
    "Roadway" means that portion of a street which is designed, improved, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. 
    "Secondary arterial" means a public street with a roadway section able to accommodate two to four through travel lanes. Access is provided by at-grade intersection normally spaced at one-eighth-mile intervals with the number and spacing of driveways controlled. Some traffic movements may be restricted or controlled. On-street parking is generally prohibited. Right-of-way widths vary from eighty-four (84) feet at mid-block locations, widening up to one hundred five (105) feet for intersections and driveways. Secondary arterials are normally spaced at one-half mile intervals. 
    "Sloping terrain" means any ground surface having a grade of six percent or more. 
    "Street" means a right-of-way which is maintained and open to the public for purposes of vehicular traffic and may include bicycle and pedestrian traffic. Street includes freeways, expressways, arterials, collectors, local streets, cul-de-sacs and commercial/industrial streets. 
    "Subdivision Map Act" refers to Division 2, Subdivisions, of the California Government Code, beginning with Section 66410. 
    "Uniform Building Code" or "UBC" means the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the city. 
(Ord. 754 § 1 (Attach. A § 1), 1999; Ord. 661 § 1 (100.060), 1994) 
Article II. - Administrative Provisions 

16.04.070 - Appeal of action. 
A.  A disagreement over an interpretation by the director, director of public works or city engineer, of a condition imposed or approved for a tentative map by the planning commission, may be appealed to the planning commission. The procedures provided in Chapter 2.44 (Uniform Appeal Procedure) of the Municipal Code shall be followed. 
B.  A decision of the director of public works or city engineer to approve or deny a final map may be appealed to the city council pursuant to Chapter 2.44 of the Municipal Code. 
C.  All other decisions of the director, director of public works, city engineer, or a decision by the planning commission under this title may be appealed to the city council pursuant to Chapter 2.44 of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 754 § 1 (Attach. A § 2), 1999: Ord. 661 § 1 (110.010), 1994) 
16.04.080 - Application. 
    The regulations set forth in this title shall apply to all or parts of subdivisions located within the city and to the preparation of subdivision maps, parcel map waivers, and all other maps and actions provided for by the Subdivision Map Act. All subdivisions and parcel map waivers shall be prepared and presented for approval as provided for in this title. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (110.020), 1994) 
16.04.090 - Application to property development other than subdivisions. 
    Property development other than subdivisions may be required to provide improvements compatible with and designed in accordance with the standards referenced to or contained herein, as determined by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (110.030), 1994) 
16.04.100 - Exceptions. 
    This title shall not apply to projects and transactions exempt by statute from the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (110.040), 1994) 
16.04.110 - Effect of annexation. 
A.  When any area in a subdivision is annexed to the city after a county-approved final map has been recorded, the final map and any agreements relating to the subdivision shall continue to be in effect. 
B.  When any area of a subdivision is annexed to the city and an approved tentative or vesting tentative map has been filed for such area, and the annexation is completed prior to the final map recording, or a parcel map is required for such area but the final act required to make the parcel map effective has not been complete prior to annexation, all procedures and regulations required by this title shall be deemed to commence as of the effective date of the annexation. The map shall then comply with the requirements of this title and of any other applicable ordinance, policy or standard of the city. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (110.050), 1994) 
16.04.120 - Fees and deposits. 
    An application for any land division, or action authorized by this title shall be accompanied by the appropriate processing fees and/or deposits, as established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (110.060), 1994) 
16.04.130 - Public hearing notice procedures. 
A.  Unless otherwise required by the Subdivision Map Act or this title, the director of community development shall publish and give notice of hearing in accordance with the provisions of Sections 65090 and 65091 of the Government Code of the state of California, except that the distance requirements shall be as follows: 
1.  Urban areas as designated by the general plan shall be five hundred (500) feet. 
2.  Rural areas as designated by the general plan shall be one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet. 
B.  The director may give such other notice that is deemed necessary or advisable. Substantial compliance with these notice provisions shall be sufficient and a technical failure to comply shall not affect the validity of any action taken. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (110.070), 1994) 
16.04.140 - Project sign posting. 
    The applicant of a proposed project scheduled for a public hearing is required to post a sign with public hearing information, in accordance with the city's procedures for project site sign posting. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (110.080), 1994) 
16.04.150 - References to ordinances and state statutes. 
    Any reference to an ordinance, state or federal statute, or reference document shall mean that ordinance, statute or document as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (110.090), 1994) 
Article III. - Responsibilities and Designation 

16.04.160 - Department of community development. 
    The department of community development shall be responsible for the processing of applications for tentative maps and parcel map waivers. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (120.010), 1994) 
16.04.170 - Director of community development. 
A.  The responsibilities of the director of community development shall include but not be limited to the following: 
1.  To develop the forms, procedures and policies necessary for the processing of applications for tentative maps, parcel map waivers, and other land use actions as provided for in this title; and 
2.  To determine whether a proposed subdivision conforms to the general plan, any applicable specific plans, and Title 17; and 
3.  To take recommendations to the planning commission for approval, conditional approval or denial of a tentative subdivision map application; and 
4.  To serve as secretary to the planning commission, certifying that the planning commission has approved, conditionally approved, or denied the tentative map for all subdivisions; and 
5.  To schedule any appeal to the planning commission of staff interpretation of a commission-imposed condition of approval; and 
6.  To certify that the final map is in substantial conformance with the approved tentative map and any conditions imposed by the planning commission; 
7.  The director is designated as the advisory agency for administrative parcel maps and shall have the authority to approve or deny applications for such administrative parcel maps. 
B.  When necessary to carry out these responsibilities, the director may designate a representative to act on the director's behalf. 
(Ord. 718 § 1, 1996; Ord. 661 § 1 (120.020), 1994) 
16.04.175 - Director of public works. 
A.  The responsibilities of the director of public works shall include but not be limited to the following: 
1.  To approve or deny final maps and accept, accept subject to improvement, or reject dedications and offers of dedication that are made by statement on the final map; 
2.  To enter into an agreement with a subdivider to guarantee the installation of required improvements. 
B.  The director of public works may designate the city engineer to act on the director of public work's behalf to carry out these responsibilities. 
(Ord. 754 § 1 (Attach. A § 3), 1999) 
16.04.180 - City engineer. 
A.  The responsibilities of the city engineer shall include but not be limited to the following: 
1.  To establish procedures and policies for design and construction details, standards and specifications (including but not limited to streets, sewer, curb radii, drainage); and 
2.  To determine if the proposed subdivision, dedications and improvements comply with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title; and 
3.  To examine and certify that final maps are in substantial conformance with the approved tentative map; and 
4.  To process and certify final maps, parcel maps, certificates of compliance, reversion to acreage maps, amended maps, and to process and approve subdivision improvement plans; and 
5.  To process parcel map waivers, mergers, and approve certificates of compliance; and 
6.  To examine the map for technical accuracy; and 
7.  To inspect and approve all required improvements; and 
8.  To provide the proper notice of proceedings under this title; and 
9.  To develop the forms, procedures and policies necessary for the interpretation and administration of this title; and 
10.  To determine violations of the Subdivision Map Act or this title. 
11.  To carry out the responsibilities listed in Section 16.04.175(A) if so designated by the director of public works. 
B.  When necessary to carry out these responsibilities, the city engineer may designate a representative to act on the city engineer's behalf, except for the responsibilities listed under Section 16.04.180(A)(11), which are exclusive to the city engineer. 
(Ord. 754 § 1 (Attach. A §§ 4, 5), 1999; Ord. 661 § 1 (120.030), 1994) 
16.04.190 - Development review committee. 
    The development review committee is established and designated to act in an advisory capacity to the planning commission. The responsibilities of the development review committee shall include but not be limited to the following: 
A.  To analyze proposed subdivisions in accordance with the city's general plan, Title 17, this title and other applicable ordinances, policies or standards; and 
B.  To provide recommendations to the subdivider for changes in the proposed subdivision as necessary to comply with city requirements or otherwise benefit the project; and 
C.  To report on the design, improvements, and other various aspects of proposed subdivisions; and 
D.  To make specific written recommendations, including conditions of approval, to the planning commission; and 
E.  Other responsibilities as assigned by Title 17. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (120.040), 1994) 
16.04.200 - Planning commission. 
    The planning commission is designated as the advisory agency regarding subdivisions, and shall have the authority as follows: 
A.  To approve, conditionally approve, or deny applications for tentative subdivision maps and parcel map waivers, and extensions thereto; and 
B.  To act as the hearing authority for appeals by applicants for the interpretation of commission-imposed conditions of approval by the director or the director of public works. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (120.050), 1994) 
16.04.210 - City council. 
    The city council reserves to itself final jurisdiction and authority as follows: 
A.  To approve reversion to acreage; and 
B.  To hear and decide appeals of staff actions and appeals of planning comniission actions on tentative subdivision maps; and 
C.  To hear and decide appeals of action by the director of public works or city engineer on final maps; and 
D.  To approve, conditionally approve, or deny an application for tentative subdivision maps filed in conjunction with a development agreement and extensions thereto. 
(Ord. 754 § 1 (Attach. A § 6), 1999: Ord. 661 § 1 (120.060), 1994) 
Article IV. - Classification of Subdivisions 

16.04.220 - Maps required. 
    Whenever a subdivision or part of a subdivision is proposed in the city, the maps created shall conform to all of the regulations in this title. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (130.010), 1994) 
16.04.230 - Summary of maps and waivers. 
A.  Tentative Tract Maps. A tentative and a final tract map are required for all divisions of land which create five or more parcels including five or more condominiums, a community apartment project containing five or more parcels, or for the conversion of a dwelling to a stock cooperative containing five or more dwelling units unless specifically excepted under Section 66426(a), (b), (c) and (d) of the Subdivision Map Act. 
B.  Tentative Parcel Maps. A tentative and a final parcel map are required for all divisions of land which create four or less parcels, including four or less condominiums, a community apartment project containing four or less parcels, or for the conversion of a dwelling to a stock cooperative containing four or less dwelling units, and for all divisions of land described in Section 66426(a), (b), (c) and (d) of the Subdivision Map Act. A tentative parcel map shall not be required where specifically excepted under Section 66428(a) of the Subdivision Map Act. A parcel map is also required for industrial or commercial development with approved access to public streets regardless of the number of lots, prepared in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and this title. 
C.  Vesting Tentative Map. Whenever this title requires the filing of a tentative map, the subdivider may file a vesting tentative map. The procedures for and rights of a vesting tentative map are set forth in Article VI of Chapter 16.08. 
D.  Parcel Map Waiver. The planning commission may waive the requirement for a final parcel map under the provisions of Chapter 16.16. 
E.  Administrative Parcel Map. The director may approve a parcel map for residential, industrial or commercial development where all public improvements have been installed and approved by the city under the provisions of Chapter 16.16. 
F.  Final Subdivision Map. A final subdivision map or final map shall mean a final tract or parcel map. 
G.  Tentative Map. A tentative map shall mean a tentative tract or parcel map. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (130.020), 1994) 
Chapter 16.08 - TENTATIVE MAP PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS 
Article I. - Tentative Map Procedural Requirements 

16.08.010 - General provisions. 
A.  The form, content, submittal and approval of tentative maps including vesting maps shall be governed by the provisions of this section. The same tentative map requirements and procedures apply both to tentative tract maps and to tentative parcel maps except where otherwise stated. 
B.  In order to be subdivided under one map, property shall be contiguous as defined in Section 66424 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
C.  Preannexation. A subdivider may file with the city a tentative map for a proposed subdivision of unincorporated territory contiguous with the city in accordance with Section 66454 of the Subdivision Map Act. The map, at the discretion of the city, may be acted upon in the manner provided in this chapter except, that if it is approved, such approval shall be conditioned upon annexation of the property to the city within such period of time as shall be specified by the city, and such approval shall not be effective until annexation of such property to the city has been completed. If annexation is not completed within the time specified or any extension thereof, then the approval of such map by the city shall be null and void. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (200.010), 1994) 
16.08.020 - Tentative map application. 
    The tentative map shall be prepared in a manner acceptable to the director. The tentative map shall be clearly and legibly drawn as set forth in the document titled "Tentative Map Procedures," located within the application package for the tentative map. The application shall be accepted for filing by the department only when the application conforms to the requirements set forth in the Tentative Map Procedures. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (200.020), 1994) 
16.08.030 - Completeness of application notice. 
    The applicant will be notified within the time limits specified in Section 65943 of the California Government Code, whether the application is considered complete or if any additional information is required. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (200.030), 1994) 
16.08.040 - Distribution and review of copies. 
A.  After the application is accepted as complete, at least one copy of the map shall be forwarded to members of the development review committee, all utilities, school districts, fire, police, and other agencies which have jurisdiction over the proposed subdivision, and all other interested agencies. 
B.  Notified parties shall have fifteen (15) calendar days after the receipt of the tentative map to comment or to make recommendations with respect to the subdivision, or as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (200.040), 1994) 
16.08.050 - Development review committee meeting. 
A.  After the tentative map application is accepted as complete, the director shall schedule the tentative map for consideration by the development review committee. Written notice of the meeting shall be given to the subdivider, and to each interested agency and utility. 
B.  Staff shall review the tentative map to determine if the map conforms with all applicable provisions as set forth in the Subdivision Map Act, the city's general plan, this title, Title 17, design standards, and any other ordinances, standards or policies, as they pertain to the subdivision, and other identifiable impacts or concerns raised by the proposed development. 
C.  The development review committee meeting shall be held for the purpose of informing the applicant whether the subdivision complies with the requirements of the city and other concerned agencies. If deemed necessary staff may request additional technical and factual reports concerning various aspects of the project (preliminary sewer, drainage concepts, etc.) from the subdivider or his agent. If the analysis by staff indicates that design deficiencies exist in the project, then staff may request that the applicant submit an appropriate number of revised maps to the department of community development for further review prior to scheduling for the planning commission agenda. The subdivider or his agent shall also have the opportunity to present information concerning the subdivision at the development review committee meeting. The conditions imposed by the development review committee shall be valid for six months from the date of the development review committee meeting. 
D.  If no meeting is held, the director shall nevertheless prepare a written report of the development review committee's recommendations to the planning commission as described under Article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (200.050), 1994) 
Article II. - Planning Commission Review and Determination 

16.08.060 - Notice. 
    The director shall set a date and time for a public hearing on the tentative map before the planning commission. Notice of the hearing shall be given in accordance with Section 16.04.130, Public hearing notice procedures. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (210.010), 1994) 
16.08.070 - Project sign posting. 
    The applicant of a proposed project scheduled for public hearing is required to post a sign with public hearing information in accordance with the procedures established for project sign posting. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (210.020), 1994) 
16.08.080 - Reports. 
    Any staff report or recommendation on a tentative map to the planning commission or the city council shall be in writing and a copy shall be provided to the subdivider at least three days prior to any hearing or action on such map by the planning commission or the city council. In the case of a proposed conversion or residential real property to a condominium project, community apartment project, or stock cooperative project, each tenant of the subject property must also receive a copy of the staff report pursuant to Section 66452.3 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 692 § 1, 1995: Ord. 661 § 1 (210.030), 1994) 
16.08.090 - Action. 
    The planning commission shall either approve, approve with conditions, continue the public hearing to a specific time, date and place, or deny the tentative map. The planning commission may accept, modify or delete any of the conditions of approval recommended in the staff report based on the findings in Section 16.08.170. The planning commission may also add additional requirements as conditions of approval. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (210.040), 1994) 
16.08.100 - Action for maps subject to development agreements. 
    In the case of a tentative map subject to a development agreement the planning commission decision shall be advisory. The recommendation of the planning commission will be forwarded to the city council. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (210.050), 1994) 
16.08.110 - Findings. 
    The planning commission shall approve or approve with conditions any tentative map only if it makes all of the following findings in writing based upon substantial evidence in the record: 
A.  The proposed subdivision is consistent with the general plan, any applicable specific plan, and is compatible with the general plan land uses, goals, objectives, policies and specific actions specified in such plan. 
B.  The design and improvement of the proposed subdivision is consistent with the general plan, any applicable specific plan, Title 17, and this title. 
C.  The site is physically suitable for the type and density of the development proposed. 
D.  The design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are not likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat. 
E.  The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will not cause serious public health problems. 
F.  The design or the types of improvements of the subdivision will not conflict with easements acquired by the public at large, for access through, or use of, property within the subdivision. The city may approve the map if alternate easements will be provided in accordance with Section 66474(g) of the Subdivision Map Act. 
G.  The city's action will not have an adverse effect on the housing needs of the region and the city has balanced these needs against the public service needs of its residents and available fiscal and environmental resources, in accordance with Section 66412.3 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
H.  The design of the subdivision provides, to the extent feasible, for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (210.060), 1994) 
16.08.120 - Appeal. 
    The decision of the planning commission regarding a tentative map may be appealed as provided in Section 16.04.070. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (210.070), 1994) 
16.08.130 - City council action. 
    Upon receipt of a planning commission recommendation regarding a tentative map filed concurrently with a development agreement, or on an appeal of a tentative map, a public hearing will be scheduled before city council. 
A.  The same legal notifications provided for planning commission consideration are also required for the city council hearing. At its meeting, the city council will take into consideration the public testimony, staff report, and environmental information as well as the recommendation of the planning commission. 
B.  Following the receipt of public testimony, the city council may: 
1.  Refer the matter back to the planning commission for further evaluation or considerations of alternatives; or 
2.  Continue the public hearing to a specific time, date and place; or 
3.  Render its decision. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (210.080), 1994) 
Article III. - Expiration of Tentative Map Approval and Extensions 

16.08.140 - Expiration of tentative maps. 
    An approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall expire twenty-four (24) months from the date of planning commission or city council approval, except as follows: 
A.  The applicant may file a request for an extension of time prior to the expiration of a tentative parcel or tract map. Upon such filing, the tentative map shall be automatically extended for a period of sixty (60) days or until the extension request is acted upon, whichever occurs first, in accordance with Section 66452.6(e) of the Subdivision Map Act. 
B.  Tentative parcel and tract maps may be extended under the provisions of this section for an aggregate time period not to exceed three (3) years. An extension may be requested, and the city may grant an extension for, any length of time up to the aggregate limit of three (3) years. 
C.  Extensions of tentative maps subject to an adopted development agreement shall be governed by Section 16.08.160. 
( Ord. No. 1029, § 2, 7-11-2017 ; Ord. 661 § 1 (220.010), 1994) 
16.08.150 - Procedures for extensions. 
    The subdivider may request an extension of the tentative map approval or conditional approval by written request to the department of community development prior to the expiration of the tentative map. Upon filing the request to extend the map, the map shall be automatically extended for sixty (60) days, or until the planning commission takes action, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (220.020), 1994) 
16.08.160 - Planning commission review. 
A.  Public Hearing Required. The director shall set a date and time for a public hearing on the extension request before the planning commission. The director shall give notice of the hearing in ac-cordance with Section 16.04.130, Public hearing notice procedures. 
B.  Project Sign Posting Required. The applicant of a proposed project scheduled for public hearing is required to post a sign with public hearing information in accordance with the procedures established for project sign posting. 
C.  Report. The director shall review the request and submit a written report on the extension to the planning commission. A copy of the report shall be forwarded to the subdivider three days prior to the planning commission meeting on the extension request. 
D.  Action. The planning commission shall either approve, conditionally approve, continue the public hearing to a specific time, date and place, or deny the extension of the tentative map based on the findings in Section 16.08.170. 
E.  Conditions. The planning commission shall either approve, approve with conditions or deny the extension of the tentative map. The planning commission may accept, modify or delete any of the conditions of approval recommended in the staff report or may add additional requirements as a condition of approval. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (220.030), 1994) 
16.08.170 - Findings. 
    The planning commission shall approve or approve with conditions the extension of a tentative map only if it makes all of the following findings in writing based upon substantial evidence in the record: 
A.  The proposed subdivision is consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan and is compatible with the general plan land uses, goals, objectives, policies and specific actions specified in such plan. 
B.  The findings justifying the original approval of the tentative map remain valid. 
C.  The approval of the extension will allow for development of a project that is of benefit to the public health, safety and welfare through completion of vital infrastructure or public improvements, correction of existing hazardous conditions, or enhancement of public facilities. 
D.  The granting of the extension is necessary to allow sufficient time for the subdivider to complete final map and improvement plans. 
E.  There is no substantial change in the land use or development patterns in the vicinity of the tentative map that would be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare should the extension be granted. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (220.040), 1994) 
16.08.180 - Appeals of extensions. 
    The subdivider or any interested affected person may appeal any action of the planning commission regarding an extension as stated in Section 16.04.070. The tentative map remains active during the appeal period until action is taken by the city council. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (220.050), 1994) 
Article IV. - Special Situations for Map Extensions 

16.08.190 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1019, § 3, adopted February 28, 2017, repealed § 16.08.190, in its entirety. Former § 16.08.190 pertained to "Expiration of other approvals in conjunction with a tentative map," and was derived from Ord. No. 661 § 1(220.110), adopted 1994 and Ord. No. 995, § 1, adopted December 10, 2013. 
16.08.200 - Statutory extensions. 
    Whenever a subdivider is required to construct, improve or finance the construction of public improvements outside the boundaries of the subdivision that meet the financial requirements as stated in Section 66452.6(a) of the Subdivision Map Act, the subdivider shall be entitled to the statutory extension set forth in Section 66452.6(a) of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (220.200), 1994) 
16.08.210 - Procedures for statutory extensions. 
    In order to receive the statutory extension the subdivider shall comply with the following procedures: 
A.  The subdivider shall request a statutory extension of the approved tentative map by written request to the director prior to the expiration of the map. The request shall contain written verification of off-site expenditures as specified in Section 66452.6(a) of the Subdivision Map Act. 
B.  The director shall review the request for extension and the written verification of the off-site expenditures, and approve the request pursuant to Section 66452.6 of the Subdivision Map Act if warranted. The director shall give the subdivider written notice of the action and specify the new expiration date of the tentative map. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (220.210), 1994) 
16.08.220 - Time limits for statutory extensions. 
    The extensions shall extend the expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map by thirty-six (36) months, from the date of its expiration or the date of the previously filed final map, whichever is later. A total of all the statutory extensions shall not extend the tentative map more than ten years from its original date of approval or conditional approval. If additional time is needed beyond the ten year period the subdivider may request an additional extension prior to the expiration of the approved tentative map. The map may be extended by the planning commission as provided in Section 220.000 et seq. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (220.220), 1994) 
16.08.230 - Tentative maps subject to adopted development agreements. 
    The expiration and extension of tentative maps which are subject to an adopted development agreement pursuant to Section 65864 et seq. of the California Government Code shall be processed in accordance with the following regulations: 
A.  Concurrent Applications. When a tentative map and a development agreement are being considered concurrently, the development agreement shall be written to require the first periodic review of the agreement to occur within twelve (12) months after adoption, with subsequent periodic reviews to coincide with the dates of action on the request for the extension of the tentative map provided that the subsequent periodic reviews occur within twelve (12) months after the most recent review of the agreement. 
B.  Tentative map that is approved prior to the adoption of the development agreement. When the development agreement is adopted subsequent to the approval of the tentative map, the development agreement shall be written to require that at the earliest opportunity the expiration of the tentative map shall coincide with the date of the annual review of the development agreement. 
C.  Tentative maps approved after the adoption of the development agreement. When the tentative map is to be approved after the adoption of the development agreement subsequent time extensions on the tentative map shall be adjusted such that future dates will coincide with the date of the annual review of the development agreement. 
D.  Extension Procedures. The following extension procedures shall apply to tentative maps subject to adopted development agreements: 
1.  The applicant shall submit a written request for extension of the map in accordance with Section 16.08.150. 
2.  The city council shall hold a noticed public hearing on the request for extension, pursuant to Section 16.08.160 concurrent with the annual review of the development agreement. The city council shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the extension based on the evidence submitted and the findings contained in Section 16.08.170. 
3.  A tentative map on property covered by a development agreement may continue to receive extensions for the period of time provided for in the agreement, but not beyond the duration of the agreement. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (220.300), 1994) 
Article V. - Minor Revisions to Approved Tentative Maps 

16.08.240 - General provisions. 
    Minor revisions to an approved tentative map may be approved by the director upon written request by the subdivider, or on the director's own initiative prior to the expiration of the tentative map. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (230.010), 1994) 
16.08.250 - Minor revisions. 
    Minor revisions are limited to those changes in a tentative map which do not substantially alter the street pattern, lot configuration, density or overall design scheme as determined by the director. The director may make the following revisions in a tentative map: 
A.  Changes in the size, shape and dimensions of individual lots; provided, however, that the changes are consistent with the intent and spirit of the original tentative map approval and all applicable city ordinances and policies; 
B.  Additions of a feature, facility or amenity which does not affect the quality, safety or function of the project; 
C.  Reductions in the total number of lots contained in the tentative map; 
D.  Increases in the total number of lots contained in the tentative map not to exceed the following: 
1.  Subdivisions of twenty-five (25) lots or less: one additional lot, 
2.  Subdivisions with twenty-six (26) to five hundred (500) lots: no more than five percent of the total number of lots in the subdivision (fractions shall be rounded to the nearest whole number), 
3.  Subdivision in excess of five hundred (500) lots: no more than twenty-five (25) lots; 
E.  The following modifications as shown on the tentative map with the concurrence of affected city departments and outside agencies: 
1.  Changes in the curve radii of streets and alleys, 
2.  Changes in the length of streets and cul-de-sacs, 
3.  Changes in the centerline alignment of streets when such changes are one hundred (100) feet or less in any one direction, 
4.  Changes in the grade of streets or drainage easements which do not reduce natural areas, create new retaining or drainage structures that would have an adverse aesthetic effect on existing adjacent development, or change pad elevations by more than three feet adjacent to existing development, 
5.  Changes in location of public utility and drainage easements. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (230.020), 1994) 
16.08.260 - Procedures. 
A.  The subdivider may request a revision of the approved tentative map by a written request to the director. 
B.  The applicant shall submit all information requested by the director. 
C.  A request for a tentative map revision cannot be filed if the approval of the original map has expired. 
D.  The director shall review the proposed minor revisions, and within thirty (30) days approve or disapprove the revised tentative map. The director shall give the subdivider written notice of his action. In addition, if a revision to the map is approved, the director shall give notice to affected city departments and outside agencies. 
E.  If the revised tentative map is approved, it shall become, for all purposes, the approved tentative map of the subdivision and the tentative map which was originally approved shall no longer be of any force and effect. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (230.030), 1994) 
16.08.270 - Findings. 
    The director may approve minor revisions to an approved tentative map where the director finds that the applicant has demonstrated the following: 
A.  The layout of the revised tentative map is consistent with the findings and conditions of the original approval. 
B.  All lots on the revised tentative map conform to the requirements specified in the conditions of approval of the tentative map and the requirements specified in this section. 
C.  The revision will not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations on surrounding properties in the same vicinity with the same zoning. 
D.  The layout and design of the revised map will not have an adverse impact on adjacent properties. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (230.040), 1994) 
16.08.280 - Action by the director. 
    If the revised tentative map is denied by the director, the subdivider may file a revised map for planning commission review. Such an application shall be processed in the same manner as a request for tentative map approval, Article I, Tentative Map Procedural Requirements. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (230.050), 1994) 
16.08.290 - Time limits. 
    Any approved amendment shall not alter the expiration date of the tentative map. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (230.060), 1994) 
Article VI. - Vesting Tentative Maps 

16.08.300 - General. 
    Whenever a tentative map is required, a vesting tentative map may be filed pursuant to Section 66498.1 of the Subdivision Map Act. The words "Vesting Tentative Map" shall be printed conspicuously on the face of the map in bold letters not less than one inch in height. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (240.010), 1994) 
16.08.310 - Procedures, requirements and findings. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this section, the procedures, requirements and findings as listed in this title for a tentative map shall also apply to a vesting tentative map. The subdivider shall submit the information at the time of filing the tentative map as set forth in Chapter 16.08. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (240.020), 1994) 
16.08.320 - Vesting of development rights. 
A.  Development Rights Created. The approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the city's ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the time the application is complete, pursuant to Section 66498.1 and as more fully set forth in Section 66474.2 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
B.  Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a permit, approval, extension or entitlement may be made conditional or denied if any of the following are determined: 
1.  A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both. 
2.  The condition or denial is required in order to comply with state or federal law. 
C.  The rights referred to herein shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in Article III of this chapter. If a final map is approved, these rights shall last for the following periods of time: 
1.  An initial time period of one year. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, the one-year initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded. 
2.  The initial time period set forth in subsection (C)(1) of this section shall be automatically extended by any time used by the city for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review, if such processing exceeds thirty (30) days, from the date a complete application is filed. 
3.  A subdivider may apply for a one-year extension at any time prior to the expiration of the initial time period set forth in subsection (C)(1) of this section. If the extension is denied, the subdivider may appeal that denial to the city council. 
4.  If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in subsections (C)(1)-(3) of this section, the rights referred to herein shall continue until the expiration of that permit, or any extension of that permit. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (240.030), 1994) 
16.08.330 - Development inconsistent with zoning-Conditional approval. 
A.  Whenever a subdivider files a vesting tentative map which is inconsistent with Title 17 in existence at that time, that inconsistency shall be noted on the map. The city may deny such a vesting tentative map or approve it conditioned on the subdivider, or the subdivider's designee, obtaining the necessary change in Title 17 to eliminate the inconsistency. If the change is obtained, the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall, notwithstanding Section 16.08.320A, confer the vested right to proceed with the development in substantial compliance with the change in Title 17 and the map, as approved. 
B.  The rights conferred by this section shall be for the time periods set forth in Section 16.08.320C. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (240.040), 1994) 
Chapter 16.12 - FINAL SUBDIVISION MAPS 
Article I. - Final Subdivision Maps 

16.12.010 - General provisions. 
A.  The same final subdivision map requirements shall apply to both final tract or parcel maps except where otherwise stated. 
B.  The form, contents, accompanying data, and filing of a final subdivision map shall conform to the Subdivision Map Act (Sections 66433 and 66444) and this chapter. 
C.  The final subdivision map shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. 
D.  The city engineer may waive a requirement of this chapter regarding map contents and accompanying information if the city engineer finds that the requirements are not applicable to the subdivision. 
(Ord. 718 § 2, 1996; Ord. 661 § 1 (300.010), 1994) 
16.12.020 - Phasing of final subdivision maps. 
A.  Multiple final maps relating to an approved or conditionally approved tentative map may be filed prior to the expiration of the tentative map if one of the following applies: 
1.  The subdivider states in the tentative map application the subdivider's intention to file multiple tract maps; or 
2.  After filing of the tentative map, the planning commission and the subdivider concur to the filing of multiple final maps. In submitting such a request, the subdivider is not required to identify the number or configuration of the proposed multiple maps. (Section 66456.1) 
B.  Each tract map which constitutes a part of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall have a separate subdivision number as assigned by the land development department, county of Los Angeles. 
C.  Multiple parcel maps may be filed pursuant to Section 66463.1 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (300.020), 1994) 
16.12.030 - Survey required. 
A.  An accurate and complete survey of the land to be subdivided shall be made by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. All monuments, property lines, centerlines of streets, alleys and easements adjoining or within the subdivision shall be tied into the survey. The allowable error of closure on any portion of the tract map shall not exceed 1:10,000 for field closures and 1:20,000 for calculated closures. 
B.  At the time of performing the survey for the final tract map, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments, conforming with the standards of Section 8771 of the Business and Professions Code, so that another engineer or surveyor may readily retrace the survey. At least one exterior boundary line of land being subdivided and not less than four exterior corners of the subdivision shall be adequately monumented prior to recording the tract map. Other monuments found or established shall be set as required to the satisfaction of the city engineer. 
C.  A parcel map may not require a field survey, if the map can be compiled from recorded or filed data per Section 66448 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (300.030), 1994) 
16.12.040 - Format requirements for final subdivision maps. 
    The format of the final subdivision map shall conform to the Subdivision Map Act, and the following requirements: 
A.  The final subdivision map shall be prepared in a manner acceptable to the city engineer. The final subdivision map shall be legibly drawn and conform to the requirements in "The Standard Format for Final Subdivision Maps" (DPW 0031). 
B.  The scale of the map shall be not less than one inch equals two hundred (200) feet or as may be necessary to show all details clearly, and enough sheets shall be used to accomplish this end. 
C.  When two of more sheets including the certificate sheet are used, a key sheet shall be included on the "Survey Detail and Index Map." 
D.  All printing, lettering and drafting on the map shall be as noted on "The Standard Format for Final Subdivision Maps" (DPW 0031). 
E.  All dimensions shown on the final subdivision map shall be in feet and decimals of a foot, rounded off to one one-hundredth of a foot. 
F.  Subdivisions containing lots or parcels of three-fourths of an acre or greater shall designate the acreage to the nearest one one-hundredth of an acre on each lot. Lots of less than three-fourths of an acre shall show the square footage to the nearest foot on each lot. 
G.  All lines shown on the final subdivision map which do not constitute a part of the subdivision itself shall be clearly distinguishable and any area enclosed by such lines shall be labeled "not a part of this subdivision." (Sections 66434(e), 66445(d)) 
H.  The basis of bearings shall make reference to a record acceptable to the city engineer. 
I.  The final form of the final subdivision map shall be approved by the city engineer. 
J.  The applicant shall submit the number of prints specified by the city engineer for distribution to the city council. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (300.040), 1994) 
16.12.050 - Contents. 
    The contents of the final subdivision map shall conform to the Subdivision Map Act, this title, "The Standard Format for Final Subdivision Maps" (DPW 0031), and the following requirements: 
A.  Title Sheet. The title sheet shall include: 
1.  Affidavits, certificates or statements, acknowledgments, endorsements, acceptances of dedication and notarial seals required by law (Sections 66435, 66435.2, 66445(e)-(i)); 
2.  The date of preparation and the signed certificate or statement of the subdivider's engineer or surveyor who prepared the final map (Section 66441); 
3.  A certificate of dedication signed and dated by those persons having any record title interest in the land subdivided if any land is to be dedicated for public use (Section 66439); 
4.  A certificate or statement executed by all parties having any record title interest in the land subdivided consenting to the preparation and recordation of the map (Sections 66430, 66436); 
5.  Certificates or statements for execution by the city engineer and the city clerk and a statement of all easements, together with all building and use restrictions pertaining thereto (Sections 66442, 66443); 
6.  Certificate by the director that the final map is in substantial conformance with the approved tentative map, and any conditions imposed by the planning commission. 
B.  Sufficient linear, angular and radial data shall be shown to determine the bearings and lengths of monument lines, street centerlines, boundary lines, block lines and the lot lines of the subdivision, and ties to existing monuments used to establish the boundary. Arc length, radius, central angle and radial bearings of all curves shall be shown. Each line on the map shall be identified by bearing and length. 
C.  Lots. 
1.  Lot or Parcel Numbers. Lot or parcel numbers shall begin with the number one in each phase of a final subdivision map and shall continue consecutively with no omissions or duplications. Each lot or parcel shall be shown entirely on one sheet of the final map, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
2.  The area of each lot or parcel on the map shall be shown and shall be calculated excluding any area within any public street right-of-way or alley (either existing or proposed) abutting the lot or parcel, but including the area within any easements for other purposes (either existing or proposed) on the lot or parcel. 
D.  Adjoining Properties. The adjoining corners of all adjoining subdivisions shall be identified by subdivision number, or name when not identified by official number, and reference to the book and page of the filed map showing such subdivision; if no subdivision is adjacent, then by the name of the owner and reference to the recorded deed by book and page number for the last record owner on the latest Los Angeles County assessor's rolls. 
E.  City Boundary Lines. City boundaries which cross or join the subdivision shall be clearly designated and shown on the final map (i.e., the names of the adjoining jurisdiction such as the "County of Los Angeles" or the "City of Palmdale" shall be designated.) 
F.  Street Names. The names of all existing and proposed streets, alleys or highways within or adjoining the subdivision shall be shown. Street names shall be submitted to the city engineer for approval along with the first submittal of the final map. The city engineer shall review and approve or disapprove the proposed street according to regulations found in the document "Street Name Assignment Requirements" (City Engineer Note #5). 
G.  Easements and Dedications. 
1.  Every easement and proposed dedication for street, trail, alley, water main, flood control, stormwater drainage, sanitary sewer, landscape, railroad, utility or other public use as may be required shall be offered for dedication to the public for acceptance by the city or other public agency, and the use and width of the easement shall be specified on the map as provided in "The Standard Format for Final Subdivision Maps" (DPW 0031). 
2.  If at the time the final subdivision map is approved, a street, trail, alley, water main, flood control, stormwater drainage, sanitary sewer, landscape, railroad, utility or other public use is not accepted by the city council, the offer of dedication shall remain open and the city council may, by resolution at any later date, accept and open the street, trail, alley, water main, flood control, stormwater drainage, sanitary sewer, landscape, railroad, utility or other easement for public use. The acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder. 
3.  The city may accept a dedication lying outside the subdivision boundary which requires a separate grant deed. The acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder. 
4.  Every easement of record shall be shown on the map, together with the name of the grantee and sufficient recording data to identify the conveyance, e.g., recorder's document number and date, or book and page of official records. 
5.  An easement not disclosed by the records in the office of the county recorder and found by the surveyor or engineer to be existing, shall be specifically designated on the map, identifying the apparent dominant tenements for which the easement was created. 
6.  The sidelines of each easement of record shall be shown by dashed lines on the final subdivision map with the widths, lengths and bearings of record. The width and location of each easement shall be approved by the city engineer. 
H.  Flood Hazards, Inundation or Geological Hazards. Any portion of a lot or parcel of a division of land which is subject to flood hazard, inundation or geological hazard shall be clearly shown on the map by a prominent note on each sheet of such map. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to divisions of land in which each resultant parcel has a gross area of forty (40) acres or more, or is a quarter-quarter section of a government plat or larger. 
I.  Open Space Areas. Open space areas, including greenbelts and open space corridors, may be shown, subject to the approval of the city. These areas shall be dedicated as open space easements unless otherwise specified in the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map, and the subdivider shall agree to allow such land to be included within an open space maintenance assessment district if proposed by the city. 
J.  Statements and Certificates. Each certificate, statement and acknowledgment required by the Subdivision Map Act and this title shall appear on the final or parcel map and may be continued where appropriate. 
K.  Miscellaneous. The map shall also show: 
1.  The location and dimensions of each drainage channel, utility and railroad right-of-way and/or easement; 
2.  The limitation, if any, on the right of access to and from a street; and 
3.  The location and dimensions of nonaccess strips and reserve strips. 
L.  Monuments. The location and description of all existing and proposed monuments shall be shown on the map. Monuments shall include the following: 
1.  Two and three-eighths inches O.D. iron pipe, properly tagged, to be set as shown on map, six inches down (Subdivision Code Section 21.20.020 of Los Angeles County Code Titles 21 and 22); 
2.  Spike and washer, properly tagged, to be set at all street intersections, end of curve and beginning of curve; 
3.  Set lead and tack on top of curb for all lot line prolongations. 
M.  Assessments. Sufficient notice that the property included within this subdivision is subject to annual assessments to pay the costs of maintenance of public improvements installed within the subdivision. 
N.  Other information as requested. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (300.050), 1994) 
Article II. - Application for Final Subdivision Map Submittal 

16.12.060 - In general. 
    Following the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map, and prior to the expiration of the tentative map, the applicant shall file with the city engineer an application for final subdivision map approval. The final subdivision map submittal shall be complete and clearly drawn as set forth in the document titled "Final Subdivision Application Submittal Requirements" (DPW 0021). The applicant's engineer or surveyor shall prepare the map to meet all requirements to ensure the accuracy of the map and that the map is technically correct. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (310.000), 1994) 
16.12.070 - Requirements for city review. 
    The final subdivision map shall be accompanied by the following data, plans, reports and documents in a form approved by the city engineer and, where applicable, the city attorney: 
A.  Improvement plans as required by Chapter 16.24 shall be submitted prior to the first check of the final map or prior to the final subdivision map approval being placed on the city council agenda. The improvement plans shall contain the information found in the "Improvement Plan Submittal Requirements" (DPW 0070); 
B.  Preliminary/subdivision guarantee showing the legal owners at the time of submittal of the final map; 
C.  Guarantee of Title. A guarantee of title, in form acceptable to the city engineer and city attorney, shall be issued by a title company to and for the benefit and protection of the city and shall be continued complete up to the instant of recording of the final subdivision map, guaranteeing that the names of all persons whose consent is necessary to pass a clear title to the land being subdivided, and all public easements being offered for dedication, and all acknowledgments thereto, appear on the proper certificates or statements and are correctly shown on the map, both as to consents as to the making thereof and affidavits of dedication where necessary; 
D.  Deeds for Easements or Rights-of-Way. A deed for each off-site easement or right-of-way required for road, drainage or utility purposes which have not been offered for dedication on the final map; written evidence acceptable to the city in the form of right of entry or permanent easements across private properly outside of the subdivision permitting or granting access to perform necessary construction work and permitting the maintenance of the facility as provided in document titled "Easement Submittal Requirements" (DPW 0033); 
E.  Governing Documents. For a cooperative apartment project, condominium, stock cooperative or conversion, the proposed declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions containing the provisions described in Section 1353 of the Civil Code, and all other governing documents for the subdivision as are appropriate under Section 1363 of the Civil Code; for all subdivisions any declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions proposed in connection therewith. All governing documents shall be subject to review and approval by the city engineer and city attorney; 
F.  Utilities. Written evidence from the utility company concerned that the utility easements are satisfactory and that any necessary annexation is complete; 
G.  Undertaking Agreement. The subdivider shall file an undertaking agreement and shall secure the performance of the undertaking agreement in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 16.32, Security; 
H.  Soils Report. The soils report required by Section 66490 of the Subdivision Map Act unless waived by the city upon the city's determination that, due to the city's knowledge of the soils qualities existing in the subdivision, no preliminary soils analysis is necessary; 
I.  Other Information. Additional data, reports or information required by the city engineer or city attorney. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (310.010), 1994) 
16.12.080 - City engineer review and determination. 
A.  The city engineer shall review the final subdivision map, and the subdivider shall make corrections and additions until the map is acceptable to the city engineer. 
B.  The appropriate public works division shall review the final subdivision map for compliance with state law, this title, and the tentative map conditions of approval. Within fifteen (15) days after submittal of the final subdivision map, the responsible public works division shall report in writing the compliance or noncompliance of the map, and shall prepare a written statement of any necessary changes to bring the map into compliance. 
C.  The subdivider shall submit to the city engineer the original tracing of the map, corrected to its final form and signed by all parties required to execute the certificates or statements on the map. Upon receipt of all information contained in the document "Requirements for City Council-Approval of Recorded Maps" (DPW 0045), and the required certificates or statements and submittals and the subdivider's payment of required fees and assessments, the city engineer shall, within twenty (20) days, sign the appropriate certificate on the final subdivision map with accompanying documents prior to scheduling the final subdivision map to the city council for its consideration and approval at the next available city council agenda date. (Sections 66442, 53077.5) 
D.  The subdivider shall enter into an improvement agreement and posting of securities pursuant to Chapter 16.32, Security. 
E.  Where conditions of approval require mitigation of impacts for the proposed development, the subdivider shall pay all fees to mitigate impacts of development prior to the date that the final map is filed for city council final approval, except where determined by ordinance or city resolution that the fees which may be required are to be paid prior to issuance of any permit. 
F.  Prior to the approval of the final subdivision map, the director shall certify in writing that all conditions of approval other than the conditions required by public works have been satisfied. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (310.020), 1994) 
Article III. - Final Map Approval 

16.12.090 - In general. 
A.  A final subdivision map is considered "filed" with the director of public works when all items necessary to present the final subdivision map for approval have been submitted as verified by the city engineer. Necessary items include but are not limited to: signatures of all title interest holders, all fees required to be paid prior to recordation, any maintenance districts to be formed or annexations required, and any other outstanding items on the "Requirement for Approval of Recorded Maps: (DPW 0045) checklist. 
B.  The director of public works shall consider approval of the improvement agreement and securities before approving the final subdivision map. 
C.  At the time of action on the final subdivision map, the director of public works shall accept, accept subject to improvement, or reject each offer of dedication made by statement on the final map. A rejected offer of dedication remains open to future acceptance under Government Code Section 66477.2 and Code of Civil Procedure Section 771.010. 
(Ord. 754 § 1 (Attach. A § 11 (part)), 1999: Ord. 661 § 1 (320.000), 1994) 
16.12.095 - Approval process. 
A.  City Council Notification. When a final map is filed with the director of public works pursuant to Section 16.12.090(A), the director of public works shall notify the city clerk of the pending action on the final map. The city clerk shall provide notice of such pending action by a notice attached and posted with the agenda for the next regular meeting of the city council following the filing of the final map. Notice of the pending action on the final map shall also be mailed to all interested persons who request such notice. 
B.  Director of Public Works Consideration. 
1.  The director of public works shall approve the map if it conforms with the tentative map conditions of approval, the Subdivision Map Act, and this title. If it does not conform, the director of public works shall not approve the map. The director of public works shall make the decision within ten (10) calendar days following the city council meeting at which notification was given pursuant to Section 16.12.095(A). 
2.  The director of public works shall not postpone or refuse approval of the final subdivision map because the subdivider has failed to meet a tentative map condition requiring construction or installation of off-site improvements on land which neither the subdivider nor the city has sufficient title or interest in to permit the improvements to be made. In this case, the city shall follow the procedures set forth in Government Code Section 66462.5 and Chapter 16.24, Improvements, Dedications and Reservations, of this code. 
3.  If the director of public works does not approve or deny the map within the prescribed time, and the map conforms to all requirements and listed under subsection (B)(1) of this section, it shall be deemed approved. 
4.  The director of public works may designate the city engineer to act on behalf of the director of public works to carry out the requirements of this section. 
5.  The decision by the director of public works to approve or deny the final map may be appealed to the city council pursuant to Section 16.04.070(B). 
(Ord. 754 § 1 (Attach. A § 11 (part)), 1999) 
16.12.100 - Exception-Judicial partitions. 
    When a final subdivision map is required to carry out a judicial partition of property which is under a Williamson Act contract, the city may not require the payment of exactions, the undertaking of improvements, or the posting of security for future performance, and may not accept any required offer of dedication until the contract terminates or is canceled as to that parcel. This deferral of exactions and dedications does not apply to fees and assessments for services which are provided to the parcel before termination or cancellation of the contract. The original applicant for the final subdivision map shall remain personally liable for deferred obligations. (Section 66411.5) 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (320.010), 1994) 
16.12.110 - Transmittals. 
A.  Upon completion of the appeal period for a final map approved by the director of public works, or upon approval of the final subdivision map by the city council on appeal, the city engineer and the city clerk shall execute the appropriate certificate on the map and shall, subject to the provisions of Section 66464 of the Subdivision Map Act, transmit the map, or have an authorized agent transmit the map, with appropriate fees to the county recorder for recordation. 
B.  After recordation, the subdivider shall provide to the city one mylar reproducible copy of the recorded final map, a microfilm card, and three blueline copies of the recorded map. No building permits other than model homes will be issued until this requirement has been fulfilled. 
(Ord. 754 § 1 (Attach. A § 11 (part)), 1999: Ord. 661 § 1 (330.000), 1994) 
16.12.120 - Annual report to the city council. 
A.  The director of public works shall prepare and transmit to the city council an annual written report on the final map approval process. The purpose of the report is to allow the city council to review the delegation of final map and related authority to the director of public works. The report shall include the following information: 
1.  The number of final maps approved and denied; 
2.  Any issues that have occurred with respect to the acceptance of dedications, improvements, approval of undertaking agreements, and approval of improvement security, including any foreclosures on security; 
3.  The number of decisions made by the director of public works on final map matters that have been appealed to the city council; 
4.  Any other information deemed pertinent to the city council's review. 
B.  The city council shall review the information in the annual report and consider whether any modifications are necessary to the final map process. 
C.  The city council may, by majority vote, request a report from the director of public works at any time regarding the final map process. The director of public works shall prepare and transmit the report to the city council within thirty (30) days from the date the request was made. 
(Ord. 754 § 1 (Attach. A § 11 (part)), 1999) 
Chapter 16.16 - PARCEL MAPS 

16.16.010 - Provisions applicable to parcel maps. 
A.  Tentative Maps. The preparation and processing of a tentative parcel map shall be in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16.08, Tentative Map Procedural Requirements. 
B.  Parcel Maps. The preparation of parcel maps shall be in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16.12, Final Subdivision Maps. 
C.  Improvements and Dedications. The requirements for improvements and dedications shall be in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16.24, Improvements, Dedications and Reservations. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (400.010), 1994) 
16.16.020 - Parcel map waiver. 
A.  Eligibility for a Waiver. The planning commission may waive the requirement for filing a final parcel map where it is determined by the city engineer that sufficient record data exists to describe the division of property and where the following exist: 
1.  Rural Residential Zones (RR) as Defined by Title 17. Where each resultant parcel has a minimum gross area of ten (10) acres or a quarter of a quarter of a quarter section of a government plat or larger, and is not located on a "sloping terrain"; or 
2.  All Other Zones. The parcel map may be eligible for a final parcel map waiver if the parcel map is not required by the conditions of approval, the Subdivision Map Act, or this title to provide street, drainage, sewer, water, or other easements, or to define flood or geological hazards, drainage courses or building restrictions. 
B.  Contents. Waiver requests shall be made in writing on a standardized form provided by the director. The request shall include the following information: 
1.  A request for waiver, signed and acknowledged by all owners of record for the property comprising the land division; 
2.  A legal description of each proposed parcel; 
3.  Sufficient record data; 
4.  If required by the city engineer, a map showing sufficient ties, dimensions and bearings to adequately establish the boundaries of each proposed parcel. Record information, as available, shall be utilized; 
5.  The city engineer may require the submission of documentation deemed necessary to verify the information presented in the request for waiver. All submissions shall be legible and readily reproducible; 
6.  Before the approval of the request for waiver, the subdivider shall complete or guarantee completion of the conditions of approval as if a parcel map were filed. 
C.  Procedures. 
1.  The request for a final parcel map waiver shall be submitted at the time of filing the tentative parcel map. The same procedures found in Chapter 16.08, Tentative Map Procedural Requirements, shall apply to the tentative map for a parcel map waiver. 
2.  The applicant shall submit information requested by the city engineer. 
3.  The planning commission may waive the requirements for a final parcel map if it finds that the proposed parcel map complies with the following requirements: 
a.  That the design of each parcel described in the request for waiver is in substantial compliance with the tentative parcel map, as approved; 
b.  That the proposed parcel map complies with all applicable requirements as to area, improvement and design, flood, water drainage control, improved public streets or roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, environmental protection, and other requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, this title, and the general plan. 
4.  The decision by the planning commission may be appealed to council pursuant to Section 16.04.070. 
D.  Recording Grant of Waiver and Certificate of Compliance. 
1.  Approval of the parcel map waiver shall constitute approval for the issuance of the certificate of compliance. 
2.  The city engineer shall file a grant of waiver/certificate of compliance with the county recorder for recordation. 
3.  The grant of waiver/certificate of compliance shall state that the requirement to file a parcel map has been waived and that the parcels may be sold, leased, financed or transferred in full compliance with all applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. 
4.  The grant of waiver/certificate of compliance shall be recorded within one year from the date of approval. If not recorded within said period, the waiver shall be deemed withdrawn by the applicant unless an extension of the tentative parcel map is granted. 
5.  Offer of separate instrument shall be recorded concurrently with or prior to grant of waiver/certificate of compliance. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (400.100-400.140), 1994) 
16.16.030 - Administrative parcel map. 
A.  In General. An administrative parcel map is a division of any vacant or developed real property that has all public improvements installed; and has been previously subdivided. An administrative parcel map does not include air space condominiums. 
B.  Requirements. The director may waive the requirement for filing a tentative parcel map where it is determined that the following conditions exist; 
1.  All public improvements which serve the property have been installed. 
2.  The parcels resulting from the administrative parcel map will conform to the requirements of the general plan, Title 17 of this code, and the Uniform Building Code as applicable. 
3.  The city engineer has determined that the administrative parcel map does not adversely affect any existing access, easements or utilities, or that the adverse effect can be satisfactorily mitigated. 
C.  Procedures. 
1.  An application for administrative parcel map shall be filed, accompanied by a map and any other information required by the director. 
2.  A request for an administrative parcel map shall be signed and acknowledged by all owners of record of the property. 
3.  Before submitting the administrative parcel map, a map number shall be obtained from the land development department, county of Los Angeles. 
4.  The administrative parcel map shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name and address of legal owner and person preparing the map; 
b.  Sufficient legal description to define the boundary of the proposed project; 
c.  Date, north arrow and scale; 
d.  Exterior boundary lines of the property indicating easements, dimensions and lot size; 
e.  The lot layout and the dimensions of each lot. The location, elevation and area of each building site; 
f.  Existing zoning; 
g.  Approximate location of the existing features on and off-site within fifty (50) feet of the site boundaries; 
h.  Any other information requested by the director. 
5.  The applicant shall submit the number of blue line copies of the map specified by the director. 
6.  Once the city engineer has determined that the administrative parcel map does not adversely affect any existing access, easements or utilities, the director shall review the administrative parcel map and within thirty (30) days approve or deny the request. 
7.  The director shall find that the proposed division of land complies with the property development regulations of the zone. 
8.  The director shall provide the subdivider written notice of his action. 
9.  If the administrative parcel map is denied by the director, the subdivider may file a tentative parcel map for consideration by the planning commission. Such application shall be processed in the same manner as a request for tentative map; Chapter 16.08, Tentative Map Procedural Requirements. 
10.  After the director approves the administrative parcel map, the parcel map shall be submitted to the city engineer for recordation. 
(Ord. 754 § 1 (Attach. A § 12), 1999; Ord. 718 §§ 3, 4, 1996; Ord. 661 § 1 (400.200-400.220), 1994) 
Chapter 16.20 - DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 
Article I. - General Provisions 

16.20.010 - General requirements. 
A.  All subdivision design shall conform to the requirements contained in this chapter. 
B.  To the extent feasible, each lot in any subdivision shall be designed to be entirely located within a single zoning classification. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (500.000), 1994) 
16.20.020 - Subdivision design. 
    Residential subdivisions shall be designed to create neighborhoods that are quiet, safe, aesthetic, comfortable and livable while providing for the necessary movement of automobiles and service/emergency vehicles. Commercial and industrial subdivisions shall be designed to create development sites that are accessible, functional and adequately serviced, and which shall contribute to the logical and orderly development of the area. Subdivision layout shall be in accordance with the following design criteria set forth in this chapter. The planning commission may approve subdivision layouts that do not conform to the design criteria when it determines that it is impractical to comply, when there are conflicts between design requirements in specific circumstances, or as noted in the design criteria. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (510.000), 1994) 
16.20.030 - Exceptions to design requirements. 
    The design requirements of Section 16.20.020 shall not apply to subdivisions filed in conjunction with a specific plan or residential planned development, or filed to convert an existing apartment project to a condominium or stock cooperative. In these situations, the design requirements shall be established by the applicable specific plan or development approval, or by the planning commission on an individual case basis. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (510.010), 1994) 
Article II. - Access and Circulation 

16.20.040 - In general. 
    Each lot in a subdivision shall be provided with adequate street access and circulation based on the design requirements contained in this article. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (520.000), 1994) 
16.20.050 - Street right-of-way and design. 
    Street right-of-way, design, and improvements within a proposed subdivision shall be consistent with Section 2.2 of the master plan of complete streets as determined by the city engineer and any city appropriate city approving authority. 
(Ord. 754 § 1 (Attach. A (Exh. 1)), 1999; Ord. 661 § 1 (520.010), 1994; Ord. No. 1036, § 2, 10-24-2017 ) 
16.20.060 - Improvement beyond centerline. 
    In cases where the ultimate street right-of-way is not entirely within a proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall be required to provide paved improvements beyond the centerline in order to provide for adequate vehicle circulation, installation of bicycling, pedestrian, or transit improvements, parking, the installation of required medians and left turn pockets in their ultimate location and paved shoulders. The minimum improvements of such streets shall be as follows; however, the city engineer may modify such requirements to meet the design intent and performance objectives of the street consistent with the master plan of complete streets: 
A.  Regional Arterials. Eighty-eight (88) feet of an ultimate one hundred twenty (120) foot right-of-way; 
B.  Major Arterials. Seventy-eight (78) feet of an ultimate one hundred (100) foot right-of-way; 
C.  Secondary Arterials. Seventy (70) feet of an ultimate eighty-four (84) foot right-of-way; 
D.  Residential Collector Streets. Forty-four (44) feet of an ultimate sixty-four (64) foot right-of-way; 
E.  Residential Local Streets. Forty-two (42) feet of an ultimate sixty (60) foot right-of-way; 
F.  Residential Cul-de-sac. Forty (40) feet of an ultimate fifty-eight (58) foot right-of-way; 
G.  Commercial and Industrial Streets. Sixty (60) feet of an ultimate eighty (80) foot right-of-way; 
H.  Commercial and Industrial Cul-de-sacs. Fifty-one (51) feet of an ultimate sixty-six (66) foot right-of-way. 
(Ord. 754 § 1 (Attach. A § 14), 1999; Ord. 661 § 1 (520.020), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 917, § 1 (Exh. A), 2-10-2009; Ord. No. 1036, § 2, 10-24-2017 ) 
16.20.070 - Street layout design requirements. 
    The street pattern and the design layout of each subdivision shall be consistent with the following design requirements. The city engineer and any city approving authority shall have the authority to require street layout and design that is consistent with the master plan of complete streets: 
A.  Each subdivision should have, at a minimum, two (2) separate points of access to the major/secondary arterial street network. The planning commission may approve subdivisions with only one point of access if other access will be provided by future development, or may require additional points of access when it is determined that the size or design of the subdivision warrants additional access, or when additional access is deemed necessary for public safety including fire access, etc. 
B.  Collector streets should be located at one-fourth (1/4) mile points when intersecting regional and major arterials, and at one-eighth ( 1/8 ) mile points when intersecting secondary arterials. However, this requirement should not be construed to impose an intersection every one-eighth ( 1/8 ) mile. It is the intent of the city, in newly subdivided areas, to establish a public street network designed on a minimum of a one-fourth (1/4) mile grid pattern to facilitate pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular circulation via multiple routes. Such streets shall be designed to minimize vehicular speed and safely accommodate multiple modes of travel, subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
C.  Intersections shall be located and designed to minimize vehicular speed and provide safe use and access by motorists, pedestrians, and bicyclists. The city may require the provision of roundabouts, neighborhood traffic circles, curb extensions, and other traffic calming and safety improvements at intersections to meet this design objective. 
D.  A minimum distance of one hundred fifty (150) feet shall be provided between the centerlines of offset streets intersecting on the opposite sides of a local or collector street, and an absolute minimum distance of three hundred eighty (380) feet shall be provided between the centerline of offset streets intersecting on the opposite sides of major or secondary arterials. 
E.  The subdivision shall be designed to respect the intent and design objectives of the master plan of complete streets, the master plan of trails and bikeways, the safe routes to school master plan, the existing circulation pattern of the area, and any previously approved tentative or final subdivision maps in the area. 
F.  Street patterns shall be designed to provide for future access to adjacent parcels when the planning commission determines that overall circulation needs in the area require such access. The development review committee and/or planning commission may, at their discretion, require the subdivider to provide conceptual design layouts for adjacent parcels when necessary to analyze whether a proposed subdivision will allow access to such adjacent parcels to allow for adequate future development or subdivision in accordance with city requirements. 
G.  Residential subdivisions should be designed to limit vehicle speeds through the appropriate use of street and intersection design, traffic calming features, and other techniques as determined by the city engineer in accordance with the master plan of complete streets. 
H.  The use of frontage roads in new residential subdivisions is prohibited. 
I.  The use of alleys in new residential subdivisions is prohibited except where they will be privately maintained through a homeowner's association or similar mechanism, or where the city engineer determines that the use of an ally system is the only practical means to design the subdivision. 
J.  The maximum length of cul-de-sacs shall be as follows: 
1.  Five hundred (500) feet in length when serving land zoned for industrial or commercial use; exception, one thousand (1,000) feet in length if the street has a minimum right-of-way of eighty (80) feet in width; or 
2.  Seven hundred (700) feet in length when serving land zoned for residential uses having a density of more than four (4) dwelling units per net acre; or 
3.  One thousand (1,000) feet in length when serving land zoned for residential uses having a density of four (4) or less dwelling units per net acre. 
The length of the cul-de-sac shall be measured along the centerline of the cul-de-sac from the centerline of the intersected street to the radius point of the cul-de-sac. 
K.  Residential cul-de-sacs connecting to an arterial street are prohibited, unless the arterial street is the only available access to the site. 
L.  Interior street patterns in commercial and industrial subdivisions should be designed primarily to provide safe access for automobiles, trucks and service vehicles at slow speeds. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (520.030), 1994) 
( Ord. No. 1036, § 2, 10-24-2017 ) 
16.20.080 - Rural street requirements. 
    Subdivisions within rural residential areas (RR zones) shall generally comply with the following street design and improvement requirements; provided, however, that the city engineer or approving authority may modify or reduce the right-of-way and improvement requirements to meet the intent, design, requirements, and performance objectives of the master plan of complete streets, including the use of alternative street surfacing materials where appropriate. The cross-sections contained in Section 2.2 of the master plan of complete streets shall be utilized for right-of-way and design guidance in rural residential areas. 
(Ord. 839 § 1 (Exh. A § 1), 2005) 
(Ord. No. 917, § 1 (Exh. A), 2-10-2009; Ord. No. 1036, § 2, 10-24-2017 ) 
16.20.090 - Future streets. 
    If the planning commission has determined that a street is necessary for the future division of property shown on the tentative map, or for adjoining property, but that the present construction of such street is not warranted, the planning commission may require that the location, width and extent of such street be shown on the final map as a future street. The commission may also require that an offer of dedication be executed for that right-of-way. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (520.050), 1994) 
Article III. - Lot Design 

16.20.100 - In general. 
    The design and layout of lots shall be in conformance with the requirements of this article and as illustrated in Figure 16.20.100. 

(Ord. 661 § 1 (530.000), 1994) 
16.20.110 - Lot area, width, depth and frontage. 
    Each lot shall have an area, width, depth and frontage not less than required by any applicable specific plan or the zone in which the lot is located. All lots shall be designed to accommodate the proposed or anticipated uses. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (530.010), 1994) 
16.20.120 - Convertible lot design. 
    Where a subdivision in a rural residential zone divides land to less than fifty (50) percent of the density range as specified by the general plan, specific plan or zoning specification, the lots shall be designed with adequate area, width, depth and frontage to allow the lots to be further subdivided in the future. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (530.020), 1994) 
16.20.130 - Lot sideline angle. 
    The side lot lines of all lots shall be at an approximate right angle to the street upon which such lots front in all cases where practical. Where the lots have a curved front lot line by reason of fronting on a curved street, a knuckle intersection, or a cul-de-sac, the side lot lines may project radially from the theoretical center point of the curve. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (530.030), 1994) 
16.20.140 - Lot orientation-Residential. 
    All lots intended for residential use shall be oriented to obtain access from an interior collector, local or cul-de-sac street. Lots shall not be oriented to front onto arterial streets unless the planning commission determines that no other practical method exists for subdividing the property, or the property is located in a rural area where larger lots, existing subdivision patterns and relatively low traffic volumes mitigate any potential detrimental effects. Residential lots shall be designed to back up or side onto adjacent arterial streets. 
(Ord. 839 § 1 (Exh. A § 2), 2005) 
16.20.150 - Lot orientation for solar access. 
    The design of a subdivision shall provide, to the extent feasible, for future passive or natural heating and cooling opportunities, provided in accordance with Section 66473.1 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (530.050), 1994) 
16.20.160 - Lot orientation-Commercial/ industrial. 
    Lots within commercial and industrial subdivisions shall be oriented to minimize direct access to arterial streets. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (530.060), 1994) 
16.20.170 - Double frontage residential lots discouraged. 
    The creation of double frontage lots on cul-de-sac, local and collector streets in residential subdivisions is prohibited except where, in the opinion of the planning commission, the size and shape of the property dictate the use of such lots and there is no other practical method of subdividing the property. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (530.070), 1994) 
16.20.180 - Reverse corner residential lots discouraged. 
    The creation of reverse corner lots in residential subdivisions is discouraged. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (530.080), 1994) 
16.20.190 - Access restriction-Residential. 
    When residential lots are located adjacent to an arterial street, access to such streets shall be restricted. In addition, the planning commission may restrict access to other streets when such restrictions are necessary to protect the public health and safety. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (530.090), 1994) 
16.20.200 - Access restriction-Commercial industrial. 
    When commercial or industrial lots are located adjacent to an arterial street, access to such streets may be restricted when alternative access is available. In cases where access to an arterial street is permitted, the planning commission may require use of reciprocal access agreements or easements between individual lots in order to minimize the number of driveways. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (530.100), 1994) 
16.20.210 - Use of flag lots. 
    The use of flag lots is discouraged. The planning commission may approve the creation of flag lots only when the site contains existing topographical features that prevent the practical use of conventional lot design, or the existing lot configuration or development in the immediate vicinity limit the availability of street access, and there is no practical method of providing such access now or in the foreseeable future to allow the site to be divided in a conventional manner. When flag lots are approved by the planning commission, they shall conform to the requirements contained in Title 17 of this code. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (530.110), 1994) 
Article IV. - Residential Subdivision Perimeter Treatment 

16.20.220 - In general. 
    The perimeter of a residential subdivision shall be treated in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. 839 § 1 (Exh. A § 4), 2005: Ord. 661 § 1 (540.000), 1994) 
16.20.230 - Treatment along arterials-Urban residential subdivisions. 
    Portions of an urban single-family subdivision that are adjacent to arterial streets shall be treated with a decorative wall and landscaping in accordance with the following: 
A.  Wall Design Standards. 
1.  Perimeter walls shall be constructed of materials selected from the following list: 
a.  Adobe block; 
b.  Brick; 
c.  Decorative concrete block; 
d.  Pre-cast concrete; 
e.  Slump stone block; 
f.  Split face block; 
g.  Stucco on block; 
h.  Wrought iron in conjunction with other listed materials. 
2.  Perimeter walls shall exhibit such design features (including, but not limited to, pilasters, alcove planters, varying textures, special subdivision entries, or other similar treatments) as necessary to provide them with appropriate design relief and visual appeal. 
3.  Perimeter walls shall be not less than six feet high except as provided in Section 17.28.080C and be located within the easement boundary. 
4.  Subdivision perimeter wall location and design is subject to approval by the planning commission or the director of community development. 
B.  Landscaped Easement Design Standards. 
1.  When a straight wall design is utilized, a landscaped buffer shall be provided between the sidewalk and a subdivision perimeter wall (inclusive of the wall) at the following widths: 
a.  Arterial streets: ten (10) feet; 
b.  Local street: 6.5 feet. 
The landscaped buffer easement shall be in addition to the required sidewalk (i.e., ten (10) feet of the landscaping and eight feet of sidewalk along an arterial street will normally require a total width of approximately eighteen (18) feet between the curb and a wall). 
2.  Along arterial streets the landscaped buffer may vary in depth from thirteen (13) feet to a minimum of seven feet where an undulating wall design is proposed as long as an average depth of ten (10) feet is maintained. 
C.  The decorative wall shall be extended adjacent to subdivision entrance streets as shown in Figure 16.20.230. 

(Ord. 839 § 1 (Exh. A § 5), 2005; Ord. 661 § 1 (540.010), 1994) 
16.20.235 - Perimeter treatment along arterials for rural residential subdivisions. 
    Portions of a rural subdivision that are adjacent to arterial streets shall be treated with a decorative wall and landscaping in accordance with the following: 
A.  Wall Design Standards. 
1.  Perimeter walls shall be constructed of materials selected from the following list: 
a.  Adobe block; 
b.  Brick; 
c.  Decorative concrete block; 
d.  Pre-cast concrete; 
e.  Slump stone block; 
f.  Split face block; 
g.  Stucco on block; 
h.  Rock on block; 
i.  Stone on block; and 
j.  Wrought iron in conjunction with other listed materials. 
2.  Perimeter walls shall exhibit such design features (including, but not limited to, pilasters, alcove planters, varying textures, special subdivision entries, or other similar treatments) as necessary to provide them with appropriate design relief and visual appeal. 
3.  Perimeter walls shall be not less than six feet in height except as provided in Section 17.28.080(C) and shall be located within the easement boundary (See Section 16.20.235(B)(1)). 
4.  Subdivision perimeter wall location and design is subject to approval by the planning commission or the director of community development. 
5.  All solid portions of the wall shall be treated with an anti-graffiti coating. 
B.  Landscape/Pathway Easement Design Standards. 
1.  An eighteen (18)-foot wide easement for landscaping and multi-use pathway shall be provided between the arterial street, curb, and the subdivision perimeter wall (inclusive of the wall). 
2.  The eighteen (18)-foot wide easement shall be counted toward lot area for the underlying parcels. 
3.  Design Requirements. 
a.  The pathway shall be located within the eighteen (18)-foot easement area and shall generally be eight feet in width; the pathway may be reduced to a minimum width of six feet where design is constrained by utilities or other obstacles or meet the intent of a meandering sidewalk. 
b.  The pathway shall be surfaced with decomposed granite, minimum four inches in depth and properly compacted. Weed barrier shall be installed underneath the pathway. 
c.  The sidewalk shall meander away from the curb once every three hundred (300) to four hundred (400) feet at these locations: the planter adjacent to the curb shall be approximately twenty (20) feet in length and five to seven feet in width. 
d.  Planters adjacent to the perimeter wall shall be a minimum width of five feet. A two-foot-high slough wall is required between the landscape area and the pathway to protect the pathway area. 
e.  A concrete spilt-rail fence is required between the sidewalk and pathway. 
f.  Decorative, low-level ambient lighting fixture shall be provided along the pathway per the direction of the director of public works. 
4.  The landscape pathway easement along the arterial shall extend adjacent to subdivision entrance streets a minimum of twenty (20) feet beyond the curb return for entry streets where lots side onto the street. 
(Ord. 839 § 1 (Exh. A § 6), 2005) 
16.20.240 - Phasing walls and treatment abutting vacant land. 
    Portions of an urban single-family subdivision where lots directly abut vacant land, as shown in Figure 16.20.240, shall be treated with a masonry wall constructed to a minimum city department of public works standard or equivalent. If the subdivision is developed in phases, a wall shall also be required around the perimeter of each phase. The intent of this requirement is to ensure that residential development immediately adjacent to vacant land is provided an adequate buffer. The planning commission or the director of community development shall have the discretion to waive the requirement for a block wall when there is already an adequate wall in existence at the location, to avoid the creation of double walls, or where it has been demonstrated that the abutting property will not be vacant for an extended period of time. 
    Where streets that will be continued in later phases are provided within a developed subdivision, such streets shall be barricaded in accordance with public works Standard Plan PW-5 or PW-6, to the satisfaction of the city engineer. Streets that dead-end at the tract boundary, adjacent to vacant land, shall be barricaded with a six-foot high wood fence with three type N-2 markers to the satisfaction of the city engineer. 

(Ord. 754 § 1 (Attach. A § 17), 1999; Ord. 661 § 1 (540.020), 1994) 
16.20.250 - Multiple-family subdivision perimeter treatment. 
    The perimeter of multiple-family subdivisions may be treated with a combination of landscaping, walls, decorative fences, or other techniques and may be required to annex into landscape maintenance districts as determined necessary by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (540.030), 1994) 
Article V. - Commercial and Industrial Subdivision Perimeter Treatment 

16.20.260 - In general. 
    The planning commission may require the perimeter of a commercial or industrial subdivision to be treated in order to provide aesthetic appearance or to provide buffering between the subdivision and potentially conflicting uses. Such perimeter treatment may consist of landscaping, walls, decorative fences, or other features; however, the creation of publicly maintained landscape maintenance districts is discouraged. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (550.000), 1994) 
Article VI. - Design of Sites for Public Facilities 

16.20.270 - In general. 
    Whenever sites are provided within a residential subdivision for public facilities pursuant to Chapter 16.24, the design, location and layout of such sites shall be made in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (560.000), 1994) 
16.20.280 - Public park sites and school sites. 
A.  Public Park Sites. When a site for a public park is provided within a residential subdivision, the following design criteria and the recommendations of the director of parks, recreation and arts shall be utilized to determine the location and design of the site: 
1.  The park site generally should be centrally located within the area it is intended to serve. 
2.  The shape of the park site shall be adequate to accommodate the expected use, including active and passive recreational activities as appropriate. 
3.  All park sites should have at least two street frontages unless topography, existing improvements, or adjacent approved development make it impractical to do so. Larger community-level park sites may need additional street frontages depending on specific access concerns. 
4.  Where a street bordering a park site is a collector, local or cul-de-sac street, lots should be designed to front or side onto the street opposite the park site as shown in Figure 16.20.280. 
5.  Park sites should be located in proximity to or connected with local and/or regional trails to encourage access by walking or bicycling. 
B.  School Sites. When a school site is provided within a residential subdivision, the following design criteria shall be utilized to determine the location and design of the site: 
1.  The size, shape and location of the site shall be acceptable to the affected school district. 
2.  The site shall be provided with adequate vehicular access. Streets should be provided on a minimum of three sides unless topography, existing improvements, or adjacent approved development makes it impractical to do so. 
3.  Where a street bordering a school site is a collector, local or cul-de-sac street, lots shall be designed to front or side onto the street opposite from the school site. 
4.  School sites should be located in proximity to or connected with local and/or regional trails systems to encourage access by walking or bicycling. 

(Ord. 661 § 1 (560.010, 560.020), 1994) 
16.20.290 - Other public facilities. 
    It sites are provided within a subdivision for public facilities such as fire stations, water wells, etc., the size and shape of the site shall be acceptable to the entity that will acquire or utilize the site. The site shall be located to provide adequate access for the intended use and located to minimize future disturbance to residential neighborhoods. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (560.030), 1994) 
Article VII. - Special Design Situations 

16.20.300 - In general. 
    When a subdivision is proposed on a site affected by one or more of the following situations, the design of the subdivision shall be consistent with the criteria of this article except where the planning commission determines that it is impractical to do so. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (570.000), 1994) 
16.20.310 - Electric substations, high voltage power line easements, drainage channels and railroad lines. 
    When a residential subdivision contains electric substations, high voltage power line easements or rights-of-way, drainage channel(s) or easement(s) therefor, or railroad line or easement therefor, the following design principles as illustrated in Figure 16.20.310 shall be utilized: 
A.  Residential lots should be oriented away from the railroad easement or drainage channel through the use of "back-up" or "side-on" design. 
B.  (Reserved) 
C.  In urban residential areas, a masonry wall shall be provided along the boundary of the easement or channel where it abuts residential lots. 
D.  If the easement or channel is part of the city's master plan of trails as contained in the general plan the subdivision shall be designed to provide access to the easement (see Section 410.060.02 of the general plan). 
E.  If railroad spur lines are provided as part of an industrial subdivision, the street pattern shall be designed to minimize the number of railroad crossings. 
Figure 16.20.310 
DRAINAGE CHANNEL OR TRAIL EASEMENT 

(Ord. 661 § 1 (570.010), 1994) 
16.20.320 - Provision of trails. 
    Where a subdivision site contains a trail identified in the general plan, the subdivision shall be designed to accommodate the trail utilizing the following design criteria: 
A.  The trail location and width shall be consistent with the master plan of trails. The planning commission may approve internal deviations from the designated route when the change results in a safer or more aesthetic trail design, or in order to connect with a public facility (such as a park or school). In such cases, the trail shall be designed to enter and exit the subdivision at the approximate location shown on the master plan. 
B.  The subdivision shall be designed to minimize the number of streets and railroad spurs crossing the trail. 
C.  Provisions shall be made for providing access to the trail from the subdivision, and any local or internal trail systems within the subdivision shall be designated to connect with the regional trail. 
D.  Width of the trail easement or right-of-way shall be twenty-five (25) feet except where specific circumstances such as topography, drainage channels, existing street improvements, or proposed trail improvements result in a need for a lesser or greater width. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (570.020), 1994) 
Chapter 16.24 - IMPROVEMENTS, DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS 
Article I. - Improvements, Dedications and Reservations 

16.24.010 - General provisions. 
    When improvements, dedications or reservations are required as conditions of a tentative map, or by any other city statute, ordinance or policy, the requirements of this chapter shall apply. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (600.010), 1994) 
16.24.020 - Improvements. 
    All improvements that are required by the conditions of a tentative map, by this chapter, or by any other city statute, ordinance or policy, shall conform with the requirements of this section and shall be installed in conformance with the current edition of "The Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction," with supplements, as approved by the city council. No final map shall be presented to the director of public works for approval until the subdivider either completes the required improvements or enters into an agreement with the city, pursuant to Chapter 16.32, agreeing to complete the improvements. 
(Ord. 754 § 1 (Attach. A § 18), 1999: Ord. 661 § 1 (610.000), 1994) 
16.24.030 - Phasing for construction of improvements. 
    A subdivider shall indicate intent to obtain occupancy on a portion of the project prior to the completion of all public improvement by submitting a construction phase plan for approval. All improvements shall be installed prior to occupancy of any building within the phase. 
A.  The plan shall delineate the portions and sequencing of the project and the improvements to be constructed with each phase. 
B.  The plan shall indicate the city's project number, location and other pertinent information deemed necessary for the city to review the application. 
C.  Request for a construction phase plan shall be made in writing to the city engineer, who shall make the final decision on such requests. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (610.010), 1994) 
16.24.040 - Supplemental improvements, size, capacity, number or length. 
    The city may require the subdivider to install improvements for the benefit of the subdivision which may contain supplemental size, capacity, number or length for the benefit of property not within the subdivision as a condition of the approval of a tentative subdivision map. 
A.  In the event that improvements of a supplemental size, capacity, number or length are required above and beyond what is necessary to serve the needs of the subdivision, the city shall, at the developers request, enter into a reimbursement agreement with the subdivider pursuant to Sections 66486 and 66487 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
B.  Upon subsequent collection of moneys from other owners or developers with benefitting properties for the additional size, capacity, number or length beyond what is necessary to serve the subdivision the city shall remit such funds to the appropriate party in accordance with the reimbursement agreement. 
C.  Supplemental size, capacity, number or length shall not be construed to include the dedication or improvement of streets or intersections, or dedication for drainage, adjacent to or within the subdivision to the ultimate right-of-way as indicated on the adopted general plan, master plan of highways, or master plan of drainage. 
D.  All costs associated with the establishment of the reimbursement agreement shall be borne by the developer. 
E.  The city may not approve a reimbursement agreement after the date construction begins on the improvements unless specifically approved by the city council. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (610.020), 1994) 
16.24.050 - Off-site improvements. 
    If the conditions of a tentative map require the construction of off-site improvements on land in which neither the city nor the subdivider has sufficient title or interest to allow construction, the city shall either: 
A.  Require the subdivider, prior to filing of the approval of the final map, to enter into an agreement to complete the off-site improvements at the time the city acquires title or an interest in the land. The subdivider shall pay all associated costs of acquiring off-site land or an interest in the land required to construct the improvements; or 
B.  Acquire by negotiation or commence condemnation of the land within one hundred twenty (120) days of recording the final map. However, the subdivider shall be required to pay all associated costs. If the city fails to meet the one hundred twenty (120) day time limit, the condition for construction is deemed waived. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (610.030), 1994) 
16.24.060 - Improvement plans. 
A.  Improvement plans shall be prepared under the direction of and signed by a registered civil engineer. 
B.  The improvement plans shall be in a form consistent with the requirements of the city engineer. The improvement plans shall be submitted as a complete package as set forth in the document titled "Improvement Plan Submittal Requirements" (DPW 0070). 
C.  All improvement plans shall be submitted in conjunction with or subsequent to the first check of the final map prior to the final subdivision map being considered for approval by the director of public works. 
D.  All improvement plans shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer before any final subdivision map shall be approved or certified, except for public recreational facilities plans pursuant to Article VIII of this chapter which shall be subject to approval of the director of parks, recreation and arts. The plans shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of Sections 66456.2 and 66462 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 754 § 1 (Attach. A § 19), 1999; Ord. 661 § 1 (610.040), 1994) 
16.24.070 - Exceptions to improvement requirements. 
    The following types of subdivisions shall be exempt from improvement requirements: 
A.  Subdivisions in which each parcel has a minimum gross area of twenty (20) acres; 
B.  Subdivisions located within an area designated by the general plan for a density of 0.4 dwelling unit or less per acre, except that the planning commission may require the dedication of all streets, improvement of arterial streets, the grading of local streets, and the improvement of drainage facilities when it is determined to be necessary for the overall orderly planned development of the area; 
C.  The planning commission shall not be prevented from requiring the dedication or provision of easements for streets, utilities or drainage courses when it is determined that such requirements are necessary for future development of the area and/or the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (610.050), 1994) 
16.24.080 - Streets. 
    All subdivisions for which street improvements and/or dedications are required shall comply with the provisions of this section. The subdivider shall grade and install curbs, gutters, paving, sidewalks, streetlights and street trees as required in accordance with the city street standards and the street improvement plans approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (610.100), 1994) 
16.24.090 - Street grades. 
    No highway or street shall have a grade of more than six percent maximum. However, in areas where hillside topography make it impractical to keep within such grade, the city engineer may approve a street grade up to ten (10) percent. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (610.110), 1994) 
16.24.100 - Street trees. 
    Street trees shall be planted along the frontage of all lots of a subdivision located in an urban residential, commercial or industrial zone prior to occupancy. The number, species and location of such trees shall be as specified by the city engineer. This requirement may be waived where the city engineer determines that sufficient trees will be located within an abutting landscaped setback. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (610.120), 1994) 
16.24.110 - Streetlights. 
    Streetlights shall be installed and the subdivision annexed to the street lighting district in accordance with city ordinance or adopted policy. The developer is to pay the annexation processing fee and the first year's assessments prior to the final subdivision map being placed on the city council agenda. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (610.130), 1994) 
16.24.120 - Street turnouts. 
    Street turnouts will be installed per Ordinance No. 633 (Chapter 15.56). 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (610.140), 1994) 
Article II. - Drainage Facilities 

16.24.130 - In general. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this title, all subdivisions shall comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (610.200), 1994) 
16.24.140 - Hydrology study. 
    A hydrology study shall be submitted and approved prior to the filing of the final map. The hydrology study shall verify, among other things, that the proposed streets and existing downstream streets are designed to carry a fifty (50) year storm, top of curb to top of curb, and one hundred (100) year storm within the right-of-way. The anticipated flow through the subdivisions and/or potential drainage problems will be mitigated through the installation of drainage structures such as culverts, storm drains, or other improvements. Review and approval of the hydrology study shall be the responsibility of the city engineer. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (610.210), 1994) 
16.24.150 - Mitigation of storm and nuisance water runoff. 
    The subdivider shall be responsible for the installation of improvements to mitigate storm and nuisance water runoff attributable to the subdivision, and for providing protection of the property and adjacent projects from flooding. Such improvements may include on or off-site culverts, detention/retention basins, channels, swales, or other structures and facilities that are determined to be necessary by the city engineer based on hydrology studies and other related information. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (610.220), 1994) 
16.24.160 - Dedication and improvement of local and regional drainage facilities. 
A.  Whenever a subdivision contains in drainage channel or facility that is part of a city-adopted master plan of drainage, the subdivider shall construct improvements of, or contributions toward the improvement of, said facilities when one or more of the following circumstances apply: 
1.  The improvements are necessary to provide drainage protection for the subdivision or affected upstream or downstream properties. 
2.  The facility will be utilized for drainage purposes for the benefit of the subdivision. 
3.  The improvement of the facility is necessary to provide a logical extension of existing improvements. 
B.  In cases where such improvements are not solely for the benefit of the subdivision, the subdivider or developer may seek relief from sole responsibility of mitigating such drainage runoff by requesting credit or reimbursement for construction of master planned drainage facilities. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (610.230), 1994) 
16.24.170 - Perimeter treatment of drainage improvements. 
    The perimeter of drainage structures, including but not limited to, detention/retention basins, channels and swales, shall be treated with fences, walls, landscaping, or other improvements when it is deemed necessary for protection of the public health, safety and welfare or the aesthetic qualities of the subdivision. Such improvements are subject to the approval of the director and shall be installed by the subdivider. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (610.240), 1994) 
16.24.180 - Drainage benefit assessment district. 
    All lots within a subdivision shall be annexed into the drainage benefit assessment district to ensure the continued maintenance of drainage improvements. The developer is to pay the annexation processing fee and the first year's assessment prior to the final map being considered for approval by the director of public works. 
(Ord. 754 § 1 (Attach. A § 20), 1999: Ord. 661 § 1 (610.250), 1994) 
Article III. - Sewers, Sewage Disposal Systems 

16.24.190 - In general. 
    Each buildable lot in the subdivision shall be served by an approved sanitary sewer system in accordance with the requirements of the city of Lancaster and county of Los Angeles, as applicable. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (610.300), 1994) 
16.24.200 - Sewer area study. 
    If determined necessary by the city engineer, a sewer area study shall be submitted by the subdivider in order to determine the capacity of existing and proposed sewage systems in the area and the improvements necessary to accommodate the sewage generated by the subdivision. 
(Ord. 754 § 1 (Attach. A § 21), 1999: Ord. 661 § 1 (610.310), 1994) 
16.24.210 - Use of septic tanks. 
    The city engineer may approve the use of on-site septic systems in nonurban residential areas as defined by the general plan only where there is no feasible method of providing sanitary sewers, and where the soil and groundwater conditions of the site are suitable for the use of such systems. All such approvals shall be contingent upon the subdivider receiving approval for the use of septic systems from appropriate county and state agencies. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (610.320), 1994) 
Article IV. - Water Systems and Fire Hydrants 

16.24.220 - In general. 
    Each unit or buildable lot within a subdivision shall be served by an approved domestic water system and adequate fire hydrants shall be placed throughout the subdivision. The water mains and fire hydrants required by this section shall comply in all respects with all statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations applicable at the time of installation. Such water mains and fire hydrants also shall be designed and constructed to deliver the fire flow as specified by the Los Angeles county fire chief pursuant to the specifications of service, design and construction as specified in city Ordinance No. 407 (Chapter 13.12), entitled "Water Ordinance," adopted July 7, 1986, and in all other respects conform to such ordinance. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (610.400), 1994) 
Article V. - Utilities 

16.24.230 - Utilities. 
    Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be served by gas, electricity, telephone, and, in the case of residential subdivisions, cable television. All utilities required to be installed to serve a subdivision shall be installed underground in accordance with Article II of Chapter 13.20 and city council policy. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (610.500), 1994) 
Article VI. - Walls and Fences 

16.24.240 - In general. 
    When walls or fences are required by the conditions of a tentative map or by other city requirements, such walls shall be shown on the grading plans and installed in accordance with city council policy. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (610.600), 1994) 
Article VII. - Landscaping Improvements 

16.24.250 - In general. 
    Landscaping shall be installed pursuant to the requirements of this article, and in accordance with the requirements of city Ordinance No. 629 (Chapter 15.48). 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (610.700), 1994) 
16.24.260 - Perimeter landscaping. 
    Where landscaping is required along an arterial street pursuant to Section 16.20.230, such landscaping and irrigation shall be installed subject to the approval of the director of public works. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (610.710), 1994) 
16.24.270 - Street side yard landscaping. 
    In an urban residential subdivision, the subdivider or developer shall install a landscaping and irrigation system in the six foot right-of-way strip along the street side yard between the front yard and rear lot line. 
(Ord. 754 § 1 (Attach. A § 22), 1999: Ord. 661 § 1 (610.720), 1994) 
16.24.280 - Landscape maintenance district. 
    All lots in a residential subdivision shall be annexed into the landscape maintenance district to ensure the long-term maintenance of perimeter landscaping by the city. The developer is to pay the annexation processing fee and the first year's assessment prior to the final map being considered for approval by the director of public works. 
(Ord. 754 § 1 (Attach. A § 23), 1999: Ord. 661 § 1 (610.730), 1994) 
Article VIII. - Public Recreation Facilities 

16.24.290 - In general. 
    The city may require the improvement of public recreational facilities such as trails and parks to the satisfaction of the general plan or the director of parks, recreation and arts as a condition of approval of a tentative map; provided that, the value of such improvement does not exceed the obligations of the project as outlined in city Ordinance No. 380 (Chapter 15.72). This section shall not, however, be deemed to limit the ability of the city to condition tentative maps to comply with the requirements of a specific plan, residential planned development, or development agreement approved for the site. The applicant shall submit the appropriate improvement plans to the director of parks, recreation and arts prior to the final subdivision map being considered for approval by the director of public works. 
(Ord. 754 § 1 (Attach. A § 24), 1999: Ord. 661 § 1 (610.800), 1994) 
Article IX. - Dedications 

16.24.300 - In general. 
    Every street, alley, walkway, drainage channel, park reserve strip (or waiver of access rights), easements and other right-of-way shown on the final map intended for public use shall be irrevocably offered for dedication at the time the final map is filed for city council approval. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (620.000), 1994) 
16.24.310 - Public park sites. 
    The city may, at its sole discretion, require the dedication or reservation of land for public park sites as a condition of approval of a tentative map. All such dedications shall be in conformance with the requirements of city Ordinance No. 380. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (620.010), 1994) 
16.24.320 - Public trails. 
    If a public trail is provided within a subdivision pursuant to Section 16.20.320, such trail shall be offered to the city through dedication, easement or reservation, to the satisfaction of the director of parks, recreation and arts. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (620.020), 1994) 
Article X. - Reservations of Land for Public Facilities 

16.24.330 - In general. 
    The planning commission or city council may require, as a condition of tentative map approval, the reservation of land within the subdivision for public facilities including schools, parks, recreational facilities, fire stations, libraries, or other public uses, subject to the conditions of this article. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (630.000), 1994) 
16.24.340 - Conditions for land reservation. 
    The requirement for reservation of land shall be based on the following standards: 
A.  The required reservation is based upon and is in conformance with the provisions for the intended public use contained within the adopted general plan or an adopted specific plan. 
B.  The amount of land reserved will not make development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically unfeasible. 
C.  The size and shape of the reserved area shall permit the balance of the property to be developed in an orderly and efficient manner. 
D.  The size and shape of the reserved area shall permit the efficient division of the reserved area in the event that it is not acquired within the time frame specified in Section 16.24.350. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (630.010), 1994) 
16.24.350 - Binding agreement to acquire reservation. 
    The public agency for whose benefit the reservation has been required shall, at the time of approval of the final map, enter into a binding agreement to acquire the reserved area within two years after the completion and acceptance of all improvements, unless such period of time is extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and public agency. The purchase price of such reservation shall be determined in accordance with the requirements of Section 66480 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (630.020), 1994) 
16.24.360 - Termination of reservation. 
    If the public agency for whose benefit the reservation has been required does not enter into a binding agreement to acquire the reserved area, or fails to acquire the property within the period of time specified in Section 16.24.350, the reservation shall automatically terminate. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (630.030), 1994) 
Article XI. - Covenant of Easement 

16.24.370 - In General. 
    The city may require certain easements to be recorded over properties currently held in common ownership for the benefit of future owners. This chapter allows for the recording of a covenant by the current owner to dedicate easements with the future transfer of said property. This chapter shall apply to all development projects approved by the city, its council, planning commission, officers, and employees and acts independently from any other authority or method for the city to require an easement. The provisions of this chapter shall only apply when the covenant of easement is for parking; ingress, egress, or emergency access; light and/or air access; signage; landscaping; and/or open space purposes. The provisions of this chapter shall only apply when all the real property benefited or burdened by said covenant is in common ownership at the time of recording the covenant of easement. This chapter is adopted pursuant to Government Code Sections 65870 et seq. 
( Ord. No. 1037, § 2, 11-14-2017 ) 
16.24.380 - Procedures. 
    Whenever the approving authority determines, independently or based upon the recommendation of city staff, that a covenant of easement is needed for one (1) or more of the purposes identified in Section 16.24.370 (General), the approval, permit, or designation shall not become effective unless or until said covenant of easement is recorded. Whenever a covenant of easement is required herein, the covenant shall either be in a form and manner approved by the city attorney based upon the advice of the city engineer and director, executable by the city engineer on behalf of the city; or be prepared by the city attorney, executable by the city engineer on behalf of the city. Whenever the city attorney prepares a covenant of easement, the city shall be entitled to reimbursement from the applicant for the costs associated therewith. 
( Ord. No. 1037, § 2, 11-14-2017 ) 
16.24.390 - Contents. 
    A covenant of easement prepared pursuant to this chapter shall contain, at a minimum, the following elements: 
A.  Identification of the owner and/or owners of the real property to be burdened, including a statement that both the burdened and benefited parcels are under common ownership; 
B.  A consent to said covenant of easement and the recording thereof by the record owner and/or owners to the covenant; 
C.  Identification of the real property to be benefited by said covenant, including a legal description of the same; 
D.  A statement that said covenant shall act as an easement pursuant to Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 801) of Title 2 of Part 2 of Division 2 of the California Civil Code, including an express statement that said easement and covenant of easement shall not merge into any other interest in real property pursuant to California Government Code Section 65 871(b); 
E.  State that said covenant of easement shall run with the land, be binding upon all successors in interest to the burdened real property, inure to all successors in interest to the real property benefited, and shall be subject to California Civil Code Section 1104; 
F.  Identify the approval, permit, or designation granted, which required the covenant; 
G.  A statement identifying the code section, which sets forth the procedure for release of the covenant; 
H.  Identification of the city as a third party beneficiary; 
I.  Provisions concerning maintenance and the scope of use of the easement; and 
J.  An appropriate section for execution of said covenant of easement by the record owner, or owners of the subject real property. 
( Ord. No. 1037, § 2, 11-14-2017 ) 
16.24.400 - Release of Covenant. 
    Any person may request that the city make a determination as to whether or not the restriction imposed by the covenant of easement is still necessary to achieve the city's land use goals. The determination of the need for the covenant of easement shall be made by the approving authority that took final action on the original application. A person shall be entitled to only one (1) such determination in any twelve (12) month period as indicated. To obtain a determination mentioned above, a "request for determination" application shall be made and filed with the city clerk. Said application shall include a fee as set by resolution of the council. Upon receipt of a completed application, the city clerk shall set the matter for public hearing before the approving authority and cause notice thereof to be given pursuant to Government Code Section 65090, and a copy of the notice shall be mailed to the record property owner or owners, as shown on the tax assessor's latest equalized roll if other than the applicant, and to all record property owners within one thousand (1,000) feet of the property. 
    At the conclusion of the public hearing, the approving authority shall determine and make a finding, based upon substantial evidence in the record, whether or not the restriction imposed by the covenant of easement is still necessary to achieve the land use goals of the city. If the approving authority determines that the covenant for easement is still required, the approving authority shall, by resolution, determine that the need still exists. If the approving authority finds that the covenant of easement is no longer necessary, the approving authority shall, by resolution, make the determination and finding and direct the city attorney to prepare a release thereof and transmit the same to the city clerk for recording. The approving authority's determination shall be final and conclusive. 
( Ord. No. 1037, § 2, 11-14-2017 ) 
Chapter 16.28 - PLAN CHECKING AND INSPECTION FEES 

16.28.010 - General. 
A.  Plans shall be submitted in a form demonstrating that the applicant's engineer has made a careful investigation of the project, surrounding properties, existing conditions, any special circumstances and the requirements of the city. The submittal to the city for review shall include all the information needed for the plans examiner to determine that the plans and studies are adequate in meeting the city's requirements. 
B.  The inspection fees are considered adequate only to cover the usual inspection of the project. Additional inspections will require additional fees. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (700.010), 1994) 
16.28.020 - Plan checking fees. 
A.  Subdivision Maps. Fees for checking of final subdivision maps shall be paid at the time of submittal of the map for review by the city. The amount of the fee shall be determined in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city council. 
B.  Improvement Plans. Fees for review of the improvement plans associated with a subdivision shall be paid with the first submittal of the plans for review by the city. The amount of the fee shall be based upon the "Engineering Division Bond Estimate Form" (DPW 0083). The unit costs shown on the engineering division bond estimate form will be reviewed from time to time and updated as needed, by the engineering division, to reflect appropriate cost estimates for bonding, plan checking and inspection purposes. 
C.  Additional Fees. Additional plan check fees shall be required after the third plan review has been completed if the plans are still not ready for signature by the city. The amount of the additional review fee shall be determined by the city engineer and shall be based on an estimate of the work to be performed by the city for the subsequent review. The additional fee shall be paid with the fourth and subsequent submittals until the plans are ready for signature by the city. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (700.020), 1994) 
16.28.030 - Inspection fees. 
A.  Inspections. Fees for inspection of the improvements for work associated with the subdivision shall be based on the engineering division bond estimate form. The fee for permits shall be paid prior to issuance of permits. The unit costs shown on the engineering division bond estimate form will be reviewed from time to time and updated as needed by the engineering division, to reflect appropriate cost estimates for bonding, plan checking and inspection purposes. 
B.  Additional Inspections. 
1.  When, in the opinion of the inspector, additional time is spent on a project for additional inspections due to the work not being ready when the inspection is called for, or additional inspections are required by the inspector for unacceptable work or corrective work, then an additional fee shall be paid by the developer for additional time spent by the inspector. 
2.  In the event that additional inspection fees are due, the developer shall deposit with the city an amount estimated by the city engineer to cover the cost of the additional inspection work. 
3.  This deposit shall in no case be less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and shall be deposited prior to any additional inspection work being performed by the inspector. An account is to be established with the city for the deposit and the inspector is to charge the additional time to the account. 
4.  If, at any time, the balance of the account is considered insufficient to cover completion of the extra work, additional deposits to the account shall be made by the developer in accordance with the above. At the end of the project, any remaining funds in the account shall be returned to the depositor. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (700.030), 1994) 
16.28.040 - Refunds and credits. 
A.  Refunds. Once a submittal for plan checking has been made, work is considered to have commenced on the project. If the developer requests in writing that the project be removed from the plan review and plan checking has not begun, then a refund of seventy-five (75) percent of the fees may be made to the developer. If, however, plan checking has begun, no refund shall be made. 
B.  Credits. If there is determined to be an overpayment to the city for plan checking services due to incorrect completion of the engineering division bond estimate form, or a change in the estimate through the plan check process, a credit of the overage will be applied to the permit fee. If no permit is to be issued due to the project being stopped by the developer or expiration of the map, a refund of the overage is to be made upon written request by the developer. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (700.040), 1994) 
Chapter 16.32 - SECURITY 

16.32.010 - Undertaking agreement. 
    Before a subdivision map is approved for recordation, all required improvements shall be installed and inspected by staff for acceptance by the director of public works. The subdivider shall enter into an undertaking agreement pursuant to which the improvements are guaranteed by a form of security acceptable to the city. The agreement is a contract between the developer and the city to insure satisfactory performance of the installation or construction of improvements in accordance with the conditions of the tentative map. 
(Ord. 754 § 1 (Attach. A § 25), 1999: Ord. 661 § 1 (800.010), 1994) 
16.32.020 - Improvement security. 
A.  An undertaking agreement, contract or act required or authorized by the Subdivision Map Act or this title for which security is required shall be secured in accordance with Section 66499 et seq. of the Subdivision Map Act and as provided in this section. 
B.  No final subdivision map shall be signed by the city or recorded until all improvement securities required by this section have been received and approved by the director of public works. 
C.  The obligations secured shall include the faithful performance of the terms of the undertaking agreement, the payment for labor, materials and equipment of the subdivider's, contractors as well as persons furnishing labor, material or equipment for the installation and guarantee of the improvements against defects for a warranty period of one year following the city's acceptance of improvements. Security shall be deposited with the city in the form and amount required by the Subdivision Map Act and this title. 
D.  Amount of Security. A subdivider shall provide security for the obligations set forth in the undertaking agreement in the following amounts: 
1.  Faithful Performance Security. The subdivider shall provide security to guarantee the faithful performance of all work, including the city's inspection of work, in the amount of one hundred (100) percent of the total estimated construction costs to guarantee the construction or installation of all improvements. 
2.  Labor and Materials Security. An additional fifty (50) percent of the estimated construction costs shall be required to guarantee payment to the subdivider's contractors, subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment for the construction or installation of improvements. 
3.  Warranty Security. As more fully set forth in Section 16.32.090, the subdivider shall provide security in the amount required by the city engineer, but in no event shall such security be less than ten (10) percent of the estimated construction cost, to guarantee the improvements against any defective work, labor done, or defective materials used in the construction of the improvements for one year following the city's acceptance of the improvements. 
4.  As part of the obligation guaranteed by the security, and in addition to the full amount of security, there shall be included costs and reasonable expenses for fees incurred by the city in enforcing the obligations secured. 
5.  The subdivider shall submit an estimate of the improvement cost on the "Bond Estimate Form" (DPW 0080) to the city engineer for approval prior to obtaining the performance security. Both the faithful performance and the labor and materials securities shall be submitted at the same time to the city engineer. 
E.  Authorized Form of Securities. 
1.  The form of security shall be one or a combination of the following at the option of, and subject to, the approval of the city engineer: 
a.  Bond. A bond by a duly authorized corporate surety which shall be in accordance with the "Faithful Performance Bond" (DPW 0055). Only one performance bond is allowed per project. 
b.  Certificate of Deposit. A deposit of money or negotiable bonds of the kind approved for security deposits of public moneys along with a certificate of such deposit will be deposited with the finance director. 
c.  Letter of Credit. Letters of credit may be furnished pursuant to Section 66499 of the Subdivision Map Act. Such letters shall be an irrevocable letter of credit from a financial institution regulated by the state or federal government pledging that the funds necessary to carry out the act or agreement for payment are on deposit and guaranteed for payment. The letter of credit shall be approved by the finance director. 
d.  Cashier's Check. The city engineer shall approve the security amount and the cashier's check. The original check shall be deposited with the finance director. 
e.  Security Interest in Real Property. The city council may request an agreement with the owner to allow the filing and recordation of a lien against the subdivision. 
f.  Any other type of security approved by the finance director. 
g.  The city shall not accept personal or company checks for project securities. 
2.  If the subdivider deposits savings and loan certificates, the subdivider also shall assign such certificates to the city and such deposit and assignment shall be subject to all of the provisions and conditions of Section 66499 of the Subdivision Map Act and all other regulations. 
3.  Special assessments furnished under authority of the Subdivision Map Act and all faithful performance bonds, referred to in this title shall be: 
a.  Furnished by a surety company authorized to write the same in the state of California; 
b.  Subject to the approval and acceptance by the city council of the city. 
F.  Securities for Other Improvements. 
1.  Water Mains. If the subdivider shows to the satisfaction of the city engineer, that the subdivider has entered into a contract with a water utility to construct water mains as defined in Ordinance No. 407, the Water Ordinance (Chapter 13.12), and has deposited securities with the county of Los Angeles to secure the installation of the water utility, the subdivider will not have to provide securities to secure construction of such water mains with the city. The city engineer shall authorize any reductions or the release of such securities by any agency. 
2.  Monuments. The undertaking agreement shall be accompanied by a cash deposit or cashier's check in a sum determined by the city engineer, which equals the cost of setting such monuments, guaranteeing the faithful performance of all such work of setting monuments and furnishing notes, and in every respect complying with such agreement. 
G.  The city may refuse to accept securities from any surety company which has previously failed or has been slow to perform in accordance with the guarantees made on projects within the city, or which his forced the city to go to court to recover the funds necessary to complete the project. 
H.  Any security deposited with the city shall not relieve the subdivider or developer of the responsibility to install any of the improvements required by the conditions for the development. 
I.  The security shall only be released upon receipt of written instructions from the city engineer. 
(Ord. 754 § 1 (Attach. A § 26), 1999; Ord. 661 § 1 (800.020), 1994) 
16.32.030 - Construction. 
A.  Construction Methods. The construction methods and materials for all improvements shall conform to the "Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction" as adopted by city council resolution. 
B.  Construction Commencement. Construction shall not commence until the required improvement plans have been approved by the city engineer and all securities and agreements have been posted and permits issued. 
C.  Inspection. All improvements shall be inspected by the city engineer to ensure that the improvements comply with the approved plans and with the "Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction." 
D.  Final Inspection and Deficiency List. 
1.  Upon completion of the subdivision improvements, the developer shall apply in writing to the city engineer for a preliminary final inspection. The city engineer shall then schedule a preliminary final inspection. 
2.  A deficiency list shall be compiled during the inspection, noting all corrections or any additional work required. If the number of items is excessive or the subdivision appears incomplete, the preliminary final inspection may be halted and rescheduled to a later date as determined by the city engineer. 
3.  When the preliminary final inspection has been completed, a copy of the deficiency list shall be transmitted to the developer for correction. 
4.  Upon having completed all corrections or additional work as outlined by the deficiency list, the developer shall certify in writing that all corrections have been completed satisfactorily and request a final inspection. The city engineer shall then make a final inspection. 
5.  Upon finding that all items on the deficiency list have been satisfactorily corrected and upon receipt of "as-built" improvement plans, the subdivision shall be considered for acceptance by the director of public works. 
6.  The completion of corrections indicated by the deficiency list shall not relieve the developer from the responsibility of correcting any deficiency not shown on the list that may subsequently be discovered. 
(Ord. 754 § 1 (Attach. A § 27), 1999; Ord. 661 § 1 (800.030), 1994) 
16.32.040 - Reduction in performance security. 
    The city engineer may authorize in writing the release of a portion of the security in conjunction with the acceptance of the satisfactorily completed portions of the improvements. However, in no event shall the security be reduced to less then ten (10) percent of the total security amount for faithful performance. 
A.  Grading Security Reductions. Reductions shall not be allowed for grading securities. The city shall retain one hundred (100) percent of all grading securities until final grading work is completed to the satisfaction of the city engineer. Final grading work shall mean that the grading around the completed structure is accomplished and the grading engineer of record has certified the same to the building division on a form acceptable to the building official. 
B.  Final Grading Certificate. The building division shall not accept a final grading certificate on any lot or parcel where partially constructed structures exist, or on any vacant lot or parcel which has not been graded. All vacant parcels shall be maintained weed free and partially constructed parcels may be fenced as deemed necessary by the building official. 
C.  Performance Security Reduction. Performance securities may be given a one-time reduction of up to fifty (50) percent of the approved security amount deposited for streets. This reduction will be allowed only after the first lift of asphaltic concrete pavement has been installed to the satisfaction of the city engineer. 
D.  To obtain a performance security reduction, the subdivider shall submit a written request to the city engineer. The city engineer shall respond to the request within fifteen (15) working days from receipt of the request. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (800.040), 1994) 
16.32.050 - Reduction in labor and materials securities. 
    Security given to secure payment to the contractor, subcontractors and persons furnishing labor, materials, or equipment for the construction of the improvements shall after the passage of time within which claims of lien are required to be recorded pursuant to Article 3 (commencing with Section 3114) of Chapter 2 of Title 15 of Part 4 of Division B of the Civil Code and offer acceptance of the work be reduced to an amount equal to the total claimed by the claimants for whom claims of lien have been recorded and notice given in writing to the director of public works. This reduction shall not apply to the warranty security nor to costs reasonable expenses and fees, including reasonable attorney fees. 
(Ord. 754 § 1 (Attach. A § 28), 1999: Ord. 661 § 1 (800.050), 1994) 
16.32.060 - Extension of the undertaking agreement. 
A.  The subdivider may request that the city engineer extend the completion date of the undertaking agreement. 
B.  The request shall be made in writing at least thirty (30) days before the expiration of the undertaking agreement. 
C.  The subdivider shall submit adequate evidence to justify the extension along with a projected time frame clearly indicating the time of completion. 
D.  The director of public works shall determine whether or not good cause has been demonstrated to entitle the subdivider an extension of the undertaking agreement. 
E.  The director of public works may request an agreement between the property owner and the city to allow the filing and recordation of a lien against the subdivision. 
F.  In consideration of an extension of an undertaking agreement, the following may be required: 
1.  Revision of improvement plans to provide for current design and construction standards when requested by the city engineer; and 
2.  Revised improvement construction cost estimates to reflect current costs as approved by the city engineer; and 
3.  Increase of improvement securities in accordance with revised construction cost estimates; and 
4.  Increase of inspection fees to reflect current construction cost estimates; and 
5.  Additional requirements as recommended by the city engineer or as the director of public works may deem necessary as a condition of its approving any time extension for the completion of improvements. 
(Ord. 754 § 1 (Attach. A §§ 29, 30), 1999; Ord. 661 § 1 (800.060), 1994) 
16.32.070 - Request to substitute the security for a subdivision. 
A.  The applicant's request to substitute a security for a subdivision shall be considered by the director of public works. The director of public works shall determine whether or not good cause has been demonstrated to entitle the subdivider to modify the security. In consideration of the request to substitute the security for a subdivision, the following may be required: 
1.  Revision of improvement plans to provide for current design and construction standards when required by the city engineer; 
2.  Revised improvement construction estimates to reflect current improvement costs as approved by the city engineer; 
3.  Increase of improvement securities in accordance with revised construction estimates; 
4.  Inspection fees may be increased to reflect current construction costs but shall not be subject to any decrease or refund. 
B.  The director of public works may impose additional requirements as recommended by the city engineer or as the director of public works may deem necessary. Acceptance of a portion of the improvements shall not relieve the developer from any other requirements imposed by this title. 
(Ord. 754 § 1 (Attach. A § 30), 1999: Ord. 661 § 1 (800.070), 1994) 
16.32.080 - Acceptance of improvements. 
A.  When the subdivider has constructed all improvements, corrected all deficiencies, and submitted "as-built" drawings of the improvements, the director of public works shall consider the subdivision improvements for acceptance. 
B.  The director of public works shall either accept the offer of dedication for recordation purposes, or accept the offer of dedication for maintenance. 
C.  If the final subdivision map contains an offer of dedication and the director of public works accepts the offer for maintenance, the city engineer shall file an acceptance of public improvements with the county recorder. 
D.  All improvements shall be warranted for a period of not less than one year. The one-year warranty period shall cover one year from the date of acceptance of the last secured improvements. 
(Ord. 754 § 1 (Attach. A § 31), 1999; Ord. 661 § 1 (800.080), 1994) 
16.32.090 - Release of security. 
    Upon release of the subdivision improvements by the director of public works, the subdivider shall provide warranty security in the amount as required by the city engineer to guarantee the improvements against any defective work or labor or defective materials used in the performance of the improvements throughout the warranty period. The warranty period shall cover one year from the date of acceptance of all improvements by the director of public works. 
A.  Grading Security Release. Grading security shall not be released until the building official is satisfied that all grading is complete in accordance with the approved grading plans as specified in Section 16.32.040. Prior to obtaining a grading security release the applicant shall submit the following information: 
1.  The applicant shall submit a final grading certificate to the building official. 
2.  The building official will give written notice to the applicant if the grading requirements are not completed in a satisfactory manner. 
3.  Once the applicant has received written notice, the applicant has fifteen (15) working days to complete the unfinished requirements or the original request to release the grading permit is invalid. 
4.  Once the city engineer has ascertained that the final grading certificate has been submitted to and accepted by the building official, the city engineer shall approve the release of the grading security. 
5.  On partially built lots or vacant lots there shall be no release of the grading security. 
B.  Performance Security Release. Performance securities shall not be released until the city engineer is satisfied that all public improvements are complete and in accordance with the approved improvement plans. To obtain a security release the applicant shall do the following: 
1.  The applicant shall submit a written request to the city engineer. 
2.  The city engineer will determine if the improvement requirements have been completed and the property owner will be notified in writing within fifteen (15) calendar days of receipt of request to the city engineer. 
3.  The owner has twenty-eight (28) days to complete the unfinished requirements before the original request for release of performance bonds shall expire. The owner must then submit a new written request. 
4.  Upon completion of all performance requirements to the satisfaction of the city engineer, the city engineer will provide notification to the subdivider of the release of the performance security. 
5.  Upon acceptance of all the subdivision improvements by the director of public works, the city may release up to ninety (90) percent of the performance securities. The balance will be held by the city to guarantee corrective work throughout the warranty period. The warranty period shall cover one year from the date of acceptance of the last secured improvement. 
C.  Material and Labor Release. Ninety (90) days after the acceptance of the last secured improvement by the director of public works, the security given to secure payment to the contractor, subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials, or equipment may be reduced to an amount equal to the amount of all claims therefore filed and of which notice has been given to the director of public works. The balance of the security shall be released upon the settlement of all such claims and obligations for which the security was given. 
D.  Warranty Security. The city may release the warranty security upon satisfactory completion of the warranty period provided: 
1.  All deficiencies appearing on the warranty deficiency list for the subdivision have been corrected. 
2.  One year has elapsed since the director of public works acceptance of the last secured improvement. 
(Ord. 754 § 1 (Attach. A § 32), 1999: Ord. 661 § 1 (800.090), 1994) 
16.32.100 - Forfeiture on failure to complete. 
A.  Upon the failure of a subdivider to complete any improvement within the time specified in the undertaking agreement, the director of public works may determine that the improvement work or partial improvement work is incomplete and is subject to foreclosure of the security. 
B.  Prior to foreclosing on the security, the city shall serve a written notice upon the person, firm or corporation signing the contract advising the responsible party that within ten (10) days the city shall foreclose on the security, or the city shall send by certified mail a written notice to the last known address of the person, firm or corporation signing such contract, advising the responsible party that within twenty (20) days the city shall foreclose on the security. 
C.  The security given for the faithful performance of work may be forfeited to the city as necessary to complete the improvement work. 
(Ord. 754 § 1 (Attach. A § 33), 1999; Ord. 661 § 1 (800.100), 1994) 
16.32.110 - Deferred improvement agreements. 
A.  Subdivisions of Four or Less Parcels. If the planning commission deems it appropriate, the improvements along existing streets of a parcel map may be deferred until development occurs. Deferral may be allowed when the planning commission finds that construction is impractical due to physical constraints, or the surrounding neighborhood is absent of similar improvements. The owner of the real property shall enter into an agreement with the city in a form acceptable to the city engineer for the installation of street improvements at a future time to be specified by the city. The agreement shall provide that: 
1.  The owner shall begin construction of improvements within ninety (90) days of receipt of the notice to proceed from the city engineer, or as mutually agreed upon in writing; and 
2.  In the event of default by the owner, the city is authorized to cause construction to be completed and charge the entire cost and expense to the owner, including interest from the date of notice of the cost and expense until paid; and 
3.  The agreement shall be recorded with the county recorder at the expense of the owner and shall constitute a lien in such amount necessary to fully reimburse the city, including interest as provided above, subject to foreclosure in the event of a default in payment. The obligation under the agreement shall run with the property and constitute a lien against it; and 
4.  In the event of litigation occasioned by default of the owner, the owner agrees to pay all costs involved, including reasonable attorney's fees. Those costs shall become a part of the lien against the real property. 
B.  Remainders. Where remainders are made part of a final subdivision map, the city may enter into an agreement with the subdivider to construct improvements within the remainder at some future date and prior to the issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for development. The fulfillment of construction requirements for improvements is not required until the city is ready to issue a permit or other approval for development of the remainder parcel or until the construction of improvements is required under an agreement between the subdivider and the city. The remainder shall be maintained weed free and fenced if deemed necessary by the building official, with properly constructed silt basins as approved by the city engineer. In the absence of an agreement, the city may require fulfillment of the construction requirements within a reasonable time following approval of the final map and before the issuance of a permit or approval for development of a remainder parcel upon a finding by the city that fulfillment of construction requirements is necessary for the reasons of: 
1.  The public health, safety, welfare; or 
2.  The required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area; or 
3.  If a designated remainder is subsequently sold, the subdivider or owner must obtain a certificate of compliance or conditional certificate of compliance. 
(Ord. 754 § 1 (Attach. A § 34), 1999; Ord. 661 § 1 (810.000-810.120), 1994) 
Chapter 16.36 - CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS 

16.36.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to: 
A.  Establish criteria for the conversion of existing multiple-family rental housing to condominiums; 
B.  Promote the concept of home ownership and bring a greater amount of owner-occupied housing on the market that is affordable by all economic segments of the community; 
C.  Ensure that converted housing achieves a high degree of appearance, quality and safety and is consistent with the goals of the city; 
D.  Provide a reasonable balance of ownership and rental housing and a variety of choices of tenure, type, price and location of housing; 
E.  Maintain a supply of rental housing for low-income and moderate-income persons; 
F.  Reduce the impact of conversion on residents in rental housing who may be required to relocate due to the conversion of apartments to condominiums by providing procedures for notification and adequate time and assistance for such relocation; 
G.  Assure that purchasers of converted housing have been properly informed as to the physical condition of the structure which is offered for purchase; and 
H.  Establish procedures and requirements for the conversion of existing mobilehome parks to resident ownership. 
(Ord. 879 § 1 (part), 2007; Ord. 661 § 1 (900.010), 1994) 
16.36.020 - Application requirements. 
    In addition to the other subdivision requirements and procedures, a conversion is subject to the requirements in this chapter. An application for approval of a tentative map for the condominium subdivision shall be accompanied by the following items: 
A.  Physical Elements Report. A report prepared by a state licensed structural or civil engineer or certified architect on the physical elements of each structure and facility, which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  A report detailing the structural condition of each element of the property, including foundation, electrical, plumbing, utilities, walls, ceilings, windows, recreational facilities, sound transmission of each building, mechanical equipment, parking facilities and appliances. Regarding each element, the report shall state to the best record, knowledge or estimate of the applicant, when the element was constructed or installed; when the element was last replaced; the approximate date upon which the element will require replacement; the cost of replacing the element; and any variation of the physical condition of the element from the zoning and building code in effect on the date that the last building permit was issued for the structure. The report shall identify each defective or unsafe element and set forth the proposed corrective measures to be employed, 
2.  A report from a licensed structural pest control operator, approved by the city, on each structure and each unit within the structure, 
3.  A statement of repairs and improvements to be made by the subdivider which are necessary to refurbish and restore the project to achieve a high degree of appearance and safety; 
B.  Plot Plan. A plot plan of the project, including the location and sizes of structures, parking layout and access areas, sewer, water and storm drains, and any other information required by the director of community development; 
C.  Construction Plans. Construction plans detailing all required alterations and/or additions to the structure shall be provided and upon approval the appropriate permits shall be obtained; 
D.  Notice of Intent to Convert. A signed copy from each tenant of notice of intent to convert as specified in subsection A of Section 16.36.050 or evidence that a certified letter of notification was sent to each tenant for whom a signed copy of the notice is not submitted. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (900.020), 1994) 
16.36.030 - Procedures. 
A.  Subdivision Procedures. Under Government Code Section 66426, a condominium conversion is treated as a subdivision subject to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. 
B.  Notice to Tenants and Prospective Tenants. Before tentative map approval, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing. In addition to all other notices required by the Subdivision Map Act and this title, the subdivider shall give notice prior to filing the tentative map to prospective tenants and tenants in the manner provided by Government Code Sections 66452.8 and 66452.9 and Section 16.36.050. 
C.  Acceptance of Reports. The final form of the physical elements report and other documents required under Section 16.36.020, Application Requirements, shall be as approved by the city. The reports in their accepted form shall remain on file with the building and safety division for review by the public. They are referred to collectively in this chapter as "the reports." 
D.  Copy to Buyers. The subdivider shall provide each purchaser with a copy of the reports (in their final acceptable form) before the purchaser executes an agreement to purchase a unit in the project, and the developer shall give the purchaser sufficient time (a minimum of seven calendar days but not more than thirty (30) calendar days) to review the reports. A copy of the reports shall be available at all times at the sales office and shall be posted at various locations, as approved by the city, at the project site. 
E.  Homeowners Association Agreement or CC&Rs. Homeowners association agreement or CC&Rs (covenants, conditions and restrictions) shall be submitted for review and approval by the director and city attorney prior to approval of the final map. 
F.  Building Department. 
1.  Inspection. The premises to be inspected including structures, common areas, site improvements, public improvements and other related facilities shall be inspected by a registered engineer or certified architect. A list of deficient conditions that may exist by reason of noncompliance with this code (including Title 17, Uniform Building Code, etc.) shall be identified, and the deficient items shall be refurbished and restored in accordance with Section 16.36.040. The building official may accompany the engineer or architect at the building official's discretion. 
2.  Building Plan Check. The purpose of the plan check is to correct the deficiencies that may exist by reason of noncompliance with state and federal law and this code and to have the deficiencies corrected prior to submitting the final map. The owner shall submit building plans in the number and manner acceptable to the building and safety official. Prior to the issuance of permits for the condominium conversion, the building plans shall show how the deficiencies listed under this section will be brought into conformance with the current mandated codes. All deficiencies must be corrected to the satisfaction of the building and safety official or his representative prior to the acceptance of the final subdivision map. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (900.030), 1994) 
16.36.040 - Standards for condominium conversion. 
    The following standards apply to a condominium conversion. These standards must be satisfied, or security provided in a form approved by the city attorney, before the final map is approved. 
A.  Building Regulations. 
1.  The project shall conform to the applicable standards of the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act, and state and city building codes in effect at the time of the approved tentative map. 
2.  Structural standards shall remain in effect based on the final inspection approved at the time of the official construction or any subsequent alteration approved by the building official. 
3.  Any addition, alteration of removal from the original construction which has been accomplished without proper permit issuance and final inspection shall be made to conform to all current federal and state laws, and city ordinances in effect at the then current time of request for conversion to condominium units. 
4.  All recognized fire and life safety violations shall be remedied with the appropriate permits and inspections prior to the approval of the final subdivision map. 
5.  Each living unit shall have each sleeping room and all basements equipped with an escape and rescue window in accordance with the Uniform Building Code. 
B.  Fire Prevention. 
1.  Fire-Warning Systems. Each living unit shall be provided with a fire-warning system conforming to the latest Uniform Building Code, Section 1210 (a) standards in type and locations. 
2.  Maintenance of Fire Protection Systems. All fire hydrants, fire alarm systems, portable fire extinguishers and other fire protective appliances shall be retained in an operable condition at all times. 
3.  Certificate of Completion. Upon completion of all required inspections and each item required by other city departments, county agencies (fire department, health department, etc.), or other state agencies, the building official shall issue a certificate of completion for each separate unit. 
C.  Sound Transmission. 
1.  Vibration Transmission. All permanent mechanical equipment (such as motors, compressors, pumps and compactors) which is determined by the building inspector to be a source of structural vibration or structural-borne noise shall be vibration isolated with inertia blocks or bases or vibration isolator springs in a manner approved by the building inspector. 
2.  Noise Standards. The converted structures shall conform to all interior and exterior sound transmission standards of the State Administrative Code, Title 24, and Uniform Building Code, Appendix-Chapter 35. Where present standards cannot reasonably be met, the planning commission may require the applicant to notify potential buyers of the noise deficiency currently within the unit. Each potential buyer shall file a notice with the city stating that they understand the noise deficiency, its effects, and that they fully accept the conditions. This notice shall be recorded at the county recorder's office by the subdivider and returned to the initial purchaser. 
D.  Utilities. 
1.  Separately Metered Utilities. Each dwelling unit shall be separately metered for all utilities (gas, electricity, water, etc.), and access shall be provided to, through, above, under and around all utilities for maintenance purposes and shall be shown on recorded easements with provisions for utility replacement and repair. 
2.  Access of Utilities. Access as described in subsection (D)(1) of this section shall be provided by each living unit owner. Replacement of any damaged items or areas shall be the responsibility of the person needing the maintenance or repair accomplished if within the structure or structures. If the repair is in the area of common ownership the cost shall be borne by the homeowner's association. 
3.  Sewer Laterals. Each building shall have a separate sewer lateral to the mainline. 
E.  Maintenance Assessment District. 
1.  The project shall be required to annex into the following districts: 
a.  Drainage maintenance district; and 
b.  Lighting maintenance district; and 
c.  Landscape maintenance district. (Annexation to the landscape maintenance district shall be determined on a case-by-case basis.) 
2.  The annexation fees shall be paid by the subdivider prior to approval of the final map. First year annual assessments shall not be paid by the subdivider but the property shall be added to the tax rolls and assessed for each maintenance district following recordation of the final map. 
3.  The owner of the condominium(s) shall notify each prospective buyer of the future assessments on the property for the maintenance districts. Each subsequent prospective buyer shall be so notified until such time as the assessments have been posted on the tax rolls. A copy of each notification signed by the buyer shall be provided to the city engineer and shall be filed with the records of the condominium conversion. 
F.  Parking. The project site shall meet the requirements listed in parking requirements by use, Section 17.08.140C. 
(Ord. 718 § 5, 1996; Ord. 661 § 1 (900.040), 1994) 
16.36.050 - Tenant provisions. 
A.  Notice of Intent. Beginning at least sixty (60) days before the filing of a tentative map, the subdivider shall give notice of intent to convert to each tenant and prospective tenant as provided in Government Code Sections 66452.8 and 66452.9. Evidence of receipt shall be submitted with the tentative map. The form of the notice shall be as approved by the director and shall contain not less than the following: 
1.  The information required by Government Code Section 66452.8 or 66452.9; 
2.  Name and address of current owner; 
3.  Name and address of the proposed subdivider; 
4.  Approximate date on which the tentative map is proposed to be filed; 
5.  Approximate date on which the final subdivision map is to be filed; 
6.  Approximate date on which the unit is to be vacated by nonpurchasing tenants; 
7.  Tenant's right to purchase; 
8.  Tenant's right of notification to vacate; 
9.  Relocation information; 
10.  Other information as deemed necessary by the director. 
B.  Tenant's Right to Purchase. As provided in Government Code Section 66427.1(d), a present tenant of a unit shall be given a nontransferable right of first refusal to purchase the unit occupied at a price no greater than the price offered to the general public. The right of first refusal shall extend for at least ninety (90) days from the date of issuance of the subdivision public report or beginning of sales, whichever is later. If the offered price to the public is lower than the original price in the first right of refusal at any time, the occupying tenant shall be granted a new ninety (90) day period for first right of refusal. 
C.  Vacation of Units. Each nonpurchasing tenant, not in default under the rental agreement or lease under which he occupies his unit, shall have not less than one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of receipt of notification from the subdivider or intent to convert, or from the filing date of the final subdivision or parcel map, whichever is later, to find substitute housing and to relocate. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (900.050), 1994) 
16.36.060 - Determination. 
    On an annual basis the city will conduct a survey to determine whether multiple family projects have a vacancy rate of less than four percent. The maximum number of multiple-family units which may be approved for condominium conversions in any one calendar year shall be determined by the city's vacancy rate in accordance with the following: 
A.  In the event that the vacancy rate is in excess of four percent, the planning commission shall not restrict the number of conversions that year. 
B.  In the event that the vacancy rate is four percent or less, the applicant shall provide any additional information requested by the director of community development to provide an analysis to the planning commission of the number of households within the project that qualify as low income and their ability to locate comparable housing. The planning commission may do the following: 
1.  Deny the request for conversion if it is determined that such conversion would have an adverse effect on the ability of low to lower income tenants to locate adequate comparable housing. 
2.  The planning commission may approve the request for condominium conversion if the applicant agrees to the following mitigation measures: 
a.  Offer the low, lower and moderate income tenants the unit occupied at a sales price at least five percent lower than the price offered to the public; or 
b.  In order to find suitable comparable housing, the tenants may occupy the units for at least an additional year after the approval of the final map at the same rental rate; and 
c.  Provide the tenants with up-to-date information of the available apartments of comparable size and price which are located within a fifteen (15) mile radius of the apartment to be converted; and 
d.  The subdivider shall pay all moving expenses, including fourteen (14) days of utilities service, to an eligible tenant within fourteen (14) days after the tenant relocates. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (900.060), 1994) 
16.36.070 - Findings. 
    The planning commission may not approve an application for condominium conversion unless it finds that the proposed conversion: 
A.  Conforms to the requirements of this chapter; and 
B.  Is consistent with the city general plan and current zoning regulations; and 
C.  Will not displace a significant number of low, lower and moderate income rental units from the city's housing stock; and 
D.  Satisfies the requirements of Government Code Section 65427.1 (regarding notice to tenants); and 
E.  Will not be detrimental to the retention of low, lower and moderate housing stock or reduce or alter significantly the opportunity within the city for the housing of young or elderly citizens; and 
F.  Conforms to the applicable findings of Section 16.08.110. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (900.070), 1994) 
16.36.080 - Mobilehome park conversions to resident ownership. 
    An application for conversion of an existing mobilehome park to resident ownership shall comply with the requirements of Sections 66427.4 and 66427.5 of the Government Code of the state of California, and with Chapter 11.12 of this code. 
(Ord. 879 § 1 (part), 2007) 
Chapter 16.40 - REVERSION TO ACREAGE 

16.40.010 - General. 
A.  Property which has been subdivided may be reverted to acreage under the Subdivision Map and this chapter. 
B.  A subdivision may be merged or merged and resubdivided without reverting to acreage by complying with all applicable requirements for the subdivision of land provided by the filing of a new map or a parcel merger. The filing of the map shall constitute legal merger and resubdivision of the land affected and shall also constitute abandonment of all public streets and easements not shown on the map pursuant to Section 66499.201/2 of the California Government Code. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (1000.010), 1994) 
16.40.020 - Initiating proceedings. 
    Proceedings for reversion to acreage may be initiated by either: (Section 66499.12) 
A.  The city council on its own motion, in which case the council shall direct the city engineer to obtain the necessary information; 
B.  Petition of all of the owners of record of the real property within the subdivision. The petition shall comply with Section 16.40.030 and shall be submitted to the city engineer. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (1000.020), 1994) 
16.40.030 - Form of petition. 
    The petition shall contain the following: (Sections 66499.13, 66499.201/4) 
A.  Adequate evidence of title to the property; 
B.  Sufficient data to enable the city council to make all of the determinations and findings set forth in Section 16.40.040; 
C.  A final map in the form prescribed by Chapter 16.12 delineating dedications that will not be vacated and dedications required as a condition to reversion. Upon the title sheet of each map filed for the purpose of reverting subdivided land to acreage, the subtitle shall consist of the words: "A Reversion to Acreage of ... (insert a legal description of the land being reverted)"; 
D.  Other relevant information as the city engineer may require. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (1000.030), 1994) 
16.40.040 - Procedures. 
A.  The subdivider may submit the petition on a form acceptable to the city engineer. 
B.  The city engineer shall schedule the reversion to acreage for initial consideration by the development review committee. 
C.  The city engineer shall notify the city clerk to set the time and date for the public hearing. 
D.  The city engineer shall submit the completed petition together with a report and recommendation to the city council for consideration. 
E.  The city council shall consider the matter at a public hearing, with notice of the hearing given in accord with Section 16.04.130 (Section 66499.15). 
F.  The city council may approve a reversion to acreage only if it finds that: 
1.  Dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public purposes; and 
2.  Either: 
a.  All owners having an interest in the real property within the subdivision have consented to reversion, or 
b.  None of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date the final subdivision map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later, or 
c.  No lots shown on the final subdivision map or portion thereof have been sold within five years from the date such map was filed for record. (Section 66499.16) 
G.  The city council may require as conditions of the reversion: 
1.  That owners dedicate or offer to dedicate streets, public right-of-way or easements; and 
2.  That all or a portion of previously paid subdivision fees, deposits or improvements securities be retained if they are necessary to accomplish any of the purposes or provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title; and 
3.  Such other conditions of reversion as are necessary to accomplish the purposes or provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title or necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (1000.040), 1994) 
16.40.050 - Recording. 
A.  If the city council approves the reversion, the city engineer shall file the final subdivision map with the county recorder for recordation. 
B.  Upon such filing for record, the reversion is effective and all dedications and offers of dedication not shown on the map are terminated. (66499.18) 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (1000.050), 1994) 
Chapter 16.44 - PARCEL MERGER 

16.44.010 - Purpose. 
    The procedures set forth in this chapter are designed to conform to the standards authorized by Government Code Sections 66451.10 through 66451.302 pertaining to the merger of contiguous parcels of land. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (1100.010), 1994) 
16.44.020 - Requirement for merger of contiguous parcels. 
    A parcel of land may be merged with a contiguous parcel held by the same owner if all of the following requirements are satisfied: 
A.  The affected parcels are held by the same owner as of the date the notice of intention to determine status may be recorded, as provided by Government Code Section 66451.13. 
B.  One of the affected parcels does not conform to the property development regulations for minimum net area under the applicable zoning. 
C.  Any of the affected parcels is one of the following: 
1.  Undeveloped by any structure for which a building permit was issued or for which a building permit was not required at the time of construction; or 
2.  Developed only with an accessory structure; or 
3.  Developed with a single structure (other than an accessory structure) that is partially sited on the contiguous parcel with which it is proposed to be merged (i.e., straddles a lot line). 
D.  With respect to any affected parcel, one or more of the following conditions must exist; however, the same condition need not exist on each affected parcel: 
1.  The net area of the parcel is less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in area at the time the merger is determined. 
2.  The parcel was not created in compliance with applicable laws or ordinances in effect at the time of its creation. 
3.  The parcel does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply. 
4.  The parcel does not meet slope stability standards. 
5.  The parcel does not have legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability. 
6.  The development of the parcel would create health or safety hazards. 
7.  The parcel is inconsistent with the general plan, any applicable specific plan, or Title 17 of this code, in other than minimum net area or density standards. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (1100.020), 1994) 
16.44.030 - Procedure. 
A.  The city council shall direct the city engineer to initiate the parcel map merger. 
B.  The city engineer shall schedule the parcel merger for consideration by the development review committee pursuant to Chapter 16.08. 
C.  Prior to recording a notice of merger, the city engineer shall send by certified mail a notice of intention to determine the status of the affected parcels to the then current owners of record. The notice of intention shall advise the owners of the following: 
1.  The property is subject to merger by the city; and 
2.  The property may be merged under the standards specified in this chapter; and 
3.  The opportunity to request a hearing on the determination of status and to present evidence at the hearing that the affected parcels do not meet the criteria for merger. 
D.  The determination of status shall proceed as follows: 
1.  Notice of intention to determine status shall be filed by the city engineer with the county recorder on the same date that the notice is mailed to the property owner. 
2.  The owner of the affected property may file with the city a request for public hearing within thirty (30) days of recording the notice of intention with the county recorder. 
3.  If within the thirty (30) day period, the owner does not file a request for public hearing, the city may, at any time thereafter, make a determination that the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged. 
4.  Upon receiving the request for the public hearing by the owner, the city engineer shall notify the clerk to set the time and date and place for a hearing to be conducted by the city council and shall notify the property owner by certified mail of the public hearing. The hearing shall be conducted within sixty (60) days from the receipt of the property owner's request. The hearing date may be postponed or continued with the mutual consent of the city council and the property owner. (Sections 66451.14, 66454.15) 
5.  At the hearing, the property owner shall be given the opportunity to present evidence that the affected parcels do not meet the requirements for merger specified in this chapter. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall determine whether the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged, and shall notify the owner of its determination. (Section 66451.16) 
6.  Recordation of Notice of Merger. A merger of parcels becomes effective when the city engineer files for recordation with the county recorder a notice of merger specifying the names of the record owners and describing the real property to be recorded within thirty (30) days after conclusion of the hearing. (Section 66451.16) 
7.  Determination of Merger Where No Hearing Requested. If, within the thirty (30) day period after recordation of the notice of intention to determine status, the owner of the affected parcel does not file a request for a hearing, the city council may at any time thereafter make a determination that the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged. A notice of merger shall be recorded no later than ninety (90) days after the date when the city engineer mailed the notice of intention to determine status. (Section 66451.17) 
8.  Determination Not to Merge. If the city council determines that the subject parcels are not to be merged, the city engineer shall record with the county recorder a release of the notice of intention to determine status and shall send by certified mail a clearance letter to the then current owner of record. (Section 66451.18) 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (1100.030), 1994) 
Chapter 16.48 - CORRECTION AND AMENDMENT OF RECORDED MAP 

16.48.010 - Lot line adjustments. 
A.  General. A lot line adjustment is a shift or rotation of an existing lot line between two or more parcels, where land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not created. 
B.  Eligibility. The director may approve the lot line adjustment where it is determined that the proposed adjustment: 
1.  Does not create additional lots; 
2.  Does not impair any existing access, easement, lot configuration or orientation or utilities to lot lines proposed; and 
3.  The parcels affected by the lot line adjustment conform to this title and Title 17. 
C.  Procedures. 
1.  The subdivider may submit the completed application for lot line adjustment to the department. The applicant shall submit the following information to the director: 
a.  Provide a copy of the assessor's map for all properties involved; 
b.  Provide a copy of current grant deeds for all properties involved; 
c.  Provide a preliminary title report for the notification of lenders; 
d.  Provide copies of the site plan showing the original lot lines, the proposed lot lines, and any existing improvements; 
e.  Exhibits of legal descriptions for the original configuration and the proposed configuration are to be submitted to the city engineer for processing after the director's approval. The legal descriptions shall be in a form acceptable to the city engineer; 
f.  If the city engineer determines that a declaration of subordination is needed, the applicant or engineer will be notified. This declaration would be needed in order to properly notify the lender of the lot line adjustment and the applicant will be charged an additional fee; 
g.  If the lot line involves two separate property owners and/or a transfer of easements, the applicant shall be required to open escrow with an escrow company. 
2.  The director shall consider the request and determine if the created lots conform to Title 17 of this code. The director shall approve or deny the application for the lot line adjustment within thirty (30) days. If the application is denied, the director shall state the reasons for denial in the notification to the applicant. 
3.  The director shall forward the lot line adjustment to the city engineer for recordation of a certificate of compliance or a conditional certificate of compliance. 
4.  The city engineer shall file a certificate of compliance for the lot line adjustment with the county recorder for recordation. 
D.  Appeals. The decision of the director or the city engineer regarding lot line adjustments may be appealed as provided in Section 16.04.070. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (1200.100-1200.140), 1994) 
16.48.020 - Correction and amendment of recorded map. 
A.  Requirements. After a final subdivision map has been filed for recording, it may be amended in a limited number of situations by means of a certificate of correction or an amending map prepared by a registered civil engineer or a licensed land surveyor. An existing map may be amended under the following conditions: (Section 66469) 
1.  To correct an error or omission in any course or distance; 
2.  To show any course or distance that was omitted; 
3.  To correct an error in the description of the real property shown on the map; 
4.  To indicate monuments set after the death, disability or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor charged with responsibilities for setting monuments; 
5.  To show the proper location of any monument that has been changed in location, or character, or originally was shown at the wrong location or incorrectly as to its character; 
6.  To correct any other type of map error or omission as approved by the city engineer, which does not affect any property right. An error or omission includes, but is not limited to, lot area, lot number, street name and identification of adjacent record maps. 
B.  Form and Contents. The amending map or certificate of correction shall be prepared and signed by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The form and contents of an amending map or certificate shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 16.12 (Final Subdivision Maps) and Chapter 16.16 (Parcel Maps) of this title. The amending map or certificate of correction shall set forth in detail the corrections made and show the names of the present fee owners of the property affected by the correction. (Section 66470) 
C.  Certification by City Engineer. The amending map or certificate of correction in completed final form shall be submitted to the city engineer. The city engineer shall examine the amending map or certificate of correction and if the only changes made are those set forth in subsection A of this section, he or she shall certify to this fact on the amending map or certificate of correction. (Section 66471) 
D.  Filing With County Recorder. The amending map or certificate of correction certified by the city engineer shall be filed in the office of the county recorder in which the original map was filed. Upon such filing, the county recorder shall index the names of the fee owners and the appropriate subdivision designation shown on the amending map or certificate of correction in the general index and map index, respectively. Thereupon, the original map shall be deemed to have been conclusively so corrected. (Section 66472) 
E.  Further Modifications of Maps. 
1.  In addition to the correction and amendment of maps after a final map is filed in the office of the county recorder, such a final map may be modified by a certificate of correction or amending map if the local agency finds that there are changes in the circumstances which make any or all of the conditions of the map no longer appropriate or necessary pursuant to Section 66472.1 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
2.  Such modification shall be set for public hearing before the city council. The city council shall confine the hearing to consideration of and action on the proposed modification. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (1200.200-1200.250), 1994) 
Chapter 16.52 - ENFORCEMENT AND JUDICIAL REVIEW 

16.52.010 - Enforcement and judicial review. 
A.  Prohibition. 
1.  No person shall sell, lease or finance a parcel of real property or begin construction of a building for sale, lease or financing thereon (except for approved model homes) or allow occupancy thereof, for which a subdivision map is required by the Subdivision Map Act or this title, until the map complies with the Subdivision Map Act and this title and is filed for recordation with the county recorder. 
2.  Permits for model homes can be issued prior to recordation of final map only if: 
a.  Securities acceptable to the city and an executed undertaking agreement are on file with the city; and 
b.  A grading plan is approved, bonded and the rough grading certification of the model lots are stamped and signed by the engineer of record is submitted to and approved by the building official. 
3.  The final map need not be recorded in order for the subdivider to install subdivision improvements subject to approved plans, securities and permits. 
4.  The final map shall be recorded prior to issuance of building permits for production housing. It shall be the responsibility of the developer's engineer to provide mylar copies of recorded final maps to the city. Such maps shall be on file prior to issuance of building permits for production houses. At the discretion of the city, permits may be issued prior to filing the mylar copies, but construction under such approval is provisional and is contingent on the city receiving such mylar copies, and shall be stopped prior to framing inspection until such mylar copies are on file. The fees in effect at the time of permit issuance shall apply. 
5.  However, this section does not prohibit an offer or contract to sell, lease or finance real property or to construct improvements where the sale, lease or financing or the beginning of construction, is expressly conditioned upon the approval and filing of a final subdivision map. 
6.  The conveyance of part of a division of real property for which a final subdivision map is required shall not be made by parcel or block number, letter or other designation unless and until such a map is filed for recordation with the county recorder. 
7.  This section does not apply to a parcel of a subdivision offered for sale or lease, contracted for sale or lease, or sold or leased in compliance with or exempt from any law, including the ordinance codified in this title, regulating the design and improvement of subdivisions in effect at the time the subdivision was established. 
B.  Remedies. 
1.  Conveyance Voidable. A deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell real property which has been divided or which results from a division in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or this title, is voidable at the sole option of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, or the heirs, personal representative, or trustee in insolvency or bankruptcy of such grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, within one year after the date of discovery of the violation. However, the deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell is binding upon a successor-in-interest of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, other than those above enumerated, and upon the grantor, vendor or person contracting to sell, or his or her assignee, heir or devisee. (Section 66499.32) 
2.  Other Legal Action. This title does not bar any legal, equitable or summary remedy to which the city or other public agency, or any other person, firm or corporation may otherwise be entitled. The city or other public agency or person, firm or corporation may file a suit in the superior court to restrain or enjoin an attempted or proposed subdivision for sale, lease or financing in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or this title. (Section 66499.33) 
3.  Denial of Permits and Approvals. The city shall not issue a permit or grant any approval necessary to develop real property which has been divided or which has resulted from a division in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or this title if it finds that development of the property is contrary to the public health or the public safety. The authority to deny, withhold or approve such a permit applies whether the applicant was the owner of record at the time of the violation or whether the applicant is either the current owner of record or a vendee of the current owner with, or without, actual or constructive knowledge of the violation at the time of the acquisition of an interest in the property. (Section 66499.34) 
4.  Permit or Approval Subject to Conditions. If the city issues a permit or grants approval for the development of any real property illegally subdivided, the city may impose those additional conditions which would have been applicable to the division of the property at the time the current owner of record acquired the property. If a conditional certificate of compliance has been filed for record in accordance with the provision of Section 16.52.030, only the conditions stipulated in that certificate are applicable. (Section 66499.34) 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (1300.000- 1300.020), 1994) 
16.52.020 - Notice of violation. 
A.  Whenever the city engineer has knowledge that real property has been divided in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title, and prior to recording a notice of violation, the city engineer shall send by certified mail a notice of intention to record a notice of violation to the current owner of record. 
B.  The notice of intention to record notice of violation shall: 
1.  Describe the property in question; 
2.  Name the owners; 
3.  Contain a description of violations and an explanation why the parcel is not lawful; 
4.  Advise the owner to inform the city engineer of objection to the notice of intention to record notice of violation within fifteen (15) days of receipt of notice; 
5.  Advise the owner of the opportunity to request a hearing on the determination of status and to present evidence at the hearing that the affected parcels do not meet the criteria for violation. 
C.  The hearing shall take place no sooner than thirty (30) days from the date of the mailing notice. 
D.  If within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the notice the owner fails to inform the city engineer of the objection to recording the notice of violation, the city engineer shall record a notice of violation. 
E.  If the owner presents evidence at the hearing and the city engineer determines that there has been no violation, the city engineer shall mail a clean letter to the owner, and if necessary to the county recorder. 
F.  If the city engineer determines the property has been illegally divided, the city engineer shall record a notice of violation with the county recorder. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (1300.100), 1994) 
16.52.030 - Certificate of compliance. 
A.  General Provisions. 
1.  A person owning real property or a vendee of such person under a contract of sale may request the city engineer to determine whether the real property complies with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. (Section 66499.35) 
2.  If the city engineer determines that the real property complies with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title, the city engineer shall grant a certificate of compliance to be recorded with the county recorder. 
3.  If the city engineer determines that the real property was not created in compliance with the Subdivision Map Act and this title, the city engineer may grant a conditional certificate of compliance, and impose the following conditions: 
a.  If the person who seeks the certificate of compliance is the one who initially violated the law and that person is the current owner, the city may impose those conditions that would be applicable to a current division of property. 
b.  If the person who seeks the certificate of compliance is not the violator, the city may impose only those conditions that would have been applicable to the division at the time the applicant acquired the property and which would have been established at such time by the Subdivision Map Act and this title. 
B.  Procedures. 
1.  Applications for the issuance of a certificate of compliance shall be made on a standardized form provided by the city engineer. The form for the certificate of compliance shall be accompanied by a current preliminary title report showing the legal owner of the property. The applicant shall also submit completed applications and any additional information needed to determine compliance to the city engineer. 
2.  The city engineer shall file a certificate of compliance with the county recorder for recordation. 
3.  The certificate of compliance shall serve as a notice to the property owner or vendee, or subsequent transferee that the fulfillment and implementation of the conditions shall be required prior to subsequent issuance of permit or other grant of approval for development of the property. 
4.  Compliance with these conditions shall not be required until such time as a permit or other grant of approval for development of the property is issued. 
(Ord. 661 § 1 (1300.200-1300.220), 1994) 
Title 17 - ZONING 
Chapter 17.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

17.04.010 - Adoption by reference of the county zoning ordinance. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, that certain zoning ordinance of the county of Los Angeles, known as Ordinance No. 1494, as amended, and in full force and effect on May 7, 1979, is adopted as the zoning ordinance of the city of Lancaster, to provide for the creation within the city of zones and prescribing area requirements and classes of uses of buildings, structures, improvements and premises in the zones referred to therein. 
    Three copies of the Los Angeles County zoning ordinance have been deposited in the office of the city clerk of the city of Lancaster and shall be at all times maintained by the clerk for the use and examination by the public. 
(Prior code § 9-1.1) 
17.04.020 - Substitution of certain terms. 
    Wherever the words "Regional Planning Commission" and "Zoning Board" appear in said Ordinance No. 1494, the words "planning commission of the city of Lancaster" shall be substituted therefor, and wherever the words "Board of Supervisors" or "Board" appear in said Ordinance No. 1494, the words "city council" shall be substituted therefor, and wherever the words "County of Los Angeles" or "Los Angeles County" appear in said Ordinance No. 1494, the words "city of Lancaster" shall be substituted therefor. Whenever the words "Los Angeles Regional Planning Commission staff" are used within Ordinance No. 1494, the words "Lancaster planning staff" shall be substituted therefor. 
(Prior code § 9-1.2) 
17.04.030 - Area designated. 
    Whenever in Ordinance No. 1494 reference is made to the unincorporated area of the county of Los Angeles, such area shall be deemed to be the area included within the boundaries of the city of Lancaster. 
(Prior code § 9-1.3) 
17.04.040 - Interim zoning. 
    This chapter is adopted as a temporary interim zoning ordinance. The city planning commission and the city attorney are directed to prepare or cause to be prepared a zoning ordinance to be presented to the city council for its adoption. Until such ordinance can be prepared and adopted, no building permit or other permit shall be issued by any officer of the city for any building, structure or use of any real property in the city, which building, structure or use is or would be in conflict with or in violation of said zoning ordinance of the county of Los Angeles, as it was in effect and applicable to that area of said county now incorporated and known as the city of Lancaster on the date immediately preceding the date of incorporation of said city, or as the same may have been amended between said date of incorporation and May 7, 1979, or as the same may hereafter be amended by this city council. Any permit issued contrary to the provisions of this ordinance shall be void. There is no intent to alter or amend any other amendments adopted by the city council to the zoning ordinance from date of incorporation. 
(Prior code § 9-1.4) 
17.04.050 - Zoning map adopted. 
    Due to the conditions referred to in Section 17.04.040, the city council further adopts as a temporary interim zoning map for the city, the zoning map for the county of Los Angeles which has until the incorporation of this city governed the zoning of the area within the city. The zoning shown on said map of all property formerly in the county and now within the city shall be, and is declared to be, the zoning of such property now that it is within the city, and governed according to classification by the zoning ordinance of the county of Los Angeles as referred to in Section 17.04.040. 
(Prior code § 9-1.5) 
17.04.060 - Highway master plan adoption. 
    The council further adopts the master plan of highways of the county of Los Angeles, insofar as it affected the area now within the city of Lancaster before incorporation, the intention of this section being that the said master plan shall have the same effect on the area as it did before incorporation. The city clerk is directed to keep on file in his office for use by the public 3 copies of the master plan of the highways of Los Angeles County. 
(Prior code § 9-1.6) 
17.04.070 - Continuation of previously issued variances and permits. 
    All variances, special permits, conditional use permits, exceptions and similar permits granted by the regional planning commission or the board of supervisors of Los Angeles County and validly in effect on the date of incorporation of the city of Lancaster, are approved, ratified and confirmed as to the entire premises to which the same relate with the same force and effect as if the same were reissued as of said date of incorporation in accordance with the provisions thereof. 
(Prior code § 9-1.7) 
17.04.080 - Providing ten-day notice prior to public hearings-Enactment. 
    This section is enacted pursuant to Section 65854 of the Government Code of the state of California. 
    The convenience, health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city of Lancaster are served by amending Chapter 6, Article 3, Section 631 of the zoning ordinance (Section 17.36.020 of this code) to provide for a minimum 10-day notification of public hearing prior to any such hearing. 
(Prior code § 9-1.10) 
17.04.090 - Short title. 
    This title shall be known as, and may be cited as "The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Lancaster." 
(Prior zoning ord. § 100.1) 
17.04.100 - List of zones. 
    In order to implement the adopted city general plan and pertinent goals, objectives, policies, and programs thereof pursuant to Chapters 3 and 4 of Title 7 of the Government Code, the Planning Law, or any statutes superseding those chapters; to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the visitors to and residents of the city; to regulate the use of buildings, structures, and land for residential, commercial, industrial and institutional purposes; to regulate location, height, bulk, and area covered by buildings and structures; and to control lot size, yards, intensity of land use, signs and off-street parking, the incorporated area of the city is divided into the following zones: 
R Zones-Residential 
RR Zone-Rural Residential 
SRR Zone-Semirural Residential 
R Zone-General Residential 
MDR Zone-Moderate Density Residential 
HDR Zone-High Density Residential 
MHP Zone-Mobilehome Park 
C Zone-General Commercial 
CPD Zone-Commercial Planned Development 
H Zone-Hospital 
OP Zone-Office Professional 
I Zones-Industrial 
LI Zone-Light Industrial 
MI Zone-Medium Industrial 
HI Zone-Heavy Industrial 
O Zone-Open Space 
P-R Zone-Restricted Parking 
SP Zone-Specific Plan 
P Zone-Public Use 
MU Zones-Mixed Use 
MU-N-Mixed Use-Neighborhood 
MU-C-Mixed Use-Commercial 
MU-E-Mixed Use-Employment 
(Ord. 743.1 § 2, 1998; Ord. 743 § 2, 1998; Ord. 651 § 1, 1993; Ord. 647 § 1, 1993; prior zoning ord. § 101) 
(Ord. No. 945, § 2, 7-13-2010) 
17.04.110 - Combining zone. 
    Zone ( ) -VM (Vegetative Management)-For every zone listed in Section 17.04.100 an additional zone designated by the symbol -VM in combination with the respective zoning symbol in Section 17.04.100 is established. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 101.3) 
17.04.120 - Purpose. 
    It is declared that in the creation of the respective zones set forth in this title, the city council has given due consideration to the suitability of each such zone created for the particular uses contained therein, the area requirements, density of land occupancy and the necessary, proper and comprehensive groupings and arrangements of industry, commerce, and the population of the city in accordance with the adopted general plan of the city. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 102) 
17.04.130 - References to ordinances and state statutes. 
    Any reference to an ordinance or state statute shall mean that ordinance or statute as amended from time to time. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 103) 
17.04.140 - Title requirements as minimums. 
    In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 105) 
17.04.150 - Replacement of other ordinances. 
    The provisions of the ordinance codified in this title shall not be deemed or construed to repeal, amend, modify, alter or change any other ordinance or any part thereof not specifically repealed, amended, modified, altered or changed herein, except in such particulars or matters as this title is more restrictive than such other ordinances or part thereof; and that in all particulars wherein this title is not more restrictive each such other ordinance shall continue and shall be in full force and effect. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 106) 
17.04.160 - Assumption of power or duty by public officer. 
    Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty imposed upon, a public officer by this title, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by the commission, a deputy of the officer or a person authorized pursuant to law or ordinance by the officer, unless this title expressly provides otherwise. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 107) 
17.04.170 - Delegation of power or duty by commission. 
    Whenever by ordinance an administrative power is granted to, or an administrative duty imposed upon the commission, the commission may instruct the director to exercise such administrative power or perform such administrative duty. The director shall exercise all such powers, and perform all such duties as he is instructed to do by the commission. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 107.5) 
17.04.180 - Tenses. 
    The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future the present. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 109) 
17.04.190 - Gender. 
    The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 110) 
17.04.200 - Plural or singular. 
    The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 111) 
17.04.210 - Severability. 
    If any provisions of this title, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the title, and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 112) 
17.04.220 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Every person violating any provision of this title or any entitlement, permit, license, or exception granted hereunder is guilty of a violation of this code as specified in Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
(Ord. 711 § 2, 1995: prior zoning ord. § 113) 
17.04.230 - Administration of use classifications. 
A.  In determining compliance with the provisions of this title as it applies to the uses enumerated in the various zones, each principal use shall be considered a separate use of land provided: 
1.  The accessory uses, buildings and structures shall be deemed an integral part of each principal use; and 
2.  That more than one principal use may be placed on a single lot or parcel of land where not in conflict with other provisions of this title. 
B.  The director shall determine whether a use, building or structure may be considered accessory pursuant to the definitions contained in this title provided, however, that where disagreement arises between said director and an applicant, the commission shall make such determination. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 114) 
17.04.235 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1019, § 3, adopted February 28, 2017, repealed § 17.04.235, in its entirety. Former § 17.04.235 pertained to "Medical marijuana dispensaries, cultivation and delivery," and was derived from Ord. No. 1012, § 1, adopted February 9, 2016. 
17.04.240 - Definitions. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this title, the definitions established in this section shall apply wherever such terms are used in this title, whether or not such terms are capitalized. Note: Definitions which are found in Title 16 also apply to the same terms as they are used within this title. 
    "Accessory building or structure" means a detached subordinate building or structure, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the main building or to the main use of the land, and which is located in the same or a less restrictive zone and on the same lot or parcel of land with the main building or use. 
    "Accessory use" means a use customarily incidental to, related and clearly subordinate to a principal use established on the same lot or parcel of land, which accessory use does not alter said principal use nor serve property other than the lot or parcel of land on which the principal use is located. 
    "Adjacent" means 2 or more lots or parcels of land separated only by an alley, street, highway or recorded easement, or 2 or more objects that lie near or close to each other. 
    "Adjoining" means 2 or more lots or parcels of land sharing a common boundary line, or 2 or more objects in contact with each other. Lots or parcels of land which touch at corners only shall not be deemed adjoining. "Abut" or "abutting" and "contiguous" mean the same as adjoining. 
    "Adult" means a person who is 18 years of age or older. 
    "Adult day care facility" means any facility which provides nonmedical care to persons 18 years of age or older in need of personal services, supervision or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual on less than a 24-hour basis as defined in Section 1502 of the Health and Safety Code. 
    "Adult day health care" means an organized day program of therapeutic, social and health activities and services provided pursuant to this chapter to elderly persons with functional impairments either physical or mental, for the purpose of restoring or maintaining optimal capacity for self-care. Provided on a short-term basis, adult day health care serves as a transition from a health facility or home health program to personal independence. Provided on a long-term basis, it serves as an option to institutionalization in long-term care facilities, when 24-hour skilled nursing care is not medically necessary or viewed as desirable by the recipient or his family as defined in Section 1570.7 of the Health and Safety Code. 
    "Affordability" means the economic feasibility to construct lower-income housing in the proposed development. 
    "Affordable housing" means housing as defined in Section 65589.5(h)(2) of the Health and Safety Code. 
    "Aircraft" means any contrivance, now known or hereafter invented, for use or designed for navigation of or flight in the air. 
    "Airport" means any area of land or water which is used or intended to be used for the landing and taking off of aircraft and any appurtenant areas used or intended to be used for airport buildings or other airport facilities or rights-of-way, together with all airport buildings and facilities located thereon. Airport includes heliport, helistop and landing strip. 
    "Alternative fuel" means biological materials, coal-derived liquids, electricity, ethanol, hydrogen, methanol, natural gas, propane and any other fuel that the Secretary of Energy finds to be substantially not petroleum and which would yield substantial energy security benefits and substantial environmental benefits. Reformulated gasoline or other fuel derived from crude oil is not considered an alternative fuel. (From Federal Energy Policy Act of 1992). 
    "Alternative fuel vehicle" means motor vehicles that run on fuels other than petroleum-based fuels. As defined by the National Energy Policy Act (EPACT), this excludes reformulated gasoline as an alternative fuel. 
    "Amphitheater" means unroofed or partially enclosed building or structure used for public assembly and/or entertainment including sports events, theatrical performances, concerts and recitals, circuses, stock shows and conventions. "Amphitheater" shall include stadium, sports arena and outdoor theater, but shall not include an entertainment park or its accessory buildings or structures. 
    Apartment, Bachelor. "Bachelor Apartment" means a dwelling unit in an apartment house, that combines sleeping, living, cooking and dining facilities into one habitable room. "Light housekeeping room" shall mean the same as bachelor apartment. 
    Apartment, Efficiency. "Efficiency apartment" means a dwelling unit in an apartment house, that combines sleeping, living, cooking and dining facilities into 2 habitable rooms, one of which shall be a kitchen. "Single apartment" and "efficiency living unit" mean the same as efficiency apartment. 
    Apartment, One-Bedroom. "One-bedroom apartment" means a dwelling unit in an apartment house, that contains a maximum of 3 habitable rooms, one of which shall be a kitchen. 
    Apartment, Two or More Bedroom. "Two or more bedroom apartment" means a dwelling unit in an apartment house that contains more than 3 habitable rooms. 
    Area, Net. "Net area" means the total area within the lot lines of a lot or parcel of land after public street easements or other areas to be dedicated or reserved for public uses are deducted from such lot or parcel. Does not include trails easement, or landscape easement for lots of less than 7,000 square feet. 
    "Automobile dismantling yard" means any premises used for the dismantling or wrecking of motor vehicles and trailers required to be registered under the Vehicle Code of the state of California including the buying, selling or dealing in such vehicles or integral parts or component materials thereof, and the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled, partially dismantled or wrecked inoperative vehicles and trailers. 
    Automobile dismantling shall not include the incidental storage of inoperative or disabled vehicles in connection with the legal operation of an automobile repair garage or automobile body and fender repair shop. 
    "Automobile impound yard" means any premises used for the temporary storage of vehicles which have been legally removed or impounded at the direction of a peace officer or by judicial order from public or private property as prescribed by law. 
    "Automobile parking space," as used in this title, means any permanently maintained space on the same lot or parcel of land as is located the structure it is designed to serve, so located and arranged as to permit the storage of, and be readily accessible under its own power to, a passenger automobile of average size. "Automobile storage space" means automobile parking space. 
    "Automobile repair" means general repair including but not limited to replacement of parts, engine and transmission rebuilding, electronic diagnosis, brakes and alignment, muffler and exhaust replacement, radiator repair or replacement, reconditioning and restoration; maintenance including tune up, oil change, and lubrication; damage repair including but not limited to body work, frame repair, upholstery and painting. 
    "Automobile service station" means uses where the primary business is the sale of motor vehicle fuels (including but not limited to alternative fuels such as compressed natural gas (CNG), liquified petroleum gas (LPG), and electric recharging stations), lubricants and other refined petroleum products, and automobile accessories such as tires, batteries, windshield wiper blades and other incidental auto parts, and may also offer minor automobile repair services, but not convenience items such as food or drink other than from vending machines. 
    "Basement" means that portion of a building between floor and ceiling, which is partly below and partly above grade (as defined in this section), but so located that the vertical distance from grade to the floor below is less than the vertical distance from grade to ceiling. 
    Biosolid Material. "Biosolid material" shall have the same meaning as "Sludge." 
    "Borrow pit" means the same as quarry. 
    "Buildable area" means that portion of the lot remaining after deducting all required setbacks from the lot when considered in conjunction with maximum lot coverage. 
    "Building" means any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
    "Building and safety official" means the building and safety official of the city. 
    Building, Enclosed. "Enclosed building" means a building enclosed on all sides. 
    "Campground" means a lot or parcel of land designed or used for tent camping including picnic areas, but excluding any structures for permanent human occupancy. 
    "Caretaker" means: 
1.  A person employed by and residing on the premises of an employer; or 
2.  The owner of any commercial/industrial enterprise or a member of his immediate family who assumes the primary responsibility for the necessary repair, maintenance, supervision or security of the real or personal property of the employer or owner which is located on the same or contiguous lots or parcels of land. 
    "Cargo container" means and includes, without limitation, a pre-manufactured, assembled reusable structure, typically made of metal but which can be made of other materials, that is delivered to a property in the city for use by an owner, occupant or licensed contractor as storage for construction materials and equipment, household items or other personal property. "Cargo container" includes, without limitation, vessels designed for packing, shipping or transportation of freight, articles, goods or commodities, and includes containers that are designed for and capable of being moved by railcar, motor vehicle, or ship. "Cargo container" does not include a storage shed or other structure that is or may be assembled at a property. 
    "Cellar" means that portion of a building between floor and ceiling which is wholly or partly below grade (as defined in this section) and so located that the vertical distance from grade to the floor below is equal to or greater than the vertical distance from grade to ceiling. 
    Centerline. Where reference is made to the centerline of any parkway, major or secondary highway, such centerline is deemed to be the centerline established by the county engineer for any proposed or dedicated public way which, in whole or in part, is included in any such parkway, major or secondary highway. Said established centerlines are those shown on a series of maps entitled "County Surveyor's Maps" or "County Surveyor's Filed Maps" on file in the office of the county engineer, except that, where two or more such centerlines are shown on any map in said series of maps, the centerline labeled "Proposed Centerline" is deemed to be the centerline of the parkway, major or secondary highway. 
    "Chapter" means a chapter of this title unless some other ordinance or statute is mentioned. 
    "City" means the city of Lancaster. 
    "City engineer" means the city engineer of the city. The functions of the city engineer may be performed by the director of public works. 
    "Clean fuel vehicle" shall have the same meaning as stated in division 1 of the Motor Vehicle Code of California. 
    Co-located Facilities. "Co-located facilities" means wireless telecommunication devices that are attached to existing telecommunication towers or other existing structures such as light standards and power poles. 
    "Commercial coach" means a structure transportable in one or more sections, designed and equipped for human occupancy for industrial, professional or commercial purposes, which is required to be moved under permit and shall include a trailer coach as defined in Section 18001.8 of the Health and Safety Code. 
    "Commercial parking lot or building" means a parking area or structure established or operated as a business, providing off-street parking for a fee or charge. 
    "Commission" means the planning commission of the city of Lancaster. 
    "Communication equipment building" means a building housing operating electrical and mechanical equipment necessary for the conducting of a public utility communications business, with or without personnel. 
    "Congregate living health facility" means a residential home with a capacity of no more than 6 beds as defined in Section 1250 of the Health and Safety Code. 
    "Consignment store" means a store which, for a mutually agreed upon method of compensation, accepts new or used merchandise to sell on behalf of the owner. 
    "Dairy" means any place or premises upon which milk is produced for sale or other distribution and where 3 or more cows or 7 or more goats are in lactation. 
    "Day care center" means any child day care facility other than a family home, and includes infant centers, preschools, and extended day care facilities as defined in Section 1596.76 of the Health and Safety Code. 
    "Density bonus" means an increased density of at least 25% over the maximum authorized density of the zone which is granted to a developer or property owner of a housing project agreeing to construct a prescribed percentage of lower-income units as defined by the California Government Code Section 65915 et seq. 
    "Detached living quarters" means living quarters within a detached accessory building located on the same premises as the main building, for use by temporary guests of the occupants of the premises. Such accessory building shall have no plumbing or plumbing facilities of any kind except for space heating, or air conditioning, or both and except in or for the purpose of supplying water to, or disposing of wastes from, a toilet or bathroom. 
    "Director" means the director of community development of the city of Lancaster. 
    "Domestic animal" means an animal which is commonly maintained in residence with man. 
    "Duplex" means a building designed or used for residential purposes and containing 2 dwelling units. "Dwelling unit" or "(DU)" means one or more habitable rooms in a building, portion of a building or mobilehome which is designed, intended to be used, or used for occupancy by one family with facilities for living, sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation, which are legally constructed, placed or installed in accordance with all applicable provisions contained within this code including, but not limited to, the city building, plumbing, electrical and fire codes. Dwelling unit shall also include any room which contains either a kitchen, kitchenette, cooking facilities or cooking appliance. (See definition of "guest room.") 
    "Earth station" means structures comprising one or more large parabolic reflectors which may be mounted on a circular control building and all appurtenant equipment necessary for the receiving, amplifying or transmitting of microwave signals in connection with a public utility communication route or system employing such earth stations and satellites in space. 
    "Electric distribution substation" means an assembly of equipment which is part of a system for the distribution of electric power where electric energy is received at a subtransmission voltage and transformed to a lower voltage for distribution for general consumer use. 
    "Electric transmission substation" means an assembly of equipment which is part of a system for the transmission of electric power where electric energy is received at a very high voltage from its source of generation by means of a network of high voltage lines and where, by means of transformers, said high voltage is transformed to a lower sub-transmission voltage for purposes of supplying electric power to large individual consumers, interchange connections with other power producing agencies or electric distribution substations for transformation to still lower voltage for distribution to smaller individual users. 
    "Electric vehicle (EV)" means an automotive-type vehicle for highway use, such as passenger automobiles, buses, trucks, vans and the like, primarily powered by an electric motor that draws current from a rechargeable storage battery, fuel cell, photovoltaic array or other source of electrical current. For the purpose of this title, electric motorcycles and similar type vehicles and off-road self-propelled electric vehicles such as industrial trucks, hoists, lifts, transports, golf carts, airline ground support equipment, tractors, boats, and the like are not included within the definition of electric vehicle. If any significant difference, as determined by the director, exists between this definition and the definition of electric vehicle as stated in the National Electrical Code, then the definition as stated in the National Electrical Code shall apply. 
    "Electric vehicle charging station (EVCS)" means a location, either within a building or out-of-doors, which is properly and legally equipped with an electric vehicle connector and at which an electric vehicle may park, connect and charge its electrical storage system. 
    "Electric vehicle supply equipment" means the conductors, including the ungrounded, grounded and equipment grounding conductors, the electric vehicle conductors, attachment plugs, and all other fittings, devices, power outlets or apparatuses installed specifically for the purpose of delivering energy from the premises wiring to the electric vehicle. If any significant difference, as determined by the director, exists between this definition and the definition of electric vehicle supply equipment as stated in the National Electrical Code, then the definition as stated in the National Electrical Code shall apply. 
    "Emergency shelter," as defined in health and safety code 50801(e), means housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay. 
    "Entertainment park" means an entertainment or amusement complex developed as a regional visitor tourist attraction and organized around a central theme such as amusement rides and attractions, tours or exhibitions, including all related accessory uses, buildings and structures designed and operated for patron participation and pleasure in conjunction therewith. 
    "Equivalent financial value" means the cost to the developer/property owner based on the land cost per dwelling unit. This is determined by the difference in the value of land with and without the density bonus. 
    "Family" means an individual or two more persons living in a single dwelling unit. "Family" also mean the persons living together a residential facility, including transitional and supportive housing. 
    "Family day care home" means a home which provides care, protection and supervision of 12 or fewer children, in the provider's own home, for periods of less than 24 hours a day, while the parents or guardians are away, as defined in Section 1596.78 of the Health and Safety Code and includes the following: 
1.  "Large family day care home" means a home which provides family day care to 7 to 12 children, inclusive, including children under the age of 10 years who reside at home. 
2.  "Small family day care home" means a home which provides family day care to 6 or fewer children, including children under the age of 10 years who reside at the home. 
    "Floor area ratio" means the numerical value obtained through dividing the aboveground gross floor area of a building or buildings located on a lot or parcel of land by the total area of such lot or parcel of land. 
    Frontage, Building. "Building frontage" means that exterior building wall of a ground floor business establishment on the side or sides of the building fronting and/or oriented toward a public street, highway or parkway. Building frontage shall be measured continuously along said building wall for the entire length of the business establishment, including any portion thereof which is other than parallel to the remainder of the wall. 

    Frontage, Street or Highway. "Street or highway frontage" means that portion of a lot or parcel of land which borders a public street, highway or parkway. Street or highway frontage shall be measured along the common lot line separating said lot or parcel of land from the public street, highway or parkway. 
    Garage, Residential. "Residential garage" means an enclosed building, or portion thereof, used for the storage of motor vehicles owned or operated by residents, and for storage and other uses related to normal household purposes. 
    "General plan" means the adopted general plan of the city and all subsequent amendments thereto. 
    "Grade" (ground level) is the average of the finished ground level at the center of all walls of a building. In case walls are parallel to and within five feet of sidewalks, the above ground level shall be measured at the sidewalks. 
    "Gross acreage" means the total area within the boundary lines of a lot or parcel of land before public streets, easements, or other areas to be dedicated or reserved for public uses are deducted from such lot or parcel, and does not include adjacent lands already dedicated for such purposes. 

    "Gross floor area" means the total horizontal area of all the floors of a building enclosed within the surrounding walls, exclusive of areas within a building designed and used for the parking of vehicles. 
    "Guest house" means living facilities having no kitchen or cooking facilities, located on the same premises with the main building, which is provided for the sole use of family members, temporary guests, or persons permanently employed on the premises. The guest house shall be either attached or detached with a separate entrance and the floor area is limited to 500 square feet. The structure shall comply with all yard, coverage and other provisions of the title for the main dwelling unit and may not be rented. (See definition for "detached living quarters.") 
    "Guest ranch" means any property operated as a ranch which offers guest rooms for rent or hire and which has outdoor recreational facilities such as horseback riding, swimming or hiking. 
    "Guest room" means one habitable room with facilities for sleeping and sanitation which does not contain a kitchen, kitchenette, cooking facilities or cooking appliance(s) (the term "cooking appliance" does not include coffee pots or refrigerators) and is designed, intended to be used, or used as temporary sleeping accommodations for any person. 
    "Hazardous material" means any material that, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical or chemical characteristics, poses a significant present or potential hazard to human health and safety or to the environment if released into the workplace or the environment. "Hazardous materials" include, but are not limited to, hazardous substances, hazardous waste, and any material which a handler or the administering agency has a reasonable basis for believing that it would be injurious to the health and safety of persons or harmful to the environment if released into the workplace or the environment; or as this definition is hereafter amended by the state of California. 
    "Health retreat" means any use providing a preventive and rehabilitative health care program on a live-in basis and offering dietary education and control as well as physical therapy including gymnasium and other exercise equipment, solariums, yoga, swimming and outdoor recreational activities. "Health retreat" shall not include hospital, medical office or clinic or nudist camp. 
    "Heavy equipment" means bulldozers, graders, tractors, plows, cultivators, and similar earthmoving or farming vehicles and tools, and trucks designed to pull detachable trailers and the trailers they pull. 
    "Heavy equipment training school" means a lot or parcel of land used to train operators in the use of earth-moving and construction equipment including motor graders, bulldozers, rollers, earth-movers, cable and hydraulic shovels, front loaders, drilling equipment, pile drivers, standing and truck cranes, fork lifts, welders and similar equipment. 
    "Height" means the vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof. In calculating the height, roof structures which comply with the provisions of Chapter 36 of the Building Code, Ordinance No. 2225, shall not be considered. 
    "Heliport" means any helicopter landing area used, designed or intended to be used for the receiving or discharging of passengers and cargo and shall include any appurtenant facilities for passengers, cargo, or for the servicing, repair, shelter or storage of helicopters. 
    "Helistop" means any helicopter landing area used, designed or intended to be used for the receiving or discharging of passengers and cargo but shall not include other appurtenant facilities permitted at a heliport other than a shelter for passengers. 
    "Highway line" means the ultimate right-of-way established for a regional, primary, secondary, or other arterial street or any other street by the general plan, by this title, or by Title 16 of this code. Such line is coterminous with the lot line on property adjoining a fully widened arterial or other street. 
    "Hog ranch" means any premises where 3 or more weaned hogs are maintained. 
    "Home occupation" means a use conducted for monetary gain within the boundaries of one's property, which use is incidental and secondary to the use of the property for residential purposes, and does not change the residential character or appearance of the dwelling, or adversely affect the uses permitted in the residential zone. These provisions do not apply to uses which are permitted as a matter of course within residential zones. 
    "Hospital" means any institution, place, building or agency licensed by the Departments of Public Health or Mental Hygiene of the state of California, which maintains and operates organized facilities for the diagnosis, care and treatment of human illness, including care during and after pregnancy. Hospital includes sanitarium, sanatorium, maternity home and convalescent hospital. 
    Hospital, Small Animal. "Small animal hospital" means any facility providing medical or surgical treatment, clipping, bathing, or other services, including incidental boarding to dogs, cats and other small animals. 
    "Hotel" means any building containing 6 or more completely furnished guest rooms or dwelling units, the majority of which have an entrance directly from an inside corridor, with automobile parking spaces provided on the lot or parcel of land for such guest rooms or dwelling units as required therefor, and such guest rooms or dwelling units are designed, intended to be used, or used for temporary sleeping purposes by registered guests. No hotel shall be allowed to have more than 40% of its total gross floor area devoted to dwelling units. (See definition of "dwelling unit.") 
    Household Appliance, Large. "Large household appliance" means a tool or machine designed for a particular household use, which is operated by gas or electricity. A large household appliance includes stoves, furnaces, refrigerators, washers, dryers, and similar devices of like size. 
    "Junk and salvage" means old, secondhand or scrap ferrous and nonferrous metals, paper and paper products including roofing and tar paper, cloth and clothing, wood and wood products, manufactured rubber products, rope, manufactured plastic products, paint, manufactured clay and porcelain products, trash, and similar materials, and shall include dismantled machinery, equipment and parts. Junk and salvage shall also include the baling of cardboard boxes, paper and paper cartons. 
    "Junk and salvage yard" means any premises, establishment or place of business which is maintained, operated or used for storing, keeping, buying, selling or dismantling of junk and salvage. 
    "Kitchen" means any room, all or part of which is designed and used for the storage, refrigeration, cooking and preparation of food. 
    "Land reclamation project" means a project established to restore otherwise unsuitable land to useful purposes through the use of fill materials such as rubbish, waste, excluding sludge or biosolid materials, soil and other unwanted materials. "Land reclamation project" shall include a dump or waste disposal facility. 
    "Landscape maintenance" means the regular, periodic care that is necessary to keep landscaped areas active and healthy and shall include but not be limited to weed and trash removal, cultivation, irrigation, fertilizing, pruning and replacement of damaged, dying or dead plants with the approved species. 
    "Landscaping" means the preparation of the ground and the subsequent planting of trees, shrubs, vines, ground cover, flowers, or lawns singly or in combination with each other. In addition, the combination or design may include natural features such as rock or stone and structural features including but not limited to fountains, sculpture, walls, fences, and street furniture. 
    "Lodger" means a person who occupies a rented room in the house of another. 
    "Long-term health care facility" means any facility licensed in accordance with state law that is any of the following: skilled nursing facility, intermediate care facility, intermediate care facility/developmentally disabled, intermediate care facility/developmentally disabled habilitative, intermediate care facility/developmentally disabled-nursing, nursing facility, pediatric day health and respite care facility. This definition does not include a general acute care hospital or an acute psychiatric hospital, except for that distinct part of the hospital that provides skilled nursing facility, intermediate care facility or pediatric day health and respite care facility services. 
    Lot, Corner. "Corner lot" means a lot or parcel of land situated at the intersection of two or more parkways, highways or streets, which parkways, highways or streets have an angle of intersection measured within said lot or parcel of land of not more than 135 degrees. 
    "Lot coverage" means the total horizontal area of a lot, parcel or building site covered by any building which extends more than 3 feet above the surface of the ground and including any covered vehicular parking spaces. 
    "Lot depth" means the horizontal distance from the highway line to the rear lot line of the lot or parcel of land, measured from the midpoint of the highway line, where it fronts the lot, to the midpoint of the rear lot line. (See also the definition of "highway line.") 


    Lot, Flag. "Flag lot" means a lot or parcel of land taking access by a strip, the owner of which lot or parcel of land has fee simple title to said strip extending from the main portion of the lot or parcel of land to the adjoining parkway, highway or street. 
    Lot, Interior. "Interior lot" means a lot or parcel of land other than a corner or flag lot. 
    "Lot line" means a boundary line of a lot or of a parcel of land. 
    Lot Line, Front. "Front lot line" means a line separating the front yard from the parkway, highway or street upon which the yard fronts or, in the case of a flag lot where the front yard is oriented toward an adjoining lot, the line separating such front yard from said adjoining lot. 
    Lot Line, Rear. "Rear lot line" means a lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. For a triangular or gore-shaped lot, the rear lot line shall mean a line 10 feet in length within the lot which is parallel to the front lot line, or parallel to the chord of a curved front lot line, and at the maximum distance from the front lot line. 
    Lot Line, Side. "Side lot line" means any lot boundary line which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line. 
    Lot, Through. A "through lot" means a lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel parkways, highways and/or streets. 
    "Lot width" means the horizontal distance between side lot lines as measured at a right angle from the midpoint of a straight line drawn in accordance with the definition of "lot depth." 
    "Low and very low income households" means income limits published by the State Department of Housing and Community Development. This definition applies to both for-rent and for-sale housing. 
    "Major highway" means a major highway or primary arterial designated on the circulation element of the general plan. 
    "Major wireless telecommunication facilities" means self-supporting, ground mounted facilities that exceed the maximum allowable height in the zone in which they are located. These facilities require Federal Communications Commission and Federal Aviation Administration review. The design of these structures shall best match the background color scheme as seen from the primary roadways adjacent to the site. Ground mounted cabinetry shall complement the adjacent buildings in color and material treatment. Typical major wireless telecommunication facilities include paging and data transfer services or personal communication services (PCS), and cellular telephone towers. 
    "May" is permissive. 
    "Microwave station" means a building housing equipment necessary for the receiving, amplifying or transmitting of microwave signals, including necessary antenna systems, along a communications route or system which employs microwave frequencies assigned by the Federal Communications Commission. 
    "Ministorage warehouse" means a warehouse and associated office and/or residence designed and intended to serve the storage needs of a variety of users from individuals to businesses on a rental basis. 
    "Mini wireless telecommunication facilities" means accessory structures attached to roof tops or buildings as an accessory or complementary use to the primary land use on the site. These structures do not exceed 10% of the height of the buildings on which they are mounted and must be fully enclosed or designed in a way that is consistent with the architectural design of the buildings on-site. Typical uses of mini wireless telecommunication facilities include building to building communications, local dispatch facilities, and small satellite communications facilities. 
    "Minor wireless telecommunication facilities" means freestanding structures essential to the primary use of the property and which do not exceed the height limit in the zone in which they are located. The structure can be roof or building mounted or solely ground mounted and be consistent with the design of the existing buildings on-site. Typical minor wireless telecommunication facilities include radio and television towers, regional dispatch facilities, and larger satellite communications facilities. 
    "Mixed use development" means the development of two or more land uses including, but not limited to a combination of residential, commercial or industrial uses on a single parcel of land or in a physically integrated group of structures. 
    "Mobilehome" means either of the following: 
1.  A structure transportable under permit in one or more sections, designed and equipped to contain not more than two dwelling units to be used with or without a foundation system; or 
2.  A structure transportable under permit in one or more sections, designed to be used with a foundation system for any of the following purposes: 
a.  Three or more dwelling units, as defined in Section 18003.3 of the Health and Safety Code, 
b.  A dormitory. A dormitory shall mean a room or rooms inhabited for the purposes of temporary residence by two or more persons, 
c.  A residential hotel, as defined in Section 50519 of the Health and Safety Code, 
d.  Efficiency units, as defined in Section 17958.1 of the Health and Safety Code. 
    Mobilehome does not include a recreational vehicle, commercial coach, or factory-built housing as defined in Section 19971 of the Health and Safety Code. The handicap accessibility and adaptability requirements of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations applicable to dormitories, hotels and apartment houses shall be applicable to mobilehomes constructed for those purposes. 
    "Mobilehome lot" means a lot created through the approval of a mobilehome subdivision by the city. 
    "Mobilehome park" means any area or tract of land where two or more mobilehome spaces are rented or leased or held out for rent or lease to accommodate manufactured homes or mobilehomes used for human habitation as defined in Section 18211 of the Health and Safety Code. 
    "Mobilehome space" means an area of land within a mobilehome park designed for the accommodation of one mobilehome which is rented or leased by the owner or occupant of a mobilehome for placing a mobilehome thereon for residential purposes. 
    "Mobilehome subdivision" means the division, by any subdivider, of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, or any portion thereof, shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units into lots, for the purpose of sale of such lots, for use as individually owned sites for the installation of mobilehomes on foundation systems. 
    "Mobile recycling unit" means an automobile, truck, trailer or van, licensed by the department of motor vehicles which is used for the collection of recyclable materials. A mobile recycling unit also means the bins, boxes or containers transported by trucks, vans or trailers, and used for the collection of recyclable materials. 
    "Model home" means a dwelling unit which is constructed upon a proposed or recorded lot in a subdivision for which a tentative map has been approved or a final map recorded, and which is intended to be temporarily utilized as an example of a dwelling unit which has been, or is proposed to be, built in the same or similar subdivision or within a three mile city radius of the approval location. The number of model homes in a subdivision shall not exceed the number of separate and distinct floor plans offered by the developer. (A reverse or mirror image of an offered floor plan shall not be considered as a separate floor plan.) 
    "Model studio" means: 
1.  Any premises on which there is conducted the business of furnishing figure models who pose for the purpose of being observed or viewed by any person or of being sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise similarly depicted for persons who pay a fee or other consideration or compensation or a gratuity for the right or opportunity so to depict the figure model, or for admission to or for permission to remain upon or as a condition of remaining upon the premises; and/or 
2.  Any premises where there is conducted the business of furnishing or providing or procuring for a fee or other consideration or compensation or gratuity, figure models to be observed or viewed by any persons or to be sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise similarly depicted. 
    "Motel" means a single building or group of attached or detached buildings containing completely furnished guest rooms or dwelling units, the majority of which have a separate entrance directly from outside the building, with conveniently located automobile parking spaces provided on the lot or parcel of land for such rooms or dwelling units as required therefor, which are designed, intended to be used, or used wholly or in part for the accommodation of registered guests who are primarily transient automobile travelers. No motel shall be allowed to have more than 40% of its total gross floor area devoted to dwelling units. "Motel" shall also include auto courts, motor lodges and tourist courts. (See definition of "dwelling unit.") 
    "Multiple-family project" means a building, or a portion of a building designed or used for occupancy by three or more families, living independently of each other and containing three or more dwelling units. 
    "Nightclub" means a place of entertainment, typically open at night, usually serving food and/or alcoholic beverages, which may have a floor show and/or offer live or recorded entertainment or music and/or space for dancing. A use that contains these operational characteristics shall be deemed a nightclub even if alcoholic beverages are not served. 
    "Nonconforming building or structure" means, unless otherwise specified by this title, any building or structure that was lawfully established and in compliance with all applicable ordinances and laws at the time this title or any amendment thereto became effective, but which, due to the application of this title or any amendment thereto, no longer complies with all the applicable regulations and standards of development in the zone in which it is located. 
    "Nonconforming use" means any use of land or property that was lawfully established and in compliance with all applicable ordinances and laws at the time this title or any amendment thereto became effective, but which due to the application of this title or any amendment thereto, no longer complies with all of the applicable regulations and standards of the zone in which it is located. 
    "Nudist camp" means any place where three or more persons not all members of the same family congregate, assemble, associate or engage in any activity while without clothing or covering or with partial clothing or covering but with any pubic area or any portion of the crease of the buttocks exposed in the presence of others or of each other, other than an occasional gathering in, or on the premises of a private home. Nudist camp includes growth center. 
    "Nuisance" means everything that endangers life, the public health, safety and welfare, gives offense to the senses, violates the laws of decency, or obstructs the reasonable and comfortable use of property by the owner or the occupant. 
    "Oath" means and includes affirmation. 
    "Open space" means space upon the land which is unoccupied by buildings, driveways and parking areas. 
    Open Space, Private. "Private open space" means open space which is intended for the exclusive use of the owner or tenant of a dwelling unit, which abuts said dwelling unit and is bounded by a wall, fence or landscaping on at least two sides, and may include a patio or balcony (covered or uncovered). 
    Open Space, Public. "Public open space" means open space which is available for use by the public at large. 
    Open Space, Usable Common. "Usable common open space" means open space which is available for use by all residents of the development and which is landscaped with lawns, trees and shrubs, and may contain paved walkways, patios, swimming pools, and similar improvements. Such open space shall have no dimension thereof less than 10 feet and area thereof not less than 200 square feet. All usable common open space shall be exclusive of required yards. 
    "Ordinance" means an ordinance of the city of Lancaster. 
    "Outdoor festival" means any music festival, dance festival, rock festival or similar musical activity to which both of the following apply: 
1.  Attendance by more than 500 persons is desired or may reasonably be expected; and 
2.  The festival will be held at any place other than in a permanent building or permanent installation which has been constructed for the purpose of or is so constructed that it can be used for conducting such activities. 
    It is immaterial whether music will be provided by paid or professional, or amateur performers or by prerecorded means; or whether admission is to be charged. 
    "Outside display" means the placement of goods, equipment, merchandise or exhibits at a location visible to the public view, other than within a building. 
    "Outside storage" means the storage of goods, equipment or materials outside of a building for any purpose other than outside display. 
    "Parcel of land" means a contiguous quantity of land, owned by, or recorded as the property of the same claimant or person, or in the possession of the same claimant or person pursuant to a recorded lease with a term of not less than 20 years. 
    "Pawnshop" means an establishment where a pawnbroker loans money on the security of personal property which is pledged in his keeping. 
    "Person" means any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, county, city and county, municipality, district or other political subdivision, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
    "Pest control operator" means a person who engages in the business of eradicating or controlling any pest which is or is liable to be dangerous or detrimental to agriculture by the application of any substance, method or device, or who engages in the business of preventing, destroying, repelling, mitigating or correcting any disorder of plants by the same means or both. "Pest control operator" does not include a person engaged in the business of termite eradication or control. 
    Plot Plan. Whenever this title refers to a "plot plan" or "plan" it shall be construed to mean a site plan. 
    "Pool hall" means any entertainment establishment which has more than four pool tables or in which more than 50% of the gross floor area is devoted to pool tables and the space required to use such tables. 
    "Portable sign" means a freestanding sign not permanently affixed, anchored or secured to either the ground or a structure on the premises it occupies. 
    "Pot-bellied pig" means a pig classified as Sus scrofa jubatus Muller, or Sus scrofa (cristatus) vittatus, as commonly referred to as a Vietnamese pot-bellied pig, which stands no higher than 20 inches at the shoulder and is no longer than 40 inches from the tip of the head to the end of the buttocks, and weighs no more than 120 pounds. When such animals are located in an R zone they shall be registered with a nationally recognized registry as one of the above species of pot-bellied pigs and considered as pets. 
    "Premises" means any lot or lots and the buildings, structures, or other improvements located thereon. 
    "Principal use" means a primary or dominant use established, or proposed to be established, on a lot or parcel of land. 
    "Private property" means any property other than public property. 
    "Project grading" means any excavation or fill or combination thereof, necessary and incidental to impending building construction or other lawful development of the premises. Impending building construction or other development as used in this section shall mean the initiation of such construction or development within one year of the date of application. 
    "Property line" means lot line. 
    "Pro shop" means an incidental commercial use operated in conjunction with, and on the same premises as a principal recreational use, which offers for retail sale sporting equipment and supplies customarily utilized in participating in such recreational activity. "Pro shop" does not include a general sporting goods store. 
    "Public property" means any real or personal property in which the city or any other governmental entity or any publicly regulated utility company possesses an ownership interest. Public property shall include, without limitation, any street, sidewalk, curb, curbstone, street lamp post, hydrant, tree, tree stake or guard, railroad trestle, electric light, power, telephone or telegraph system, any lighting system, public bridge or wall, drinking fountain, life preserver, lifesaving equipment, street sign, traffic sign or signal, street median, public park, or other publicly owned property or structure. 
    "Public utility service center" means any buildings or premises used for the administration of public utility repair, maintenance and installation crews including parking for vehicles, not to exceed 2 tons rated capacity, but not including warehouses or storage yards. 
    "Public utility service yard" means any buildings or premises used for the office, warehouse, storage yard, or maintenance garage of a public utility including microwave repeater stations when incorporated as a part of the service yard use. 
    "Quarry" means any place on a lot or parcel of land where dirt, soil, sand, gravel, rock, clay, decomposed granite, or other similar material is removed by excavation or otherwise. Quarry shall include mining operations for the removal of ores, precious stones, or other solid materials but shall not include project grading. 
    Recreation Club, Commercial. "Commercial recreation club" means a commercial enterprise offering the use of outdoor recreational facilities to the public. 
    Recreation Club, Private. "Private recreation club" means an association of persons who are bona fide members, paying regular dues, and organized to provide outdoor recreational facilities for members and their guests but not including an association organized primarily to render a service customarily carried on as a commercial enterprise. 
    Recreation Facilities, Neighborhood. "Neighborhood recreation facilities" means outdoor recreation facilities established by an association of persons who are bona fide members and operate as a nonprofit corporation to provide outdoor recreation facilities for residents in the immediate vicinity and their guests. Such facilities may include a clubhouse, changing rooms and similar subordinate facilities in conjunction with the outdoor recreation activity but shall not include a restaurant, bar or pro shop. 
    "Recreational trailer park" means any area or tract of land, within an area zoned for recreational use, where one or more lots are rented or leased or held out for rent or lease to owners or users of recreational vehicles or tents and which is occupied for temporary purposes. 
    "Recreational vehicle" means a motor home, travel trailer, truck camper or camping trailer, with or without motive power, designed for human habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy as defined in Section 18010 of the Health and Safety Code. 
    "Recyclable material" means reusable material including but not limited to metals, glass, plastic and paper, which are intended for reuse, remanufacture, or reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form. Recyclable material does not include refuse or hazardous materials. Recyclable material may include used motor oil collected and transported in accordance with Section 25250.11 and 25143.2(b)(4) of the California Health and Safety Code. 
    "Recycling facility" means a center for the collection and/or processing of recyclable materials. A "certified recycling facility" or "certified processor" means a recycling facility certified by the California Department of Conservation as meeting the requirements of the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986. A recycling facility does not include storage containers or processing activity located on the premises of a residential, commercial or manufacturing use and used solely for the recycling of material generated by that residential property, business or manufacturer. Recycling facilities may include the following: 
1.  Collection Facility. A collection facility is a center for the acceptance by donation, redemption or purchase, of recyclable materials from the public. Such a facility does not use power-driven processing equipment except as indicated in Article VI of Chapter 17.40, Criteria and Standards for Recycling Facilities. Collection facilities may include the following: 
a.  Reverse vending machine(s); 
b.  Small collection facilities which occupy an area of not more than 500 square feet, and may include: 
1)  A mobile unit, 
2)  Bulk reverse vending machines or a grouping of reverse vending machines occupying more than 50 square feet, 
3)  Kiosk type units which may include permanent structures, 
4)  Unattended containers placed for the donation of recyclable materials; 
c.  Large collection facilities which may occupy an area of more than 500 square feet and may include permanent structures. 
2.  Processing Facility. A processing facility is a building or enclosed space used for the collection and processing of recyclable materials. "Processing" means the preparation of material for efficient shipment, or to an end-user's specifications, by such means as baling, briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding, cleaning and remanufacturing. Processing facilities include the following: 
a.  A light processing facility occupies an area of under 45,000 square feet of gross collection, processing and storage area and has up to an average of 2 outbound truck shipments per day. Light processing facilities are limited to baling, briquetting, crushing, compacting, grinding, shredding and sorting of source-separated recyclable materials and repairing of reusable materials sufficient to qualify as a certified processing facility. A light processing facility shall not shred, compact or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers. 
b.  A heavy processing facility is any processing facility other than a light processing facility. 
    "Redevelopment agency" means the redevelopment agency of the city of Lancaster. 
    Renovation, Exterior Façade. "Renovation, exterior façade" means a resurfacing of an existing building frontage so that the façade and signs are integrated into one unit. 
    "Required area" means: 
1.  The area of a lot which is shown as a part of a subdivision for purposes of sale, recorded as a final map or filed as a record of survey map approved as provided in the Subdivision Map Act or as provided in Ordinance No. 4478, entitled "Subdivision Ordinance," adopted March 19, 1945, except that where a parcel which otherwise would have been shown as one lot, is divided into two or more lots because of a city boundary line or a line between land the title to which was registered under the Land Title Law (Torrens Title) and land the title to which was not so registered, in which case "required area" means the area of such parcel; or 
2.  The area of a lot or parcel of land the right of possession of which, by virtue of a deed duly recorded, or by a recorded contract of sale, is vested in a person who neither owns nor has a right of possession of any contiguous parcel of property; provided, that the deed or contract of sale by which such right of possession was separated has been recorded prior to the adoption by the board of supervisors of the ordinance, which imposes the area requirements upon such lot or parcel of land; or 
3.  Minimum lot area is specified in the property development regulations of the zone. Required area shall not include the access strip of a flag lot extending from the main portion of the lot or parcel of land to the adjoining parkway, highway or street. 
4.  Where neither subsection 1, 2 or 3 applies, the required area is: 
a.  In the CPD zone the minimum lot area is 5,000 square feet. 
5.  A lot shown as such on a subdivision for the purpose of lease only does not have the required area unless it complies with subsection 2, 3 or 4 of this definition. 
    "Residence" means a building designed as a one-family dwelling unit or a two-family dwelling unit which complies with the current adopted U.B.C. "Residential care facility for the elderly" means a housing arrangement chosen voluntarily by persons 60 years of age or over, or their authorized representative, where varying levels and intensities of care and supervision, protective supervision, or personal care are provided, based upon their varying needs, as determined in order to be admitted and to remain in the facility. Persons under 60 years of age with compatible needs may be allowed to be admitted or retained in a residential care facility for the elderly, as defined in Section 1569.2(k) of the Health and Safety Code. 
    "Residential facility" means any family home, group care facility, or similar facility for 24-hour nonmedical care of persons in need of personal services, supervision or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual, as defined in Section 1502(a)(1) of the Health and Safety Code. 
    "Reverse vending machine(s)" means an automated mechanical device which accepts at least one or more types of empty beverage containers including, but not limited to aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the container's redemption value as determined by the state. A reverse vending machine may sort and process containers mechanically provided that the entire process is enclosed within the machine. In order to accept and temporarily store all 3 container types in a proportion commensurate with their relative redemption rates, and to meet the requirements of certification as a recycling facility, multiple grouping of reverse vending machines may be necessary. A bulk reverse vending machine is a reverse vending machine that is larger than 50 square feet, is designed to accept more than one container at a time; and will pay by weight instead of by container. 
    Room, Habitable. "Habitable room" means an enclosed subdivision in a building commonly used for sleeping, living, cooking or dining purposes, excluding closets, pantries, bath or toilet rooms, service rooms, connecting corridors, laundries, unfinished attics, foyers, storage space, cellars, utility rooms, and similar spaces. For purposes of applying parking space requirements: 
1.  If any of the above excluded rooms or spaces equals or exceeds 90 square feet of superficial floor area and is capable of being used for living or sleeping purposes, such room or space shall be considered a habitable room; or 
2.  If any room or space equals or exceeds 150 square feet of superficial floor area and is so designed to be capable of being used for both cooking and living, living and sleeping, or cooking and sleeping purposes, such room or space shall be considered as 2 habitable rooms, except in a bachelor or efficiency apartment. Superficial floor area shall be measured as clear floor space, exclusive of fixed or built-in cabinets or appliances. 
    "Rooming house and boarding house" means a lodging house, or other building or structure maintained, advertised or held out to the public as a place where sleeping or rooming accommodations are furnished to the whole, or any part of the public whether with or without meals. Rooming house includes fraternity and sorority houses. 
    "Safety" means and includes a water supply for fire protection which complies with the requirements of Ordinance No. 7834 entitled "water ordinance," adopted August 2, 1960. 
    "Scenic highway" means a highway within the state scenic highway system of the state of California. 
    "Scrap metal processing yard" means any establishment or place of business which is maintained, used or operated solely for the processing and preparing of scrap metals for remelting by steel mills and foundries. 
    "Second dwelling unit" means an additional dwelling unit on a lot or parcel which provides complete independent living facilities and may be rented. For the purposes of this title a granny house is considered a second dwelling unit. 
    "Section" means a section of this title unless some other ordinance or statute is mentioned. 
    "Senior citizens and handicapped persons housing development" means a multiple-family housing development maintained for the occupancy of the elderly in which not more than 10% of the occupants are under 62 years of age, or for handicapped persons whose disabilities seriously restrict operation of a motor vehicle. 
    "Senior mobilehome park" is a mobile home park in which at least 80% of the spaces are occupied by or intended for occupancy by at least one person who is 55 years of age or older, or in which 100% of the spaces are occupied or intended for occupancy by persons 62 years of age or older. 
    "Shadow plan" means a diagram of the total area likely to be shaded from the sun on December 21st by an object of given height and dimension. 
    "Shall" is mandatory. 
    "Shopping center" means a group of attached commercial buildings, with a common architectural theme, which is designed and intended to house retail commercial uses on a lot(s) or parcel(s) of land with a total net area of 2 acres or more which is planned, developed and managed as an operating unit including the provision of on-site common parking and access to serve each use and its customers. 
    "Sign" means any name, figure, character, outline, spectacle, display, delineation, announcement, advertising, billboard, signboard, device, appliance, or any other thing of similar nature to attract attention outdoors or on the face, wall or window of any building, and shall include all parts, portions, units and materials composing the same, together with the frame, background and support of anchorage therefor, as the case may be. Any sign authorized by this title is allowed to contain noncommercial copy in lieu of any other copy. 
    "Sign area" means the entire surface area, excluding all support structures, of a single-faced sign or the largest face of a sign having 2 or more faces. 

    Sign Area, Total. "Total sign area" means the sum of the surface areas, excluding all support structural faces of a sign. 

    Sign, Awning or Entrance Canopy. "Awning or entrance canopy sign" means any sign affixed to an awning or removable canopy not permanently attached to or built as part of a building. Such signs shall be considered the same as a projecting sign for purposes of regulation. 
    Sign, Building Identification. "Building identification sign" means a sign which contains no advertising matter other than the name and/or trademark and/or address of the building to which it is affixed or of the occupant located therein. 
    Sign, Bulletin or Special Event. "Bulletin or special event sign" means a changeable copy sign on which bulletins, notices, messages or displays are placed. 
    Sign, Business. "Business sign" means a sign directing attention to the principal business, profession or industry located upon the premises upon which the sign is displayed, to type of products sold, manufactured or assembled, or to services or entertainment offered on said premises. 
    Sign, Changeable Copy. "Changeable copy sign" means a sign which is characterized by manually changeable copy, letters, symbols or numerals. 
    Sign, Civic Organization. "Civic organization sign" means a sign which contains the names of, or any other information regarding civic, fraternal or religious organizations located within an unincorporated community or city but which contains no other advertising matter 
    Sign, Community Identification. "Community identification sign" means a sign which contains the name of an unincorporated community or city of the county and appropriate travel directions but which contains no other advertising matter. 
    Sign, Construction. "Construction sign" means temporary sign denoting the architects, engineers, owners, lenders, contractors, future tenants and others associated with a construction project, but which contains no other advertising matter. 
    Sign, Directional and/or Informational. "Directional and/or informational sign" means a sign which indicates the route to, direction of, or location of a given goal, or which provides regulatory or service information of a nonadvertising character. 
    "Sign face" means that portion of a sign intended to be viewed from one direction at one time. Spherical, cylindrical, or other 3-dimensional signs not having conventional sign faces shall be considered to have 2 faces and the area of each sign face shall be computed from the smallest 3-dimensional geometrical shape or shapes which will best approximate the actual surface area of said faces. 

    "Sign face height" means the vertical dimension of a sign face. 
    "Sign face length" means the horizontal dimension of a sign face. 
    Sign, Flashing or Scintillating. "Flashing or scintillating sign" means any sign which, by method or manner of illumination, flashes on or off, winks, or blinks with varying light intensity, shows motion or creates the illusion of motion, or revolves in a manner to create the illusion of being on or off. 
    Sign, Freestanding. "Freestanding sign" means a sign which is placed on the ground or has as its primary structural support one or more columns, poles, uprights or braces in or upon the ground. "Freestanding sign" includes ground, monument, pole and post signs. 
    Sign, Freeway-Oriented. "Freeway-oriented sign" means a sign oriented to be viewed primarily from an adjacent freeway which identifies a business engaged in the provision of food, lodging or motor vehicle fuel, and which is primarily dependent upon said freeway. 
    Sign, Fuel Pricing. "Fuel pricing sign" means a sign indicating, and limited to, the brand or trade name, method of sale, grade designation, and price per gallon of gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel offered for sale on the business premises; and such other information as may be required by county ordinance or state law. 
    Sign, Incidental Business. "Incidental business sign" means a business sign indicating credit cards accepted, trading stamps offered, trade affiliations and similar matters. 
    Sign, Lighted. "Lighted sign" means a sign which is illuminated by any source whether internal, external or indirect. 
    Sign, Marquee. "Marquee sign" means any sign painted on or affixed to the perimeter or border of a permanently roofed structure constructed as a part of a building and protruding over public or private sidewalks or rights-of-way. Such signs shall be considered wall signs for purposes of regulation. 
    Sign, Monument. "Monument sign" means a freestanding sign which does not exceed 12 feet in height and is supported by an enclosed structure which has at least the same length and width as the sign face it supports. 

    Sign, Outdoor Advertising. "Outdoor advertising sign" means any sign directing public attention to a business, profession, product or service that is not a primary business, profession, product or service which is sold, manufactured, conducted or offered on the premises where such sign is erected or maintained. "Outdoor advertising sign" includes billboard. 
    Sign, Pole. "Pole sign" means a freestanding sign which is supported entirely by unenclosed poles or uprights in or on the ground. (This definition shall not apply to outdoor advertising signs.) 

    Sign, Portable. "Portable sign" means a freestanding sign which is not permanently affixed, anchored or secured to either the ground or a structure on the premises it is intended to occupy. 
    Sign, Post. "Post sign" means a freestanding sign which is supported by not more than 2 enclosed poles or uprights in or on the ground, and the horizontal dimensions of such enclosure where it faces the same direction as the sign face is not less than 50% of the maximum length of the sign face. Where 2 enclosed poles or uprights are used the sum of the 2 equal horizontal dimensions of the enclosures is not less than 50% of the maximum length of the sign face. 

    Sign, Project Identification. "Project identification sign" means a sign which displays only the name of a multiple-family development or project and shall be only a wall sign or monument sign. 
    Sign, Projecting. "Projecting sign" means a sign which is affixed to and wholly supported by an exterior wall of a building or structure other than a wall sign. 
    Sign, Revolving. "Revolving sign" means a sign or any portion thereof which rotates, moves or appears to move in some manner by mechanical, electrical, natural or other means. 
    Sign, Roof. "Roof sign" means any sign erected upon and wholly supported by the roof of any building or structure. "Roof sign" shall not include a wall sign affixed to the roof eaves or that portion of an actual or false roof varying less than 45 degrees from a vertical plane as provided by this title. 
    Sign, Sidewalk. "Sidewalk sign" means a temporary, portable sign typically near or upon a sidewalk. 
    "Sign structure" means a structure existing, erected or maintained to serve exclusively as a stand, frame or background for the support or display of signs. 
    Sign, Subdivision Directional. "Subdivision directional sign" means a temporary single-faced sign used for the purpose of providing travel directions to a subdivision development offered for public sale for the first time. 
    Sign, Subdivision Entry. "Entry subdivision sign" means a temporary sign which provides necessary travel directions to and within a subdivision offered for sale or lease for the first time but contains no other advertising matter. 
    Sign, Subdivision Kiosk. "Subdivision kiosk sign" means a sign erected for the purpose of providing directional information in a uniform manner to new residential developments offered for sale for the first time to the public. Said sign may identify multiple developments and shall contain no advertising information other than the name of the development and a directional arrow. Subdivision kiosk signs may also contain directional information to public facilities. 
    Sign, Subdivision Sales. "Subdivision sales sign" means a temporary sign which contains the name of, and information relating to, a subdivision being offered for sale or lease for the first time. 
    Sign, Subdivision Special-Feature. "Subdivision special-feature sign" means a temporary sign which contains a description of the features and related information pertaining to a model home complex in a subdivision offered for sale or lease for the first time. 
    Sign, Temporary. "Temporary sign" means any sign which is intended to be posted for a maximum period of one year. Temporary signs include, without limitation as to content, political campaign signs, garage sale signs, search lights, real estate-for sale, lease, rent, or open house signs, holiday decorations, and seasonal sales signs. 
    Sign, Temporary Personal Message. "Temporary personal message sign" means a sign which is of a temporary nature and which displays only personal, as opposed to commercial, messages from the resident owner or occupant of the residential premises. Such messages may include, but are not limited to, birth announcements, greeting for a birthday or anniversary, and other messages of a personal nature. 
    Sign, Temporary Window. "Temporary window sign" means any sign painted on a window or constructed of paper, cloth, canvas or other similar lightweight material, with or without frames, and affixed to the interior side of a window and displayed so as to call to the attention of persons outside the building a sale of merchandise or a change in the status of the business. 
    Sign, Time, Temperature and Public Service. "Time, temperature and public service sign" means a sign which uses any system to display the time of day and/or atmospheric temperature, and which may have the means to display a programmable electronic public service message. Electronic messages of an advertising nature are not permitted on such signs. 
    Sign, Under-Marquee. "Under-marquee sign" means any sign suspended from the underside of a permanently roofed structure constructed as part of a building and protruding over public rights-of-way or private sidewalks. 
    Sign, Wall or Wall-Mounted. "Wall or wall-mounted sign" means a sign, other than a roof sign, affixed to and wholly supported by a building in such a manner that its exposed face is approximately parallel to the plane of said building and is not projecting more than 18 inches from the building face or from a permanent roofed structure projecting therefrom. 

    Sign, Window. "Window sign" means any sign which is painted on or otherwise permanently affixed to the display window glass or located inside the building within 3 feet of the display window glass. 
    "Single-family attached residence" means a building, containing only one kitchen, designed or used to house not more than one dwelling unit, which shares a common wall or walls with another dwelling unit or units of the same type, and which is located on a separate lot from the unit or units with which it shares a common wall or walls. No such dwelling unit may occupy any space over or above another dwelling unit. 
    "Single-family detached residence" means a building containing only one kitchen, designed or used to house not more than one dwelling unit, not attached to or sharing a common wall with any other dwelling. 
    "Slope" means the degree of deviation of surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent or degrees. 

Slope Percentage = rise / run = (x) feet run to one foot rise 
    "Sludge" means the accumulated matter, whether mechanically treated, irradiated, digested, stabilized, composted, or untreated, produced in the treatment of wastewater. This includes liquid, semi-liquid, and solid material that has been mechanically dewatered or air dried. 
    "Solar energy system" means either of the following depending upon the context of the ordinance: 
1.  Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage and distribution of solar energy lot space heating or cooling, or for water heating, or generation of electricity; or 
2.  Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage and distribution of solar energy for space heating or cooling, or for water heating. 
    "Solid fill" means any noncombustible materials, insoluble in water, such as soil, rock, sand or gravel, that can be used for grading land or filling depressions. 
    "Solid fill project" means any operation on a parcel of land where more than 1,000 cubic yards of solid fill materials are deposited for any purpose including the grading or reclaiming of land. 
    Special Use Permit. Whenever this title, or any case granted thereunder, refer to a "special permit" or a "special use permit" it shall be construed to mean a conditional use permit. 
    Stable, Boarding. "Stable, boarding" means a stable for the boarding of horses, mules or ponies for compensation. 
    Stable, Commercial. "Stable, commercial" means a stable which offers horses, mules or ponies for hire. Such stables may also offer training for such animals and/or riding instruction. Commercial stables may also board such animals for compensation. 
    "Stand" means a structure for the display and sale of products with no space for customers within the structure itself. 
    "Station" means the stopping place in a transportation system designed or intended to be used for the receiving or discharging of passengers and cargo, but shall not provide for the storage of the conveyance vehicle and shall not include any appurtenant facilities other than a shelter and ticketing facilities for passengers. Stations include train stations, bus stations, and similar transit stations. 
    "Stealth communication facilities" means wireless telecommunication facilities that may be over the height limit in the zone in which they are located, but are designed or camouflaged to blend into the surrounding background environment or be enclosed into the structure upon which they are mounted. Stealth facilities would not be recognizable as a wireless telecommunication device. Examples include wireless telecommunication facilities constructed within church steeples or towers, camouflaged by vegetation, or designed into the construction of other architectural building features. 
    "Story" is that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the roof above. Story includes a basement but not a cellar. 
    Street. See Section 16.04.060 of this code for definitions of the various types of streets. 
    "Structure" means anything construed or erected, which requires a fixed location on the ground, or is attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. 
    "Subdivision development" means a subdivision located wholly or partially within the city, a final map of which has been recorded prior to the date on which an application for a subdivision directional sign pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.40.220C has been filed. 
    "Subdivision directional sign base" means the base structure upon which subdivision directional signs are placed. 
    "Subdivision ordinance" means the subdivision ordinance of the city, codified as Title 16 of this code. 
    "Supportive housing," as defined in Health and Safety Code 50675.14(b), means housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population as defined in subdivision (d) of section 53260, and that is linked to on- or off-site services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. 
    "Target population" means adults with low-income having one or more disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other chronic health conditions, or individuals eligible for services provided under the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act (division 4.5 (commencing with section 4500) of the welfare and institutions code) and may, among other populations, include families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system, individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans, or homeless people. 
    "Telephone repeater station" means a building used for housing amplifying equipment along aerial or underground telephone cable routes. 
    "Terminal" means any facility designed or intended to be used for the receiving or discharging of passengers or cargo and providing for the temporary or permanent storage of the conveyance vehicle. Terminals include train terminals, airports, bus terminals, freight terminals, harbor terminals, or any combination of the above commonly referred to as multipurpose terminals. 
    "Theater" means an enclosed building used for public assembly and/or entertainment including sports events, theatrical performances, concerts and recitals, circuses, stock shows and conventions. "Theater" includes auditorium. 
    "Tower height" means the height of the actual tower plus one-half the rotor diameter on horizontal axis installations, and the distance from the base of the tower to the top of the unit on vertical axis installations. 
    "Transitional housing," as defined in Health and Safety Code 50675.2(h), means buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six months. 
    "Travel trailer" means a vehicle other than a motor vehicle which is designed for human habitation and which may be moved upon a public highway without a special permit or chauffeur's license. 
    "Travel trailer park" means any area or tract of land or a separate designated section within a mobilehome park where one or more lots are rented or leased or held out for rent or lease to owners or users of recreational vehicles used for travel or recreational purposes. 
    "Use" means and includes construction, establishment, maintenance, alteration, moving onto, enlargement and occupation. Wherever this title prohibits the use of any premises for any purposes, such premises and any building, structure or improvement on such premises shall not be used, occupied, altered or improved for such purpose, and no building, structure or improvement on such premises shall be erected, constructed, established, maintained, allowed to remain, altered, moved onto, or enlarged which is designed, arranged or intended to be occupied or used for such purpose. 
    Veterinary Clinic, Small Animal. "Small animal veterinary clinic" means any facility providing medical or surgical treatment, clipping, bathing and similar services to dogs, cats and other small animals, but excluding boarding or the keeping of animals on the premises other than those requiring emergency treatment or those recovering from anesthetic. 
    "Video game arcade" means any use where five or more coin-operated games of skill are kept and maintained for public use. 
    "Waste disposal facility" means any dump, transfer station, land reclamation project, incinerator except household incinerators and wood refuse to be burned in a suitable furnace, or other similar site or facility which is used or intended to be used for the transfer, salvage or disposal of rubbish, garbage or industrial waste. Waste disposal facilities do not stockpile, commercially compost, process, or handle sludge or biosolid materials. 
    "Wild animal" means any wild, exotic, dangerous or nondomestic animal, including but not limited to mammals, fowl, fish or reptiles. 
    "Wind energy conversion system" means a mechanism which is designed to utilize the natural movement of air as a means of generating electricity. The following terminology as it pertains to wind energy conversion systems is listed below: 
    "AWEA" means American Wind Energy Association. 
    "FAA" means Federal Aviation Administration. 
    "Guy wires" means wires or cables used in tension to support a tower. 
    "Non-commercial wind energy system ("NC-WES")" means a small wind energy system suitable for Rural Residential Zone (RR-1 and RR-2.5 only) meeting the requirements of Section 17.08.337, consisting of a wind turbine, tower, blades, associated controls and conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity that does not exceed the allowable rated capacity under the Emerging Renewables Fund of the Renewables Investment Plan administered by the California Energy Commission and which will be used primarily to reduce on-site consumption of utility power by converting mechanical energy into electricity. 
    "Tower" means the portion of the NC-WES upon which the wind turbine is mounted. 
    "Tower height" means the height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower measured from the ground to the top of the tower, excluding the wind turbine, blades and wind-measuring devices. 
    "USGS" means the United States Geological Survey. 
    "Vertical axis wind turbine (VAWTS)" means a small scale, non-commercial vertical axis wind turbine system, designed with a vertical axis, suitable for residential zones consisting of a wind turbine, tower, blades, associated controls and conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity that does not exceed the allowable rated capacity under the Emerging Renewables Fund of the Renewables Investment Plan administered by the California Energy Commission and which will be used primarily to reduce on-site consumption of utility power by converting mechanical energy into electricity. 
    "Wind turbine" means a non-commercial small wind turbine consisting of a wind turbine generator and rotors, which has a rated capacity of not more than one hundred (100) kilowatts (kW) and which converts kinetic energy in wind into mechanical energy. 
    "Wireless telecommunications facility" means a land use facility supporting antennas whips, panels or microwave dishes that send or receive radio frequency signals. Wireless telecommunication facilities include the structures or towers and related equipment buildings or cabinetry supporting the facility and can be manned or unmanned. Wireless telecommunications do not include noncommercial communication facilities such as licensed amateur radio stations and standard radio and television receive-only antennas. 
    "Writing" means and includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this title, it shall be made in writing in the English language unless it is expressly provided otherwise. 
    "Yard" means an open space on the same lot or parcel of land, other than a court, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise permitted by this title. 
    Yard, Front. "Front yard" means a yard extending across the full width of the lot or parcel of land. The depth of a required front yard shall be a specified horizontal distance between the highway line of any arterial or other street on which the property fronts, and a line parallel thereto on the lot or parcel of land, except as otherwise provided for a flag lot in Section 17.08.170A. On corner lots the front yard shall be located across the narrower frontage of the lot. A yard shall not be deemed a front yard if there is no right of access of any kind, pedestrian or vehicular, from the adjoining arterial or other street. 
    Yard, Rear. "Rear yard" means a yard extending across the full width of the lot or parcel of land. The depth of the required rear yard shall be a specified horizontal distance between the rear lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot or parcel of land. 
    Yard, Side, Corner. "Corner side yard" means a yard bounded by an arterial or other street, extending from the required front yard, or the highway line on which the property fronts where no front yard is required, to the required rear yard or to the rear lot line where no rear yard is required. The width of such required side yard shall be a specified horizontal distance between the highway line of the arterial or other street on which the property sides, and a line parallel thereto on the lot or parcel of land. 
    Yard, Side, Interior. "Interior side yard" means a yard extending from the required front yard, or the highway line on which the property fronts where no front yard is required, to the required rear yard or to the rear lot line where no rear yard is required on other than a corner side yard. The width of a required interior side yard shall be a specified horizontal distance between each such side lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot or parcel of land. 
    Yard, Street Side. "Street side yard" means the same as corner side yard. 
(Ord. 900 § 1, 2008; Ord. 896 § 1 (Exh. A §§ 1, 2), 2008; Ord. 862 § 1, 2006; Ord. 849 § 1 (Exh. A § 1), 2005; Ord. 758 § 1 (Exh. A § 1 (part)), 1999; Ord. 753 § 1 (Exh. A § 1 (part)), 1999; Ord. 713 § 1, 1995; Ord. 711 § 3, 1995; Ord. 681 §§ 1, 2, 1995; Ord. 663 § 1, 1994; Ord. 661 § 3, 1994; Ord. 651 § 3, 1993; prior zoning ord. §§ 120-120.25) 
(Ord. No. 921, § 1, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 954, § 1, 12-14-2010; Ord. No. 989, §§ 2-5, 7, 4-9-2013) 
Chapter 17.08 - RESIDENTIAL ZONES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 989, § 1, adopted April 9, 2013, repealed ch. 17.08, §§ 17.08.010-17.08.400 and added a new ch. 17.08, §§ 17.08.010-17.08.500. Former ch. 17.08 pertained to similar materials and was derived from Prior zoning ord. §§ 200.000, 201.010-201.021, 201.023-201.025, 201.027, 201.040, 201.050, 201.060-201.062, 201.070-201.075, 201.080, 201.083, 201.085, 201.086, 201.088, 202.010, 202.015, 202.020, 202.021, 202.024, 202.025, 202.050, 202.052, 202.053, 202.070, 211.000-211.130, 2.12.000-2.12.140, 212.200-212.230, 213.100-213.130, 213.500-213.585, 214.200, 214.300; Ord. 651 §§ 4 (part), 5, adopted 1993; Ord. 658, § 1, adopted 1994; Ord. 663 § 2, adopted 1994; Ord. 681 § 3, adopted 1995; Ord. 711 §§ 4-13, 18 (part), 19(A), 30 (part), 31, 43 (part), adopted 1995; Ord. 713 §§ 2, 4, 1995; Ord. 752 § 1, adopted 1999; Ord. 758 § 1 (Exh. A §§ 2, 3), adopted 1999; Ord. 812 § 2, adopted 2003; Ord. 815, (Exh. A), adopted 2003; Ord. 816, (Exh. A (part)), adopted 2003; Ord. 837, § 1 (Exh. A (part)), adopted 2004; Ord. 854, § 1 (Exh. A), adopted 2006; Ord. 879 § 1 (part), adopted 2007; Ord. 896, § 1 (Exh. A §§ 3, 4), adopted 2008; Ord. 900 §§ 2-6, adopted 2008; Ord. No. 907, § 4, adopted October 28, 2008; Ord. No. 921, §§ 2-4, June 9, 2009; Ord. No. 924, § 1, August 25, 2009; Ord. No. 933, §§ 1-3, adopted October 13, 2009; Ord. No. 941, § 3, adopted February 9, 2010; Ord. No. 954, §§ 2-6, December 14, 2010; Ord. No. 956, §§ 1, 2, January 11, 2011; Ord. No. 964, § 1, adopted May 24, 2011; Ord. No. 971, §§ 4-6, adopted October 25, 2011. 

17.08.185 - Grazing. 
Article I. - In General 

17.08.010 - In general. 
    As used in this title, "residential zones" mean the RR, R, MHP, MDR and HDR zones. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
Article II. - Non-urban, Urban, Medium and High Density Residential Zones 

17.08.020 - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of the residential zones are to implement the city's general plan, and land use designations as set forth in the text of the general plan and as delineated on the general plan map. The adopted general plan specifies goals, objectives, policies, and specific actions with regard to residential uses and development. 
    It shall not be the intent of this title to render previously legally created building lots or legally constructed buildings which do not comply with the property development regulations of this title to be nonconforming where these lots or buildings complied with the ordinances in effect at the time of their creation or construction. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.030 - Purposes of the Residential zones. 
A.  Non-urban residential or RR zones. These zones are intended to provide for single-family dwellings in a non-urban environment with minimal urban services. The primary difference between the zones is the minimum lot size. Only those additional uses that are complementary to and exist in harmony with a rural residential neighborhood are allowed. 
1.  The RR-2.5 (rural residential) zone implements the "non-urban residential, rural residential" designation. This zone is intended for rural single-family residential use, allowing one dwelling unit per minimum net area of one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet; 
2.  The RR-1 (rural residential) zone implements the "non-urban residential, low density" designation. This zone is intended for low density single-family residential use, allowing one dwelling unit per minimum net area of forty thousand (40,000) square feet; and 
3.  The SRR (semi-rural residential) zone implements the "non-urban residential, transitional density" designation. This zone is intended for transitional density between the rural and urban land uses, allowing one dwelling unit per minimum net area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
B.  Urban residential or R zones. These zones are intended to provide for single-family dwellings in an urban environment with full urban services. Only those additional uses that are complementary to and exist in harmony with an urban residential neighborhood are allowed. 
1.  The R-15,000 zone implements the "urban residential, transitional density" land use designation. This zone is intended for single-family dwellings, allowing one dwelling unit per minimum net area of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet; 
2.  The R-10,000 zone implements the "urban residential, transitional density" land use designation. This zone is intended for single-family dwellings, allowing one dwelling unit per minimum net area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet; and 
3.  The R-7,000 zone implements the "urban residential, low density" land use designation. This zone is intended for single-family dwellings, allowing one dwelling unit per minimum net area of seven thousand (7,000) square feet. 
C.  Medium and high density residential zones. These zones are intended to provide for medium to high density multiple-family dwellings in an urban environment with full urban services. Only those additional uses that are complementary to and exist in harmony with such residential developments are allowed. 
1.  The MDR zone implements the "medium density residential" land use designation. This zone includes lower intensity residential dwelling units, with a density range of 6.6 to fifteen (15) dwelling units per acre; and 
2.  The HDR zone implements the "high density residential" land use designation. This zone includes higher density residential dwelling units, with a density range of 15.1 to thirty (30) dwelling units per acre. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.040 - Applicability of standards. 
    A person shall not use any premises in the residential zones, except as hereafter permitted in this title and subject to all regulations and conditions enumerated in this title. Development and new land uses proposed within the residential zones shall comply with the standards in this section for the applicable zones, as follows: 
A.  Use. Only the land uses allowed by section 17.08.050 shall be established in the applicable zone. In the instance when an applicant proposes a use that is not specifically listed in section 17.08.050, the planning director shall make a determination on whether it is allowed or not, based on the finding that the proposed use would complement and be able to exist in harmony with other permitted uses in the same zone. 
B.  Site specifications and building placement. Each proposed structure shall comply with the build-to line, setback, and buildable area requirements in section 17.08.060 as required for the applicable zone, as well as the design requirements listed in 17.08.070. 
C.  Building size and massing. Each proposed structure shall adhere to size, massing, and height standards established by section 17.08.060 for the applicable zone, as well as the design requirements listed in section 17.08.070. 
D.  Parking. On-site parking shall be provided, located, and designed in compliance with section 17.08.060 for the applicable zone. 
E.  Development and building types. All developments shall substantially resemble one of the development and building types listed in section 17.08.060, or feature primary characteristics of the development and building types. 
F.  Other design requirements. All other requirements listed in section 17.08.060, section 17.08.070, and all applicable guidelines in the city design guidelines shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.050 - Uses and permit requirements. 
Residential Zones - Uses Matrix USES 
P = permitted use / D = director's review 
C = conditional use / N/A = not allowed ZONES RR-2.5 
RR-1 
SRR R-15,000 
R-10,000 
R-7,000 MDR 
HDR A. Uses. Single-family house on individual lot P P N/A Multi-family: 2 or 3 units N/A N/A D Multi-family: 4 or more units N/A N/A P Duplex on single-family corner lot in a new subdivision (minimum dimensions of 100' by 100') N/A P N/A Residential planned development (RPD) C C C Assisted living facility/residential care facility N/A C 1 P Congregate living health facility (up to 6 beds) D D N/A Supportive and transitional housing (group homes) P P P Mobilehome on individual lot P P N/A Mobilehome parks Permitted in MHP zone only B. Accessory uses. Accessory structures/buildings (gazebos, sheds, etc.) P P P Swimming pools and pool equipment P P P Accessory dwelling unit D D N/A Guest house P P N/A Garage conversion P P N/A 2 Small family daycare (up to 7 children) P P N/A 2 Large family daycare (8 to 14 children) D D N/A 2 Home occupation/home office P P P Electric vehicle charging station (EVCS) P P P Non-commercial solar energy systems, including building and ground-mounted photo-voltaic (PV) panels P P P Non-commercial wind energy systems (NC-WES) D D D Vertical-axis wind turbines (VAWTs) D D D Cargo containers 3 P N/A N/A Light agricultural uses 3 P N/A N/A Carnivals 6 D D D C. Temporary uses. Temporary mobilehome as residence during construction D D N/A Real estate sales office in conjunction with new subdivision D D D Model homes in conjunction with new subdivision D D D Cargo containers P P N/A D. Other uses. Adult daycare or day health care C C P Animal boarding and training; kennels 4 C N/A N/A Animal hospital 4 C N/A N/A Arboretums and horticultural gardens C N/A N/A Churches C C C Colleges and universities C C C Commercial crop production P N/A N/A Commercial solar electrical generation facilities 4 C N/A N/A Community gardens D D D Daycare center C C C Electric distribution substations C C C Equestrian center; commercial or boarding stables 3 C N/A N/A Expansion of parking lot for institutional uses D D D Feed stores and related accessory uses 3 C N/A N/A Gas metering and control stations C C C Golf courses and driving ranges, and accessory facilities C C C Land reclamation projects 4 C N/A N/A Neighborhood wellness home D D D Parking lots as a transitional use D D D Radio and television stations and towers 3 C N/A N/A Retail nurseries 3 C N/A N/A Rooming and boarding houses N/A N/A C Schools, not including trade or commercial schools C C C Single-room occupancy (SRO) N/A N/A D Water reservoirs, pumping stations, tanks, wells, etc. P P P Wireless telecommunication facilities (stealth) 5 D D D Wineries (minimum 10 gross acre lot) C N/A N/A  
Notes: 
1 R-7,000 and R,10-000 zones only 
2 For existing single family homes in MDR and HDR zones, use and permit requirements consistent with urban residential single family zones would apply 
3 RR-1 and RR-2.5 zones only 
4 RR-2.5 zones only 
5 In conjunction with a non-residential use, such as a church, school, etc. 
6 Subject to the provisions of Chapter 9.46. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013; Ord. No. 999, § 3, 8-26-2014) 
17.08.060 - Development regulations by building types. 
A.  Single-family house on Rural Residential lot. A single-family house on a rural residential lot is a residence for one household, with its primary entrance accessed through the front yard, on a lot ranging from 20,000 to 100,000 square feet or greater. 
1.  Development standards. 
Rural Residential Development Standards ZONES RR-2.5 RR-1 SRR SITE SPECIFICATIONS Minimum lot size (sq. ft.). 100,000 40,000 20,000 Minimum width (feet). 165 110 85 Minimum depth (feet). 250 130 120 BUILDING PLACEMENT Front yard (feet). 40 30 30 Garage location. All garages shall be located at or behind the wall plane where the front entrance is located. Rear yard (feet). 30 25 20 Interior side yard: minimum (feet). 20 15 10 Interior side yard: total sum of two yards (feet). 40 30 25 Street side yard (feet). 40 30 20 BUILDING SIZE AND MASSING Lot coverage (percentage). 30% 40% 40% Building height (feet). 40 40 35 PARKING Number of parking spaces. 2 spaces within an enclosed garage per Section 17.08.100  
Diagram for Single-family house on Rural Residential lot - perspective view

Diagram for Single-family house on Rural Residential lot - site plan view

B.  Single-family house on Residential lot. 
1.  Development standards. 
Development Standards ZONES/LOT TYPE R-15,000 R-10,000 R-7,000 Infill R-7,000 (with RPD) Infill R-7,000 (alley access, with RPD) SFR corner duplex SITE SPECIFICATIONS Minimum lot size (sq. ft.). 15,000 10,000 7,000 5,000 3,500 10,000 Minimum width (ft.). 85 70 60 50 40 100 Min. width - corner lot (ft.). 100 85 75 60 50 Minimum depth (ft.). 120 100 100 85 75 100 BUILDING PLACEMENT Front plane build-to line (ft.). 20-32 16-28 14-26 12-20 10-18 16-28 Required minimum porch size (feet x feet). 6 x 12 6 x 12 6 x 12 6 x 10 6 x 8 6 x 12 To the satisfaction of the Planning Director, an alternative frontage feature may be proposed in lieu of a porch if it achieves the same design intent and variation. Porch encroachment. Up to additional 6' beyond front plane build-to line Garage location. All garages shall be located at or behind the wall plane where the front entrance is located. A homebuilder with a subdivision with at least four floor plans may have one floor plan that has a garage located in front of the front entrance plane. Rear yard (ft.). 20 20 15 12 0 N/A Interior side yard: min. (ft.). 5 5 5 5 0 10 Interior side yard: sum of two yards (ft.). 20 15 15 10 10 N/A Street side yard (ft.). 15 15 10 10 10 N/A BUILDING SIZE AND MASSING Lot coverage (percentage). 40% 40% 50% 55% 60% 45% Building height (ft.). 35 35 35 35 35 35 PARKING Number of parking spaces. 2 spaces within an enclosed garage (Section 17.08.100)  
a.  A tandem garage parking arrangement may be considered if the applicant cannot meet the requirement to place a two-car garage behind the plane of the house. 
b.  Corner lots featuring side yard driveway access require a minimum 20-foot driveway and street side yard setback. 
Diagram for Single-family house on Residential lot - perspective view

Diagram for Single-family house on Residential lot - site plan view

Diagram for Single-family house on Infill Residential lot - perspective view

Diagram for Single-family house on Infill Residential lot - site plan view

Diagram for Duplex on Corner Residential Lot - perspective view

Diagram for Duplex on a Corner Residential lot - site plan view

C.  Small apartment/condominium building/complex (two to fifteen (15) units). 
1.  Development standards. 
Development standards MDR or HDR ZONE SITE SPECIFICATIONS Minimum lot size (sq. ft.) 6,000 Minimum width (feet). 60 Minimum width - corner lot (feet). 80 Minimum depth (feet). 100 BUILDING PLACEMENT Front build-to line. Fronting local, collector, or other residential street with on-street parking (feet). Transitional infill design guidelines apply (Section 17.08.070.D). 0-12 Fronting local, collector, or other residential street with on-street parking and adjacent to single-family uses along the same street (feet). 8-20 Fronting arterial street with no on-street parking (feet). 20-32 Rear yard (feet). 15 Interior side yard (feet). 10 Street side yard (feet). 15 BUILDING SIZE AND MASSING Lot coverage (percentage). 50% Building height within 100 feet of SFR zone (feet). 35 Maximum building height (feet). 55 PARKING Location of on-site parking. Behind the front façade of the residential building Number of parking spaces. Per Section 17.08.100 OPEN SPACE Required usable open space/recreation area. Minimum 8% of lot area, minimum 20' width and depth LANDSCAPING Required landscaping (percentage). Minimum 15% of lot area SOLAR PROVISION Minimum photo-voltaic kW per unit per Section 17.08.305. 0.5 kW  
a.  On-site management shall be provide for apartments four units or greater. 
b.  A minimum four feet by four feet covered entryway shall be provided for each apartment or condominium unit. The entryway may be enlarged and designed as a porch. 
c.  Required amenities for units in a small apartment include in-unit laundry hook-ups. 
d.  Required amenities for units in a small condominium, beyond those required for apartments, include garage parking with storage shelves for each unit, and a minimum four feet by eight feet porch, patio, or balcony area. 
e.  Other site amenities may include a barbeque area, pool, recreation courts, and shall be centrally located and easily accessible for residents. 
Diagram for small apartment - perspective view

Diagram for small apartment - site plan view

D.  Large apartment/condominium building/complex (sixteen (16) or more units). 
1.  Development standards. 
Development standards MDR or HDR ZONE SITE SPECIFICATIONS Minimum lot size (sq. ft.) 6,000 Minimum width (feet). 60 Min. width - corner lot (feet). 75 Minimum depth (feet). 100 BUILDING PLACEMENT Front build-to line. Fronting local, collector, or other residential street with on-street parking (feet). Transitional infill design guidelines apply (Section 17.08.070.D). 0-12 Fronting local, collector, or other residential street with on-street parking and adjacent to single-family uses along the same street (feet). 8-20 Fronting arterial street (feet). 20-32 Rear yard (feet). 15 Interior side yard (feet). 15 Street side yard (feet). 20 BUILDING SIZE AND MASSING Lot coverage (percentage). 50% Building height within 100 feet of SFR zone (feet). 35 Maximum building height (feet). 72 PARKING Location of on-site parking. 40 ft. from front property line Number of parking spaces. Per Section 17.08.100 OPEN SPACE Required usable open space/recreation area. Minimum 8% of lot area, minimum 50' width and depth LANDSCAPING Required landscaping (percentage). Minimum 15% of lot area SOLAR PROVISION Minimum photo-voltaic kW per unit per Section 17.08.305. 0.5 kW  
a.  On-site management and security shall be provided for all large apartment complexes. Specific security provisions may include cameras, alarms, or active security guard surveillance, to the satisfaction of the planning director. 
b.  Required amenities for units in a large apartment include in-unit laundry hook-ups, and community pool and recreation room. 
c.  Required amenities for units in a large condominium, beyond those required for apartments, include garage parking with storage shelves for each unit, and a minimum four feet by eight feet porch, patio, or balcony area. 
d.  Other amenities for units in a large multi-family complex may include courts for basketball, tennis or other sports, indoor gym, outdoor dog park, or daycare center. 
e.  All amenities shall be centrally located and easily accessible for residents. 
Diagram for large apartment - perspective view

Diagram for large apartment - site plan view

(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013; Ord. No. 1020, § 4, 2-14-2017) 
17.08.070 - Design and performance measures. 
    Developers shall take the following actions in meeting specific design and performance measures in residential zones: 
A.  Site design. Develop projects that enhance the sense of place and reflect a commitment to functional efficiency, quality, and neighborhood context. 
1.  Develop innovative designs for new subdivisions that feature pedestrian connections, open spaces, enhanced landscaping, architecture, and streetscapes. 
2.  Develop innovative designs for residential lot layouts, including wide corner lots, varied setbacks, and minimized visual presence of garages. 
3.  Design neighborhoods to have distinct entryway features that help define neighborhood character and provide a sense of arrival. 
4.  Design neighborhoods using "safe by design" techniques to reduce opportunities for criminal activity. 
B.  Pedestrian connections and amenities. Develop residential neighborhoods with safe and attractive pedestrian and bicycle connections to trails, parks, schools, public transit, and other daily uses. 
1.  Design neighborhoods with street patterns that minimize the walking distance between residential homes and neighborhoods amenities, such as trails, parks and schools. 
2.  Design open-ended cul de sacs with paseos for pedestrian and bicycle access. 
3.  Design pedestrian and bicycle paths separated from vehicular paths, to ensure safety and ease of use. 
4.  Where appropriate, use traffic calming measures to reduce automobile speed within residential developments, including corner bulbouts, tree plantings, enhanced paving at crosswalks, and round-a-bouts. 
C.  Building architecture and form. Provide enhanced elevations for residential structures that contribute to an attractive neighborhood streetscape. 
1.  Articulate building façades by including variation in massing, roof form, and wall planes. 
2.  Use multiple colors, materials, textures, and applied finishes to help break up wall massing. 
3.  Provide distinctive entries, porches, balconies, and window treatment, oriented toward the street. 
4.  Residential buildings shall use high-quality, tile roofing (concrete, ceramic, etc.), providing aesthetic value and appropriate for withstanding the city's varied climate conditions; asphalt shingle or other roofing material of a similar quality are prohibited. 
5.  Garage door shall provide aesthetic value to the home. Roll-up garage door types are permitted, whereas wooden, swing-out garage doors are prohibited. 
6.  Builders of new single-family residential subdivisions shall ensure architectural variation by providing a minimum of the following combinations, dependent on the proposed number of residential units in the development: 
Proposed number of residential units Minimum number of elevations Minimum number of floor plans Less than 20 units 3 3 20 to 50 units 3 4 50 to 100 units 4 5 100 units or greater 5 5  
In no instance should two homes of the same model and floor plan be built adjacent to each other or across the street from each other. 
D.  Transitions and buffering. Encourage transitions between proposed higher intensity developments and adjacent, less intensive uses to keep disturbance to a minimum. 
1.  Step down the heights of structures at the edge of developments to match or complement those in adjacent properties. 
2.  Enhance buffers with additional width or increased landscaping. Plant trees and shrubs in voids created by wall variations, at an appropriate scale. 
3.  Vary building setbacks and wall alignments to soften the edge of the development. 
4.  Provide a clear distinction between public and private spaces, through the use of height separation, fencing, berm, or a combination of these elements. 
5.  Offset windows from one another between residential units. 
E.  Open space and common areas. Provide open space and common areas to enhance quality of life, and to encourage opportunities for social gathering and interaction. 
1.  For single-family residential developments, create centralized pocket parks, connected by trails and pedestrian paths, to serve the neighborhood. 
2.  For multi-family residential developments, provide centralized open space and community facilities, to serve residents of the development. 
3.  Create recognizable focal points by using community amenities in public open spaces and other commonly used community spaces. 
F.  Parking and access. Minimize the dominant appearances of parking areas and structures, while ensuring functional vehicular access. 
1.  For multi-family residential developments, locate parking behind residential structures. For developments facing arterial streets, a builder may design a wide, enhanced landscape buffer between the street and parking areas, in circumstances where it is difficult to achieve rear parking placement. Wherever possible, design parking lots by dividing a large parking lot into a series of smaller, connected lots. 
2.  Decorate and define parking areas with plants, shrubs, trees, light fixtures, and textured paving to minimize the negative impact of large expanses of asphalt. 
3.  Provide defined pedestrian pathways between parking areas and residential building entrances. 
4.  Permanent parking for recreation vehicles (RVs), boats and other similar large items shall be located behind the front plane of the house. 
5.  In no instance shall flat, paved surfaces, including driveways, cover more than fifty (50) percent of a single-family front yard. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.080 - Infill residential development. 
A.  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to implement the city general plan 2030, policy 18.2.1, which encourages appropriate infill development, and specific action 18.2.1(c). Under the guidance of the specific action, a developer may build up to eight residential units per net acre on land zoned R-7,000, provided the developer submits an application for a residential planned development, as well as findings that the proposed infill development would integrate with the surrounding area. 
B.  Qualification criteria for infill residential development. Properties zoned R-7,000 and meeting one of the following criteria qualify for infill residential development of up to eight units per acre: 
1.  The project site is located within the area bounded by Avenue I, 20th Street East, Avenue L and 30th Street West; or 
2.  The project site is surrounded by existing development (fully improved with paving, landscaping, curb and gutter, etc.) on all adjoining sides; or 
3.  The project site is located adjacent to property zoned commercial, office professional, mixed use or light industrial development; or 
4.  The project site combines four or more adjoining parcels, combining for a minimum project size of five acres. 
C.  Findings for infill residential development. Among other findings necessary for a residential planned development (RPD), as listed in section 17.08.340, the following findings shall be made when recommending approval for a infill residential development: 
1.  The project reduces overall land use fragmentation in the city. 
2.  The project uses existing infrastructure and minimizes extension of new services and resources. 
3.  The project is compatible with adjacent land uses and would not adversely affect the health, peace, comfort or welfare of persons residing or working at the adjacent properties. 
D.  Infill residential development standards. In addition to all other applicable development standards listed in this chapter, infill residential single-family lots shall adhere to the following additional standards specific for small-lot single-family homes: 
1.  Site design. 
a.  Maximize usability of property by minimizing "dead spaces," which can often be found in narrow side yards with limited access. 
b.  Create privacy by designing windows that minimizes view into an adjacent residential home. Also, design windows of a façade along a zero-lot line facing a neighboring side yard to be small, with a high sill height, typically six feet above the finished floor, or provide windows with translucent glazing. 
c.  For alley-access small-lot single-family parcels, the developer shall provide a four-foot-wide pedestrian pathway to connect the building entrance to the street sidewalk. 
2.  Building design. 
a.  A proposed small-lot subdivision must have homes that are distinguished from one another, following the minimum number of model and floor plan combinations as listed in subsection 17.08.070.C.5. 
b.  Blank, flat wall planes are prohibited. Varied and articulated façades that create visually appealing elevations are required. 
c.  Provide at least two different rooflines to provide visual interest to the residential structure. 
d.  Roof-mounted equipment is not allowed, with the exception of solar and wind generation systems. Photo-voltaic panels facing the street shall be designed integrated with the house rooftop. 
3.  Transitions and buffering. 
a.  In infill situations, new buildings shall be located in a manner that complements the location of existing buildings on adjacent lots; and not in a manner that would diminish their appearance or that would create a streetscape with dramatically uneven building setbacks. 
b.  All residential buildings, including detached garages, shall maintain a minimum five-foot separation distance from any other structure to ensure adequate clearance area around the structures. 
c.  Adjacent homes shall not vary more than one-story in height. 
4.  Patios, private yards, open space and common areas. 
a.  Each small-lot single-family home shall have a porch area with minimum dimensions as listed in subsection 17.08.060.C. 
b.  Each small-lot single-family parcel shall provide a minimum of four hundred (400) square feet of usable private yard space with no dimensions less than twelve (12) feet. 
c.  The City may grant a reduction of usable private yard space to two hundred (200) square feet, with no dimensions less than twelve (12) feet, if the developer provides common open space or park elsewhere in the neighborhood that is no further than 1/4 mile from the residence, or if there is an existing park within the same distance. 
5.  Parking and access. 
a.  For alley-access small-lot single-family parcels, a garage entrance facing an alley shall ensure a minimum of twenty-six (26) feet from the opposite edge of the alley, for adequate vehicle backup space. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.090 - Density bonus. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the density bonus ordinance is to provide incentives for the production of affordable housing, senior housing, and the development of child care facilities, in the city's residential zones, as directed by general plan 2030, and as mandated by the state government code, section 65915. In the event that any provision in this section conflicts with state law, the state law shall take precedence. 
B.  Definitions. The following terms used in the section shall be defined as follows: 
    "Affordable housing/affordable housing unit." A housing unit which is available for sale to moderate income households or for rent to low and/or very low income households, as those terms are defined in this section. 
    "Affordable rent." Monthly rent charged to low and very low income households for housing units as calculated in accordance with section 50053 of the state health and safety code. 
    "Child day care facility." A facility that provides non-medical care and supervision of minor children for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours and is licensed by the state department of social services, further subject to the definition in the state government code section 65915(h)(4). 
    "Density bonus." A density increase for residential units over the otherwise allowed residential density under the applicable zoning and land use designation on the date an application is deemed complete. 
    "Density bonus housing agreement." A legally binding agreement between a developer and the city to ensure that continued affordability of the affordable housing units required in this chapter persists and the units are maintained in accordance with this section. 
    "Density bonus units." Those additional residential units granted pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
    "Housing development." A development project for five or more residential units. Within this section, it shall also include a subdivision or planned unit development, rehabilitation and conversion of an existing building to residential use, or condominium conversion of an existing multi-family building. 
    "Incentives" or "concessions." Regulatory concessions which include, but are not limited to, the reduction of site development standards or zoning code requirements, approval of mixed-use zoning in conjunction with the housing development, or any other regulatory incentive which would result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions that are offered in addition to a density bonus. 
    "Initial subsidy." The fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale minus the initial sale price to the moderate-income household, plus the amount of any down payment assistance or mortgage assistance. If upon resale the market value is lower than the initial market value, then the value at the time of the resale shall be used as the initial market value. 
    "Low income household." A household whose income does not exceed eighty (80) percent of the area median income for the county, as published and periodically updated by the state department of housing and community development pursuant to section 50079.5 of the state health and safety code. 
    "Moderate income household." A household whose gross income does not exceed one hundred twenty (120) percent of the area median income for the county, as published and periodically updated by the state department of housing and community development pursuant to sections 50079.5 and 50052.5 of the state health and safety code. 
    "Proportionate share of appreciation." The ratio of the local government's initial subsidy as defined above to the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale. 
    "Senior citizen housing development." A residential development developed, substantially rehabilitated or renovated, and having at least thirty-five (35) dwelling units for senior citizens in compliance with the requirements of section 51.3 and 51.12 of the state civil code. 
    "Very low income households." A household whose income does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the area median income for the county, as published and periodically updated by the state department of housing and community development pursuant to section 50105 of the state health and safety code. 
C.  Application for Density Bonus and Incentives or Concessions. An applicant seeking a density bonus for a housing development shall submit a density bonus application, containing the following information with the fees and the required application: 
1.  Identification of the location, acreage, and the maximum number of base units allowed under the zoning and land use designated under the general plan without the density bonus. 
2.  Identification of the total number of units proposed, specifically identifying the density bonus units and the affordable units which will demonstrate eligibility under this section. 
3.  Identification of the requested incentives or concessions. 
4.  A statement of how the requested incentives or concessions are necessary to make the proposed housing development economically feasible, and result in identifiable, financially sufficient and actual cost reductions. 
D.  Processing of Density Bonus Application. 
1.  Once deemed complete, the density bonus application shall be processed and determinations made concurrent with the underlying housing development application. 
2.  Review Authority. A request for density bonus will be reviewed by the same review authority as the housing development's other entitlements specifically noted below. The review authority shall grant the density bonus and requested incentive(s) or concession(s) unless the findings in section 17.08.090.E can be made. 
a.  Administrative. When a proposed housing development needs only administrative approval (i.e. site plan review), then the planning director will consider and act on the density bonus request when the site plan review application is considered. 
b.  Planning Commission/City Council. If the project requires entitlements or an environmental clearance to be considered by the planning commission and/or the city council, then these decision bodies will consider and act on the density bonus request concurrent with the applicable project entitlement/environmental clearance. 
3.  Application for Density Bonus Housing Agreement. Once the proposed housing development has received its approval for density bonus, as described above, the developer shall file an application, including the payment of any processing fees with the city for approval and finalization of the density bonus agreement in compliance with the requirements set forth in section 17.08.090.J. 
E.  Eligibility Criteria for Density Bonus. The city shall consider a density bonus and provide incentives or concessions as described in section 17.08.090.H, when a developer of a housing development seeks and agrees to construct a housing development that will contain at least one of the following: 
1.  10% of the total units of a housing development strictly for low income households as defined herein; 
2.  Five percent of the total units of a housing development strictly for very low income households as defined herein; 
3.  A senior citizen housing development, as defined herein; 
4.  Ten percent of the total dwelling units in a common interest development for persons and families of moderate income households as defined herein, provided that all units in the development are offered to the public for purchase. 
F.  Project Specific Density Bonus. The city will grant a housing development a density bonus and incentives or concessions meeting all the applicable eligibility requirements of this section according to the following density bonus options. In the event that the minimum requirements for granting density bonus units or number of applicable incentives or concessions as set forth in government code 65915 is amended or modified after the adoption of this chapter by the city, then the lowest minimum requirements shall apply. 
1.  Density Bonus for Very Low Income Households. If a housing developer elects to construct units for very low income households, the development shall be entitled to the following density bonus calculation: 
Provision of Very Low Income Units Percentage of Very Low Income Affordable Units Density Bonus Available Number of Incentives or Concessions 5% 20% 1 6% 22.5% 1 7% 25% 1 8% 27.5% 1 9% 30% 1 10% 32.5% 2 11% 35% 2  
2.  Density Bonus for Low Income Households. If a housing developer elects to construct units for low income households, the housing development shall be entitled to the following density bonus calculation: 
Provision of Low Income Units Percentage of Low Income Affordable Units Density Bonus Available Number of Incentives or Concessions 10% 20% 1 11% 21.5% 1 12% 23% 1 13% 24.5% 1 14% 26% 1 15% 27.5% 1 16% 29% 1 17% 30.5% 1 18% 32% 1 19% 33.5% 1 20% 35% 2  
3.  Senior Housing. If a housing developer elects to construct a senior citizen housing development, the density bonus shall be twenty (20) percent of the total number of allowed housing units without the density bonus. 
4.  Moderate Income Units in Common Interest Developments: If a housing developer elects to construct units for moderate income households, the development shall be entitled to the following density bonus calculation: 
Provision of Moderate Income Units Percentage of Moderate Income Affordable Units Density Bonus Available Number of Incentives or Concessions 10% 5% 1 11% 6% 1 12% 7% 1 13% 8% 1 14% 9% 1 16% 10% 1 15% 11% 1 17% 12% 1 18% 13% 1 19% 14% 1 20% 15% 2 21% 16% 2 22% 17% 2 23% 18% 2 24% 19% 2 25% 20% 2 26% 21% 2 27% 22% 2 28% 23% 2 29% 24% 2 30% 25% 3 31% 26% 3 32% 27% 3 33% 28% 3 34% 29% 3 35% 30% 3 36% 31% 3 37% 32% 3 38% 33% 3 39% 34% 3 40% 35% 3  
5.  Density Bonus for Land Donation. When an applicant for a tentative map, parcel map, or other residential development approval donates at least one-acre of land or enough land to develop forty (40) units, then the applicant shall be entitled to a fifteen (15) percent increase above the otherwise maximum allowable residential density for the entire housing development as follows: 
Land Donation Percentage of Very Low Income Units Percentage Density Bonus 10% 15% 11% 16% 12% 17% 13% 18% 14% 19% 15% 20% 16% 21% 17% 22% 18% 23% 19% 24% 20% 25% 21% 26% 22% 27% 23% 28% 24% 29% 25% 30% 26% 31% 27% 32% 28% 33% 29% 34% 30% 35%  
a.  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to enlarge or diminish the authority of the city to require a developer to donate land as a condition of development. 
b.  The density bonus for land dedication shall be in addition to any density bonus earned pursuant to section 17.08.090.E and up to a maximum combined increase of thirty-five (35) percent. 
c.  An applicant with a land donation shall be eligible for the increased density bonus if all of the following conditions are met: 
1)  The applicant donates and transfers the land to the city no later than the date of approval of the city of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or housing development application for the proposed housing development seeking the density bonus. 
2)  The developable acreage and zoning classification of the land being transferred are sufficient to permit construction of units affordable to very low income households in an amount not less than 10% of the number of residential units of the proposed housing development seeking the density bonus. 
3)  The land proposed to be donated to the city: 
i.  Has the appropriate general plan designation and is appropriately zoned for development at the density described in paragraph (3) of subsection (c) of section 65583.2 of the state government code; and 
ii.  Is or will be served by adequate public facilities and infrastructures; and 
iii.  Is donated no later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map or housing development application seeking a density bonus and has all of the permits and approvals, other than building permits, necessary for the development of the very low income housing units on the transferred land; and 
iv.  Is transferred to the city or a housing developer approved by the city; and 
v.  Shall be within the boundary of the proposed development or within one-quarter mile of the boundary of the proposed development; and 
vi.  Must have a proposed source of funding for the very low income units prior to the approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map or housing development application seeking the density bonus. 
vii.  May be zoned mixed use-neighborhood, mixed use-commercial, or mixed use-employment; however, the land shall assume a density equivalent to the medium density residential zone, for the purposes of calculating affordable housing yield. 
4)  The transferred land and the affordable housing units shall be subject to a deed restriction, which shall be recorded on the property upon dedication, ensuring continued affordability of units for at least thirty (30) years from the date of occupancy. 
6.  Condominium Conversions. Density bonus for condominium conversion, shall be considered and approved in accordance with section 65925.5 of the state government code for specifications. 
G.  Density Bonus for Development of Child Day Care Facility. 
1.  A housing development meeting the requirements of subsections E. and F. which includes a child day care facility built and operated in accordance with section 17.08.190 that will be located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to, such a housing development shall receive either of the following: 
a.  An additional density bonus that is an amount of square feet of residential space that is equal to or greater than the amount of square feet in the child day care facility. 
b.  An additional incentive or concession that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the child day care facility. 
2.  When a housing development is providing a child day care facility consistent with this ordinance, then the conditions of approval shall require that: 
a.  The child day care facility shall remain in operation for a period of time that is as long as or longer than the period of time during which the affordable units are required to remain affordable; and 
b.  Of the children who attend the child day care facility, the children of very low income households, lower income households, or persons or families of moderate income shall equal a percentage that is equal to or greater than the percentage of affordable units that are required pursuant to subsection F. 
3.  The city shall not be required to provide a density bonus or incentive or concession for a child care facility if it makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence, that the community has adequate child day care facilities. 
H.  Available Incentives and Concessions. In addition to the applicable density bonus described above, an applicant may request incentives or concessions in connection with its application for a density bonus in accordance with the density bonus calculation set forth in subsection F. 
1.  An incentive or concession shall mean: 
a.  A reduction in the site development standards or a modification of zoning code requirements including but not limited to: 
1)  Increased lot coverage percentage 
2)  Reduced minimum setbacks 
3)  Increased maximum height 
4)  Reduced number of parking spaces 
b.  If a housing development is one hundred (100) percent affordable, meaning that all or substantially all of the units will be maintained at affordable rents by agreement through the city, priority processing of the required density bonus application and associated entitlement applications will be given. Priority processing shall mean a timeline for review of the housing development and all associated applications as mutually agreed to by the city and the developer; 
c.  Approval of mixed-use development in conjunction with the proposed housing development if the non-residential uses will reduce the cost of the proposed housing development, and the non-residential uses are compatible with the proposed housing development and surrounding development; 
d.  Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the applicant or that the city determines will result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions. 
2.  The city shall grant incentive(s) or concession(s) requested by the applicant unless the city can make a written finding, based upon the substantial evidence, of any of the following: 
a.  The incentive or concession is not required in order to provide for affordable housing costs or affordable rents. 
b.  The incentive or concession would have a specific adverse impact, as defined in paragraph (2) of subdivision (d) of section 65589.5 of the state government code, upon public health and safety or physical environment or any real property that is listed in the state registry of historical resources and for which the city determines there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low-and moderate-income households. 
c.  The incentive or concession would be contrary to state or federal law. 
I.  General Provisions for Density Bonuses and Incentives/Concessions. 
1.  All density bonus calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole number. 
2.  The granting of a density bonus shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment, zone change, or other discretionary approval. 
3.  Upon request by the applicant, the city shall not require the proposed housing development eligible for a density bonus pursuant to this section to provide a parking ratio, including handicapped and guest parking, that exceeds the following: 
a.  Zero to one bedroom: one on-site parking space 
b.  Two to three bedrooms: two on-site parking spaces 
c.  Four and more bedrooms: two and one-half parking spaces 
If the total number of parking spaces required for the proposed housing development is other than a whole number, the number shall be rounded up to the next whole number. For purposes of this subsection, a development may provide on-site parking through tandem parking or uncovered parking, but not through on-street parking. 
4.  The city shall not apply any development standard that would have the effect of precluding the construction of a proposed housing development meeting the requirements of this section, at the densities or with the incentives permitted by this section. An applicant may submit with its application to the city a proposal for the waiver or reduction of development standards. A waiver or reduction of development standards, the application of which would physically preclude the development, shall not reduce nor increase the number of incentives or concessions being requested. Nothing in this subsection, however, shall be interpreted to require the city to waive or reduce development standards if the waiver or reduction would have a specific adverse impact, as defined in paragraph (2) of subdivision (d) of section 65589.5 of the state government code, upon public health and safety or the physical environment or on any real property that is listed in the state register of historical resources and for which the city determines there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact. Furthermore, the applicant shall be required to prove that the waiver or modification is necessary to make the affordable units economically feasible. 
5.  Location of Affordable Units. The location of the affordable units within the housing development may be at the discretion of the developer. However, the affordable units shall: 
a.  Be constructed at the same time as the market units are constructed; 
b.  Be reasonably dispersed throughout the development and/or phases if applicable; 
c.  Be a similar unit type/size to the overall housing development; and 
d.  Be reasonably compatible with the design or use of the remaining units in terms of appearance, materials and quality finish. 
J.  Required Density Bonus Agreement and Terms of Agreement. 
1.  A density bonus housing agreement must be executed prior to recording any final map for the underlying property or prior to the issuance of any building permit for the housing development, whichever comes first. The density bonus housing agreement shall be binding on all future owners and successors of interests of the housing development. 
2.  The density bonus housing agreement shall: 
a.  Identify the type, size and location of each affordable housing unit required hereunder; 
b.  Identify the term of the agreement, which would define the term of affordability of the required units; 
c.  Require that the affordable housing units be constructed and completed by the developer as specified in this chapter and in accordance with state law; 
d.  Require that each affordable housing unit be kept available only to members of the identified income group at the maximum affordable rent during the term of the agreement. 
e.  Identify the means by which such continued availability shall be secured and enforced and the procedures under which the affordable housing units shall be leased and shall contain such other terms and provisions, the housing authority may require. The agreement, in its form and manner of execution, shall be in a form to be recorded with the county recorder. 
f.  The density bonus housing agreement shall be reviewed and approved by the city and the affordability of the required units shall be monitored for compliance by city staff. 
3.  Required Terms for the Continued Availability of Affordable Units: 
a.  Low and Very Low Income Households. A housing developer providing low and very low income units in accordance with this chapter must continue to restrict those units to low or very low income households for a minimum of thirty (30) years or longer term under another regulatory agreement from the date of initial occupancy. 
b.  Moderate Income Households. In the case of housing development providing moderate income units, the initial occupant of the unit must be a person or family of moderate income. 
1)  Upon resale, the seller of the unit shall retain the value of any improvements, the down payment, and the seller's proportionate share of appreciation. The local government shall recapture any initial subsidy and its proportionate share of appreciation; which shall be used within five years for any purposes described in subdivision (e) of section 33334.2 of the health and safety code that promote home ownership. Any recaptured funds shall be deposited and used in accordance with subsection (e) of section 33334.2 of the health and safety code. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
Article III. - General Site Planning and Project Design Standards 

17.08.100 - Parking and Loading. 
    The automobile parking facilities required by this section shall be provided and permanently maintained unless and until a substitute has been provided which is in full compliance with the provisions of this title. 
A.  General conditions. All buildings shall have permanently maintained off-street parking and shall apply as follows: 
1.  No structure or use shall be permitted or constructed unless off-street parking spaces are provided and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this section; 
2.  When a building is enlarged the required amount of parking spaces shall be provided for that enlargement portion, in accordance with the provisions of this section; 
3.  When there is an increase in the number of bedrooms (to more than one); or 
4.  When there is an increase in the number of dwelling units. 
B.  Fractions. Fractional space requirements for a parking space shall be rounded up to the next whole space. 
C.  Parking Requirements by Use. The following number of parking spaces shall be the minimum provided for each new use: 
Parking Requirements by Use Use Number of Required Spaces 1. Single-family house 2 parking spaces within an enclosed garage a. 2 nd dwelling unit 1 uncovered parking space b. Guest house/carriage unit 1 uncovered parking space 2. Duplex/triplex/four-plex 2 parking spaces within an enclosed garage for each unit 3. Apartments, 5 or more units a. Studio/loft and one bedroom 1 and 1/2 covered spaces for each unit b. Two or more bedrooms 1 and 1/2 covered and 1/2 uncovered for each unit c. Guest parking 1 uncovered space for every 4 units 4. Condominiums 2 parking spaces within an enclosed garage for each unit and 1 guest space for every 4 units 5. Condominiums, mid-rise (3+ stories) a. Studio/loft and one bedroom 1 and 1/2 covered spaces for each unit b. Two or more bedrooms 1 and 1/2 covered and 1/2 uncovered for each unit c. Guest parking 1 uncovered space for every 4 units 6. Boarding or rooming house, hostel, fraternity or sorority house 1 uncovered space for each guest room and 2 spaces within an enclosed garage for resident manager 7. Senior apartments/condominiums 1 covered parking space for each unit and 1 guest space for every 4 units 8. Senior residential care facility 1 space for every 3 beds and 1 space for each resident employee 9. Churches 1 space for each 5 fixed seats or for each 45 square feet of seating area within the main auditorium; 24 inches of bench shall be considered a fixed seat 10. Daycare center (nursery/preschool) 5 spaces per 100 students 11. Elementary and middle school 15 spaces per 100 students 12. High school 26 spaces per 100 students 13. Colleges/universities 33 spaces per 100 students, plus one space per bed in dormitories  
Notes: 
1.  An uncovered parking space shall not include the driveway area for a garage. 
2.  Parking lots or areas for ten (10) or more contiguous uncovered vehicle parking spaces shall comply with the requirements of subsection 17.08.090.D. (Parking design and performance standards) for design and development of landscaping and surface parking area. 
3.  Parking for uses subject to conditional use permit shall meet the requirements specified in the permit or as otherwise provided in this title. 
4.  Requirements for uses not specifically listed herein shall be determined by the director based upon the requirements for comparable uses and upon the particular characteristics of the use. 
5.  The number of parking spaces required may be reduced, at the discretion of the director, if the builder can sufficiently demonstrate, through research and analysis that the development warrants fewer parking than is required. Such parking reductions may be granted if the development is located near public transit or if the builder pays in-lieu parking fees for future public parking, transportation, or pedestrian and bicycle trail improvements. 
6.  For multi-family uses, a private owner retains the right to assign parking spaces for tenants and visitors, provided there are enough parking spaces per city code. 
D.  Accessible parking. Housing providers shall adhere to the accessible parking regulations of the American Disabilities Act "ADA," Part 20 of the United States Code of Federal Regulations, and the state building code. In accordance to these regulations, housing providers shall establish the following number of accessible parking spaces for multiple-family developments: 
Total Number of Parking Spaces in Lot or Garage Minimum Required Number of Accessible Spaces 1-25 1 26-50 2 51-75 3 76-100 4 101-150 5 151-200 6 201-300 7 301-400 8 401-500 9 501-1,000 Two percent of total 1,001 and over Twenty plus one for each 100, or fraction over 1,001  
E.  Parking design standards. The following design and development standards shall be met for development in all residential zones. 
1.  Location of parking facilities. 
a.  Required off-street parking shall be located on the same parcel as the uses served, unless it can be sufficiently demonstrated that parking from another parcel can adequately serve the project, with a recorded parking agreement between the parcels. 
b.  Parking facilities other than driveways shall not be located in a required front or street side setback. 
2.  Access to parking facilities and parking spaces. 
a.  Access to parking lots. Parking facilities shall be designed to prevent vehicle access at any point other than at designated driveway entrances. 
b.  Access to individual unit garages. Garages shall be accessed via a minimum twenty (20)-foot-length driveway. Garage driveway width shall be minimum twenty (20)-foot-wide, except for access into tandem garages, or rear-located garages (not alley access), in which the driveway width shall be minimum twelve (12)-foot, and shall widen or taper as necessary to allow for adequate vehicle access. 
c.  Internal maneuvering and queuing. Parking facilities shall provide suitable maneuvering room so that vehicles enter the street in a forward direction, except for lots with four or fewer residential units. 
3.  Parking space and facility dimensions. 
a.  Individual unit garages. Parking spaces within garages shall have minimum dimensions of ten (10) feet in width and twenty (20) feet in length, clear of any obstructions. Tandem parking garage arrangements may be considered, and shall have minimum dimensions of twelve (12) feet in width and forty (40) feet in length, clear of any obstructions. 
b.  Carports. Parking spaces within carports shall have minimum dimensions of nine and one-half feet in width and nineteen (19) feet in length, clear of any obstructions. 
c.  All other parking spaces. Minimum parking space dimensions shall be as follows, except as shown in the following table and figure. 
1)  Standard parking spaces shall have a minimum dimension of nine feet in width by eighteen (18) feet in length, except for spaces provided at either a forty-five (45) or thirty (30) degree layout, in which the spaces shall have a minimum dimension of eight and one-half feet in width by eighteen (18) feet in length. 
2)  Up to thirty-five (35) percent of the spaces in a parking lot may be compact spaces, with minimum dimensions of eight feet in width by sixteen (16) feet in length. For multi-residential uses, this shall only apply to guest parking spaces. 
3)  Parallel parking spaces shall be eight feet by twenty-two (22) feet, except that spaces that are unencumbered at one end may be reduced to eight feet by twenty (20) feet. 
4)  The width of a parking space shall be increased by one-foot if either side of the space is adjacent to a wall, fence, support column or other structure, except where the obstruction is limited to the front or rear one-third of the parking space. 


4.  Curbing. Continuous concrete curbing at least six inches high and six inches wide shall be provided along the edges of parking spaces adjacent to fences, walls, sidewalks, other structures, and landscaping. 
a.  Alternative barrier designs may be approved by the director. 
b.  Parking spaces adjacent along their length to landscaped areas or other similar surfaces shall incorporate a paved extension of the curb measuring twelve (12) inches (for a total of eighteen (18) inches) to provide a place to stand while exiting and entering vehicles. 
c.  Although discouraged, wheel stops may be installed as determined by the director, in the uncommon circumstance where there is no curbing or landscaping that buffer parking spaces from a fence or other structures. The wheel stop shall be located in a manner that prevents a vehicle from colliding into a fence, or other structures. 
d.  Curb design and installation shall comply with national pollution discharge elimination system (NPDES) standards where applicable. 
5.  Directional arrows and signs (except single-family detached): 
a.  Parking spaces, aisles, approach lanes, and maneuvering areas shall be clearly marked with directional arrows and lines to ensure the safe and efficient flow of vehicles. 
b.  The director may require the installation of traffic signs in addition to directional arrows to ensure the safe and efficient flow of vehicles in a parking facility. 
6.  Access to public right-of-way. Each vehicular passage of any parking or loading facility to or across a public right-of-way shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  No such curb cut may exceed twenty-four (24) feet in width for single-family residential uses, or thirty-five (35) feet for multi-family residential uses, unless as approved by a director's review. Curb cut is defined as the flat bottom dimension for the driveway, excluding wings. 
b.  Wherever feasible, curb cuts serving adjacent uses shall be combined to minimize the number of entrances onto arterial and collector streets. 
c.  Only one curb cut may be installed for any parking or loading facility, provided that additional curb cuts may be allowed if the city engineer determines that each such additional curb cut is necessary for the efficient operation of the facility and will not significantly affect capacity and traffic safety. 
d.  Curb cuts for any circular driveway or multiple driveways on the same lot must meet the following requirements: 
1)  The curb cuts of circular or multiple driveways must be at least twenty (20) feet apart. 
2)  The combined width of the curb cuts shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the lot frontage. 
e.  Any curb cut on a corner shall be located at the farthest point on the lot from the curb return. 
7.  Striping and identification (except single-family residential). Parking spaces shall be clearly outlined with four-inch wide lines painted on the surface of the parking facility. Circulation aisles, approach lanes, and turning areas shall be clearly marked with directional arrows and lines to ensure safe traffic movement. Double-striping outlining of parking spaces is also permitted, using the mid-point of the double-striped area as the measurement of the parking space width. 
8.  Grade of parking facilities. Parking facilities should not exceed a grade of five percent. 
9.  Parking lots as a transitional use. Parking lots may be permitted in the residential zones as a transitional use, provided: 
a.  In the RR and R zones: 
1)  The area used for parking adjoins or is separated only by an alley from property in a multiple-family, commercial, or industrial zone; and 
2)  Parking shall be limited to an area within one hundred (100) feet from the boundary of the qualifying multiple-family, mixed use, commercial or industrial zone. 
b.  In the MDR and HDR zones: 
1)  The area used for parking adjoins or is separated only by an alley from property in a commercial or industrial zone; and 
2)  Parking shall be limited to an area within one hundred (100) feet from the boundary of the qualifying multiple-family, mixed use, commercial or industrial zone. 
3)  An area developed with parking shall have direct vehicular access to an improved public street, highway, alley, or to the qualifying multiple-family, mixed use, commercial or industrial zone. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.110 - Landscaping. 
A.  Landscaping in general. 
1.  Landscape designs shall be consistent throughout a project site. A combination of landscape materials should be arranged in a harmonious manner as an integral part of project design to enhance building design, public view, and interior spaces and provide buffers and transitions as needed. Unrelated and random choice or placement of plant materials shall be avoided; however, variety may be employed to intensify distinction between spaces or to strengthen a sense of place or movement, or to promote energy and water conservation and mitigate erosion. 
2.  The type, scale and proportion of landscape materials shall be appropriate to the site and/or structures to which they relate. 
3.  Plant material shall be selected for interest in its structure, texture, color, ultimate growth and water efficiency. Plants that are native or climate adaptive to the high desert area of Lancaster and/or others that will be hardy, harmonious with project design and of good appearance shall be used. Drought-resistant varieties of plants shall be used in accordance with Title 8, Chapter 8.50, Landscaping Installation and Maintenance; Title 8, Chapter 8.30, Residential Landscaping Installation and Maintenance; and Title 15, Chapter 15.48, Specifications for Landscape Development of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
4.  Landscaped areas shall be irrigated by an automatic system with separate stations for each hydrozone. The irrigation system shall be designed and equipped to incorporate water conservation techniques, such as drip systems, moisture sensors and anti-drain valves. Sprinkler systems shall be designed to prevent water from falling onto impervious surfaces. The system shall comply with title 8, chapter 8.50, landscaping installation and maintenance; title 8, chapter 8.30, residential landscaping installation and maintenance of this Code. 
5.  All areas which are not utilized for buildings, sidewalks, vehicle access, or parking, shall be permanently landscaped and maintained. 
6.  All landscaped planters for interior parking areas shall be completely bordered by a six-inch concrete curb to prevent runoff. 
7.  Required Landscaping. The following basic standards shall be observed: 
a.  All interior areas of parking lots shall be landscaped with a minimum of one shade tree plus one shade tree for each four parking spaces along with other required plant materials. 
b.  The minimum required landscaping for parking lots shall be the percentage shown below of the total area used for vehicle ingress, egress, circulation and parking. Only landscaped areas exclusive of curbs shall qualify toward meeting this requirement and no landscaped area with a dimension of less than two feet shall be credited toward meeting the landscape requirement. 
Size Minimum Percentage of Landscaping Required 1-4,999 square feet 5% 5,000-19,999 square feet 6% 20,000 or more square feet 7%  
c.  Where off-street parking areas abut local or collector public streets, such areas shall be separated from an abutting street by a continuous landscaped planter which extends parallel to the street frontage of the parking area. The planter shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width exclusive of perimeter curbs. Up to one-half of the area of this required landscape planter may be counted toward fulfilling the requirements of the required landscaping for lots under twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
8.  Utilize trees and landscaping wherever possible to shade buildings as a means of enhancing energy conservation. 
9.  All landscaped areas shall be continuously and properly maintained in good condition. 
10.  At least twenty-five (25) percent of all trees installed shall be from a twenty-four (24) inch box, and no tree shall be less than fifteen (15) gallon size. At least fifty (50) percent of all shrubs shall be of five-gallon size, and no shrub shall be less than one-gallon size. Ground covers shall be planted at no further apart than six inches on center. 
11.  Multiple family residential developments shall comply with the provisions of chapter 8.30. 
12.  Single family residential developments shall comply with the provisions of chapter 8.30. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.120 - Signs. 
    A person shall not use any sign except as specifically permitted in this section and subject to all regulations and conditions set forth in this title. The following signs are permitted in the residential zones except where specific references limit certain uses to the RR, R, MDR or HDR zone. 
A.  Signs in general. 
1.  Address. Street numbers of all buildings shall be prominently located and of sufficient size, lighted or illuminated during hours of darkness, to be easily read from the street by public safety personnel in accordance with city standards. 
2.  Building identification signs. One illuminated wall-mounted sign not to exceed six square feet in sign area shall be permitted on a lot which contains three dwelling units or more, in the MDR and HDR zones only. No such signs may be illuminated by an exposed incandescent lamp and any continuous or sequential flashing operation is prohibited. 
3.  Directory diagram. A multiple-family residential development consisting of six or more dwelling units shall have posted at or near the primary entrance to the building or buildings a brief descriptive directory diagram which clearly indicates the numerical, alphabetical or identification pattern or layout showing the location of each dwelling unit, including floor levels and access patterns. Such diagram shall be of a size to be easily readable by a person with normal vision, shall be illuminated during the hours of darkness, and shall be protected from the elements by being placed in a permanent glass or transparent plastic covered device. 
4.  Project identification signs. One wall or monument sign may be permitted for a multiple-family development or project which contains ten (10) dwelling units or more. Such sign shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet of total sign area or eight feet in height measured vertically from the average ground level at the base of the sign. If, in the opinion of the director, the project requires more than one such sign and there are more than twenty-five (25) dwelling units in the project, the director may then approve a second project identification sign of equal area for a particular project. No such signs may be illuminated by an exposed incandescent lamp and any continuous or sequential flashing operation is prohibited. 
5.  Prohibited signs. The following signs shall be prohibited in the R zones and may not be included in any sign plan. 
a.  Any notice, placard, bill, card, poster, sticker, banner, sign, advertising or other device calculated to attention of the public which any person posts, prints, sticks, stamps, tacks or otherwise affixes upon any street, right-of-way, crosswalk, curb, lamppost, hydrant, tree, telephone or lighting system, or upon any fixture in the public right-of-way. 
b.  Any strings of pennants, banners or streamers, clusters of flags, strings of twirlers or propellers, flares, balloons, and similar attention-getting devices, including noise-emitting devices, with the exception of the following, not intended for advertising use: holiday decorations in season used for an aggregate period of sixty (60) days in any one calendar year, or national, state, or other governmental or institutional flags properly displayed. 
6.  Signs for uses subject to conditional use permit. The planning commission may approve signs it deems appropriate for the use. In cases where the commission does not specifically approve signs, the maximum dimensions that may be authorized in the residential zones are as follows: 
a.  A sign face area of twenty-five (25) square feet, or a total sign area of fifty (50) square feet; and 
b.  A height of eight feet. 
B.  Temporary signs. Temporary signs, such as real estate "for sale" or "for lease" signs may be permitted in the residential zones subject to the following restrictions: 
1.  Area permitted. Temporary signs that are posted for less than ninety (90) days shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in sign area (one-sided) or thirty-two (32) feet in total sign area (two-sided) as defined in section 17.04.240. An applicant proposing a temporary sign for more than ninety (90) days shall obtain a temporary sign permit, with the requirement that the sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in sign face area or sixty-four (64) square feet in total sign area. 
2.  Height permitted. Freestanding temporary signs shall not exceed six feet in height. 
3.  Lighting. Temporary signs shall not be lighted. 
4.  Placement. Temporary signs shall not be placed on public property, including all public right-of-ways, or in any manner than would endanger the public. 
5.  Prohibited temporary signs. All prohibited signs as listed in subsection A.5. 
6.  Duration. No temporary sign shall be posted for more than ninety (90) days without obtaining a sign permit pursuant to this section. No sign permit for a temporary sign shall be valid for more than a year. Upon written request for an extension, the director may grant an extension for up to one additional year upon finding that the sign is otherwise in compliance with the requirements of this section et seq. and that the extension is necessary to accomplish the purposes for which the sign has been posted. No additional extensions may be granted. All temporary signs shall be removed within fourteen (14) calendar days after the event. The date of the posting shall permanently and legibly marked on the lower right-hand corner of the sign face. 
7.  Permit required. Any person who proposes to post or erect a temporary sign for more than ninety (90) days shall file an application for a sign permit with the planning department. The applicant shall also file a statement of responsibility as required in subsection I. 
8.  Standards for Approval. 
a.  Within seven working days, the director or his designated representative shall act upon the application for a temporary sign permit. 
b.  The action on the application shall be based on character, location and design, including design elements such as material, letter style, colors, sign type or shape, and the provisions of section 17.08.110 et seq. 
c.  If the action is to disapprove, the notice of disapproval shall specify the reasons for disapproval. 
9.  Statement of responsibility. Each person desiring to post or erect a temporary sign, regardless of duration, shall submit to the planning department, a statement of responsibility in a form approved by the director with a description sufficient to identify the temporary sign, the location of the sign to be posted, and certifying a named individual who is responsible for removing each temporary sign. In the event the responsible individual fails to remove the temporary sign as required by this section, the temporary sign shall be deemed abandoned and may be removed by the city, the cost of which removal shall be payable by the responsible individual. 
10.  Removal of unauthorized, non-maintained or dangerous signs. 
a.  Temporary signs posted for which a statement of responsibility has not been submitted, and a required permit has not been obtained, are subject to immediate removal by the city without compensation. The city may also pursue legal action under section 17.04.220. 
b.  Temporary signs which are deemed by the city to constitute a threat to the public health and safety are subject to immediate removal by the city without compensation or prior notice. (Some examples might include signs which are not secured against the wind or were placed in a manner which would interfere with the vision of drivers or pedestrians.) The city's cost of removal shall be payable by the responsible individual. 
c.  Temporary signs for which a statement of responsibility has been submitted, and a required permit has been obtained, and which do not pose a threat to public health and safety are otherwise posted in violation of section 17.08.110 et seq. shall be subject to removal in accordance with the following procedures: 
1)  The city shall provide written notice to the responsible individual for each temporary sign established pursuant to subsection I. 
2)  The sign in violation of section 17.08.110 et seq. shall specify the nature of the violation and shall direct the responsible individual to remove or alter such temporary sign. 
3)  If the responsible individual fails to comply with the notice within 3 working days after such notice is mailed, the sign shall be deemed abandoned, and may be removed by the city. 
4)  The responsible individual shall pay the city for the cost of the sign removal. 
C.  Subdivision sales signs. Temporary subdivision sales signs, entry signs and special feature signs shall be accompanied by site plan or other pertinent information and approved by the director in order to be permitted in all zones. 
1.  Subdivision sales signs. 
a.  One freestanding subdivision shall be allowed per street frontage. 
b.  Sign area. The sign face shall not exceed one hundred eighty (180) square feet per sign face or three hundred sixty (360) square feet in total sign area. 
c.  Height permitted. Twelve (12) feet measured vertically from ground level at the base of the sign. 
d.  Location. Each sign shall be located on the subdivision and be oriented to read from the street or highway where the sign is permitted. The distance between subdivision signs shall be a minimum of five hundred (500) feet. 
e.  Lighting. Subdivision signs may be internally or externally lighted. Continuous or sequential flashing is not allowed. 
f.  Time limit. Subdivision sales signs shall be maintained only until all the property is disposed of, or for a period of three years from the date of issuance of the first building permit. The approved sales sign shall be removed at the end of the three-year period. The director may extend the permitted time beyond three years, if needed by the owner of the property. The owner must make the request in writing. 
g.  Copy. All copy shall relate exclusively to the subdivision being offered for sale. 
2.  Subdivision entry and special feature signs. 
a.  Such signs are permitted and shall be located within a subdivision to facilitate entry and movement. 
b.  Sign area. 
1)  Subdivision entry signs. The sign face shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet per sign face or twenty-four (24) feet in total sign area. 
2)  Special feature signs. The sign face shall not exceed six square feet per sign face or twelve (12) feet in total sign area. 
c.  Height permitted. 
1)  Subdivision entry signs. Shall not exceed a maximum height of eight feet measured from the base of the sign. 
2)  Special feature signs. Shall not exceed six square feet in sign area or twelve (12) square feet in total sign area. 
d.  Lighting. Signs shall be unlighted. 
e.  Time limit. Shall have the same time limit as subdivision sales signs approved for the same tract and shall be removed at the end of such period. 
3.  Subdivision kiosk signs. 
a.  Contents of application. An application for a subdivision kiosk sign shall be filed as a director's review, and shall contain the following information: 
1)  A scale drawing of the proposed sign; 
2)  Proposed location of the sign, including distance from adjacent streets and public sidewalks; 
3)  The proposed colors of the sign. 
b.  Development standards. All subdivision kiosk signs shall be of a consistent design and shall comply with the following standards: 
1)  Height. The overall height of the sign shall not exceed ten (10) feet, measured form the ground level at the base of the sign. 
2)  Width. The overall width of the sign shall not exceed six feet. 
3)  Individual sign panels. Individual sign panels shall not exceed one-foot in width and six feet in length. Copy on sign panels shall be limited to the name of the subdivision and/or builder, and a directional arrow. 
4)  Location. Signs may be located on either public or private property, provided that the appropriate agency or property owner has given their written consent. Signs shall not obscure required line of sight visibility for motorists or pedestrians. 
5)  There shall be no additions, tag signs, streamers, flags, banner devices, display boards, or appurtenances added to the signs as originally approved. Further, no other directional signs shall be used, including but not limited to posters or portable outdoor advertising signs. 
6)  Subdivision directional signs may advertise tracts either within the city limits or within that portion of the county which is within the city's sphere of influence. 
c.  Approval process. 
1)  Approval authority. Application shall be reviewed and approved by the planning department. 
2)  Building permit. The applicant shall obtain all necessary construction permits from the public works department. 
3)  Separate agreement. The city may, at its discretion, enter into an agreement with a private entity for the purpose of erecting and maintaining subdivision kiosk signs. Such agreement shall be consistent with the provisions of this section, but may also establish other requirements not specifically addressed by this section. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.130 - Fences, Walls, and Screening. 
A.  Purpose. This section provides regulations for the installation, construction and placement of fences on private residential property. For the purpose of this zoning code, the term "fence" includes fences, hedges, walls or other structures with the functions and characteristics of a fence. 
B.  Measurement of fence and wall height. 
1.  Fence height shall be measured as the vertical distance between the finished grade from the base of the fence to the top edge of the fence material. 
2.  Where the ground elevation within six feet of the base of a fence differs from one side of the fence to the other (as when a fence is placed at the top of a slope or on a retaining wall), the height shall be measured from the side with the highest natural grade. (See section 17.28.030). 
C.  Fence height limits. 
Location Maximum height Within front yard setback or corner lot side yard setback 3 1/2 feet Within side or rear yard setback or along/behind corner lot side yard setback 6 feet  

D.  Consideration for additional height. A fence or wall may be constructed to a height in excess of the limits established by subsection 17.08.120.C. with a director's review. The director's review shall require that the applicant make the following findings, in addition to the findings required for a director's review listed in chapter 17.32: 
1.  The issuance of the permit is reasonably necessary, by reason of unusual or special circumstances or conditions relating to the property, for the preservation of valuable property rights or the full use and enjoyment of the property. 
2.  The fence will not create a safety hazard to pedestrians or vehicular traffic. 
3.  The appearance of the fence is compatible with the design and appearance of other existing buildings and structures within the neighborhood. 
4.  The orientation and location of the fence is in proper relation to the physical characteristics of the site and the surrounding neighborhood. 
5.  The fence will be of sound construction. 
E.  Fencing for new production homes. Fencing for new production homes shall be a masonry wall, adjacent to the rear and side yards, up to six feet in height. The planning director may approve alternative fencing materials that provide comparable aesthetics and durability. 
F.  Subdivision perimeter walls. A masonry wall shall be constructed along the perimeter of a subdivision, with the color and design to be specifically approved by the planning director. 
G.  Prohibited fence materials. The use of barbed wire, razor wire, electrical fence, glass and other similar objects of a hazardous characteristic shall not be permitted for residential uses. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.140 - Outdoor Lighting. 
    The intent of this requirement is to properly illuminate the site without producing an adverse impact on neighboring property. Exterior lighting of the building and site shall be provided, maintained and utilized during the hours of darkness in accordance with the following requirements: 
A.  Outdoor lighting in general. 
1.  Lighting shall be part of the architectural concept. Fixtures, standards, and all exposed accessories shall be compatible with the building design. 
2.  Lighting shall be placed to provide adequate illumination for security and safety. 
3.  Lighting used to illuminate the premises shall be directed away from adjacent properties. 
4.  Lighting shall be designed and located in a manner that prevents glare onto adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
Article IV. - Standards for Specific Land Uses 

17.08.150 - Purpose and Applicability. 
A.  Purpose. This article provides site planning, development, and/or operating standards for certain land uses that are allowed within the residential zones, and for activities that require special standards to mitigate their potential adverse impacts. The land uses and activities covered by this article shall comply with the provisions of the sections applicable to the specific use, in addition to all other applicable provisions of this zoning code. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  Where allowed. The uses that are subject to the standards in this article shall be located in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
2.  Land use permit requirements. The uses that are subject to the standards in this article shall be authorized by any required and applicable land use permit. 
3.  Development standards. The standards for specific uses in this article are required in addition to those listed elsewhere in the residential chapter of the zoning ordinance. In the event of any conflict between the requirements of this article and those listed elsewhere in the residential chapter of the zoning ordinance, the specific requirements under this article shall take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.160 - Residential Accessory Uses and Structures. 
    The development criteria set forth in this section are intended to provide minimum standards for accessory buildings or structures. Accessory buildings and structures may only be constructed on a lot containing a main dwelling unit. Whenever there is a conflict between these standards and the city's building code, the most restrictive requirement shall apply. 
A.  Standards for residential accessory uses and structures. 
Structure type Maximum height Distance from interior/rear property lines Distance from main dwelling unit Other notes 1. Attached accessory structures (patio, etc.) One story or 12 feet 5 feet N/A • Shall remain permanently unenclosed on at least 2 sides, excluding the placement of detachable screens 2. Detached accessory structures less than 120 sq. ft. (small shed, etc.) 8 feet 0 feet 6 feet 3. Detached accessory structures greater than 120 sq. ft. (shed, gazebo, etc.) One story or 12 feet 5 feet 6 feet 4. Detached garages (without 2 nd story living area) 16 feet 0 feet 6 feet • Detached garages built to the property line shall not result in drainage onto neighboring properties 5. Swimming pools and spas N/A 5 feet 6 feet 6. Accessory structure and equipments (air conditioner units, pool equipment, etc.) 6 feet 5 feet 0 feet  
Other notes: 
• For accessory buildings that are used for living or sleeping space, see section 17.08.220 discussing guest houses. 
• No more than fifty (50) percent of the required rear yard shall be covered by roofed structures. Infill residential lots (smaller than seven thousand (7,000) square feet) may have up to sixty (60) percent of the rear yard covered by roofed structures. 
B.  Projections permitted into yards. The following projections are permitted in a required yard: 
1.  Eaves, cantilevered roofs, awnings and similar architectural features may project a maximum distance of two and one-half feet into any required front or side yard or five feet into a rear yard, provided that such features shall maintain a minimum distance of three feet to any property line and are not less than eight feet in height above grade. Such appendages shall be supported only at or behind the building setback line. 
2.  Fireplace structures (meeting all requirements of the current state building code), bay windows (not wider than eight feet measured in the general direction of the wall of which it is a part), fire escapes, exterior stairs, and landings, buttresses and wing walls may project a maximum distance of two and one-half feet into any required yard, provided that such features shall maintain a minimum distance of three feet to any property line. Such structures shall not be utilized to provide closets or other usable floor area. 
3.  Decks, platforms, covered and uncovered porches, and landing places including access stairs, which exceed an average height of two and one-half feet and do not extend above the level of the first floor may project a maximum distance of two feet into required interior side yards, and a maximum distance of five feet into required front and side yards, provided such features shall maintain a minimum distance of three feet to any property line, and that an open-work railing installed shall not exceed three and one-half feet in height. 
4.  Walls and window-mounted air conditioners, coolers, and fans may be used in any required interior or side yard provided that such equipment shall maintain a minimum distance of three feet to any property line. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.170 - Cargo Container Storage. 
    All cargo container uses, except those use by a public agency or entity, or by a non-public or private school, shall comply with all pertinent city codes, ordinances and regulations in addition to the following conditions: 
A.  Cargo containers as accessory buildings or structures. Cargo containers may be used as accessory buildings or structures in the RR-2.5 and RR-1 zones, subject to the following: 
1.  Containers shall be located only to the rear of the main building, in which a permissible use is occurring; 
2.  Containers shall only be used for incidental uses that are permissible in the zone; 
3.  Containers shall not be used for commercial purposes or in conjunction with commercial activities; 
4.  Containers shall not be closer than fifty (50) feet to any property line; 
5.  Containers shall not be stacked on top of each other or on any other structure; 
6.  Containers shall not encroach upon, block, obstruct, or reduce in any manner any required exits, windows or vent shafts of structures, or any parking spaces, driveways, private streets, or public rights of way; 
7.  Containers shall not be used for human habitation or occupied by individuals for any reason; 
8.  Containers shall not have any electrical, plumbing, heating or air conditioning installations or systems, and shall not be connected to a power source; 
9.  Containers shall not be unsightly, graffitied, or damaged; 
10.  Refuse, garbage, trash and debris, as well as hazardous substances, as defined by state or federal law, shall not be placed or stored in, against, on, or under a cargo container at any time; 
11.  Containers shall require a container permit. The number and location of cargo containers used as accessory buildings or structures in the RR-2.5 and RR-1 zones shall be subject to the review and prior written approval of the directors of planning and housing and neighborhood revitalization, or their duly authorized representatives. Upon such approval, compliance with all conditions of approval, and payment of a container permit fee in an amount established by city council, a container permit shall be issued. 
B.  Cargo containers as temporary storage. Cargo containers may be used as temporary structures in the R and RR zones, including the following: 
1.  Storage of materials for public works and other infrastructure improvements. 
a.  Storage of materials and construction equipment used in construction or maintenance of streets and highways, sewers, storm drain, underground conduits, flood control works, pipelines and similar uses, shall not exceed a period of one-year. 
2.  Storage of building materials for temporary construction. 
a.  This includes storage of building materials, machinery and equipment used in conjunction or development project undertaken pursuant to an active building permit. Storage shall be on the lot or parcel which is part of the project, or on property adjoining the construction or development site with the written consent of the property owner. Storage shall not occur until the building permit is obtained. Storage shall be removed within thirty (30) calendar days after the permit is expired, revoked, or finalized. 
b.  Cargo containers may be used for the temporary construction storage described in subsection A. A cargo container approved pursuant to this subsection shall not require a separate permit. The number and location of cargo containers used for temporary construction storage shall be subject to the review and prior written approval of the building official and directors of planning and housing and neighborhood revitalization or their duly authorized representatives. Application for approval of cargo containers for temporary construction storage shall be made on a city-approved form and shall indicate the number of the building permit obtained for the construction or development project for which the temporary construction storage is requested, the size of each cargo container, the proposed location of each container on the property, and the date on which each container shall be placed on the property. 
c.  The time period for which a cargo container may be used for temporary construction storage is limited to the time when the building permit is active. An active building permit means one that has not expired, been revoked, or been finalized. Cargo containers used for temporary construction storage shall be removed from the property within thirty (30) calendar days of the expiration, revocation or finalization of a building permit. 
d.  Cargo containers used for temporary construction storage shall not exceed eight feet in width, eight feet six inches in height, and forty (40) feet in length. 
e.  Cargo containers used for temporary construction storage shall conform to the following standards: 
1)  Cargo containers shall be set back a minimum of five feet from any property line and a minimum of ten (10) feet from any structure. 
2)  Cargo containers shall not be stacked on top of each other or on any other structure. 
3)  Cargo containers shall not encroach upon, block, obstruct, or reduce in any manner any required exits, windows or vent shafts of structures, or any parking spaces, driveways, private streets, or public rights of way. 
4)  Cargo containers shall not be used for human habitation or occupied by individuals for any reason. 
5)  Cargo containers shall not have any electrical, plumbing, heating or air conditioning installations or systems, and shall not be connected to a power source. 
6)  Refuse, garbage, trash and debris, as well as hazardous substances, as defined by state or federal law, shall not be placed or stored in, against, on, or under a cargo container at any time. 
3.  Storage of household materials during remodeling or other construction work. 
a.  This includes temporary storage of household materials, including but not limited to furniture, appliances, household electronics, clothing and other items of personal property, when a structure is undergoing rehabilitation, repair, remodeling, alteration or other construction work under an active building permit. 
1)  The number and location of cargo containers used for temporary household storage shall be subject to the review and prior written approval of the building official and directors of planning and housing and neighborhood revitalization or their duly authorized representatives. A cargo container approved under this subsection shall not require a separate permit. Application for approval of cargo containers for temporary household storage shall be made on a city-approved form and shall indicate the number of the building permit obtained for the repair, remodeling, alteration or other work for which the temporary household storage is requested, the size of each cargo container, the proposed location of each container on the property, and the date on which each container shall be placed on the property. 
2)  The time period for which a cargo container may be used for temporary household storage is limited to the time when the building permit is active. An active building permit means one that has not expired, been revoked, or been finalized. Cargo containers used for temporary construction storage shall be removed from the property within thirty (30) calendar days of the expiration, revocation or finalization of a building permit. 
3)  Cargo containers used for temporary household storage shall not exceed eight feet in width, eight feet in height, and sixteen (16) feet in length. 
4)  Cargo containers used for temporary household storage shall conform to the standards set forth in subsection B.2.e. 
4.  Emergency storage of household materials due to disaster circumstance. 
a.  Cargo containers used for emergency household storage shall require a container permit. The number and location of cargo containers used for emergency household storage shall be subject to the review and prior written approval of the directors of planning and housing and neighborhood revitalization, or their duly authorized representatives. Upon such approval, and payment of a container permit fee in an amount established by city council, a container permit shall be issued. 
b.  Cargo containers may be used for emergency household storage for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) calendar days. This use may be extended for an additional ten (10) calendar days upon the prior written approval of the directors of planning and housing and neighborhood revitalization. 
c.  Cargo containers used for emergency household storage shall not exceed eight feet in width, eight feet in height, and sixteen (16) feet in length. 
d.  Cargo containers used for emergency household storage shall conform to the standards set forth in subsection B.2.e. 
5.  Storage of household materials used for relocation. 
a.  Cargo containers used for relocation storage shall require a container permit. The number and location of cargo containers used for relocation storage shall be subject to the review and prior written approval of the Directors of planning and housing and neighborhood revitalization, or their duly authorized representatives. Upon such approval, and payment of a container permit fee in an amount established by city council, a container permit shall be issued. 
b.  Cargo containers may be used for relocation storage for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) calendar days. This use may be extended for an additional ten (10) calendar days upon the prior written approval of the directors of planning and housing and neighborhood revitalization. 
c.  Cargo containers used for relocation storage shall not exceed eight feet in width, eight feet in height, and sixteen feet in length. 
d.  Cargo containers used for relocation storage shall conform to the standards set forth in subsection B.2.e., except as provided in f. of this subsection. 
e.  Cargo containers used for relocation storage may be placed on driveways. 
C.  Existing cargo containers. 
1.  Cargo containers that are present on private real property, for any use or purpose, on the effective date of this section shall be removed within six months from the effective date, unless the property owner obtains the requisite approvals and permits in conjunction with temporary uses allowed in subsection B. and otherwise complies with all regulations pertaining to cargo containers. 
2.  This subsection does not apply to cargo containers that are present on real property located in RR-2.5 and RR-1 zones, provided they are brought into conformance with the requirements of subsection B.2.e. 
D.  Exceptions. Except as provided in subsection A., cargo containers shall not be used as accessory buildings or structures, and shall not be placed, maintained or used on private real property at any time except as permitted in conjunction with temporary uses allowed in subsection B. This provision does not apply to the following real property: 
1.  Real property owned, leased, rented, occupied or used by a public agency or entity; 
2.  Real property owned, leased, rented, occupied or used by a non-public or private school. For purpose of this subsection, "non-public school" means a private, non-sectarian school that enrolls individuals with exceptional needs pursuant to an individualized education program and is certified by the state department of education. For purposes of this subsection, "private school" means a full-time day school that provides instruction in the several branches of study required to be taught in the public schools of the state, by persons capable of teaching, and that files an annual private school affidavit as required by the state department of education. For purposes of this subsection, "private school" does not include a school that provides instruction in building used for residential purposes. A non-public or private school is not exempt unless it is operating in conformity with all pertinent land use and technical code regulations. 
3.  Real property utilized for the placement of cargo containers that are used exclusively for the storage of emergency supplies to be used for the benefit of the public by a recognized governmental agency, such as the county fire department, in the event of a disaster or emergency situation. Placement of a cargo container for the storage of private supplies is not included in this exemption. Placement of cargo containers for this purpose shall be approved through a director's review. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.180 - Animal Keeping. 
A.  Purpose. Regulations governing animals for the personal use of the family residing on the premises are established in order to provide for the keeping of domestic and wild animals where accessory to the residential use of the property as opposed to maintenance for commercial purposes. The following regulations presume a reasonable effort on the part of the animal owner to recognize the rights of surrounding neighbors by maintaining and controlling animals in a safe and healthy manner. 
B.  Animal keeping in Residential zones. On any lot in a residential zone, or in conjunction with any residential use in any other zone, a total of five animals (domestic or exotic) may be kept on one lot, of which not more than three may be dogs. 
C.  Animal keeping in Rural Residential zones only. Where allowed by section 17.08.050, livestock farming shall be limited to the raising, feeding, maintaining, and breeding of livestock, subject to a minimum twenty-thousand (20,000) square-foot net lot area. The following are allowed per each twenty-thousand (20,000) square feet of gross lot area, in accordance with the following limitations and conditions: 
1.  Two hogs or pigs; 
2.  Two horses or mules or cows or steer; 
3.  Three goats or sheep or similar livestock; 
4.  One dozen chickens or ducks or rabbits. 
D.  Offspring. Young animals born to a permitted animal kept on the site may be kept until such animals are weaned. 
E.  Therapy and service animals. In accordance with fair housing law, a housing provider shall accommodate a person with a disability who requests a reasonable and necessary animal. Such animals may include, but are not limited to, guide dogs that assist persons with visual impairment, hearing dogs trained to alert those who are hard of hearing, service dogs trained to assist those with mobility impairment, or other animals intended to provide therapy, including emotional support. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.185 - Grazing. 
A.  Purpose. Section 17.08.050 permits light agricultural uses as an accessory use, which includes grazing, in the RR-2.5 and RR-1 zones. The following regulations clarify where and in which instances grazing is permitted. 
B.  Grazing of animals (e.g., sheep, goats, cattle, etc.) is allowable in the rural zones identified above, in accordance with the following limitations and conditions. 
1.  Free range grazing of animal herds is prohibited within the city limits. 
2.  All grazing shall occur on property owned by the herder or with express written permission of the property owner. 
3.  All grazing animals shall be controlled in a manner that prevents them from straying onto unauthorized property. 
4.  The owner of said grazing animals is responsible for ensuring that the animals are moved regularly to prevent the removal of all vegetation. In the event that the over-grazing of animals causes dust control issues, the owner of the animals and/or the property owner shall be responsible for implementing measures to control the dust in accordance with this Code and applicable Antelope Valley Air Quality Management District (AVAQMD) Rules and Regulations. 
C.  Alternative energy developments may utilize sheep to control vegetation growth within the fenced boundaries of their facilities, subject to the requirements set forth in subsection B. 
( Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 6-13-2017 ) 
17.08.190 - Child Day Care Facilities. 
A.  Purpose and Intent. The availability and affordability of quality, licensed child care is beneficial to the well-being of parents and children within this community. The purpose of regulating child day care facilities, including large family daycares (eight to fourteen (14) children) located as an accessory use in a residential home, and daycare centers, within the city shall be to: 
1.  Facilitate and encourage the establishment of licensed child day care; 
2.  Specify standards to avoid any adverse effects of such facilities upon surrounding properties; and 
3.  Avoid the over-concentration of child care facilities in any neighborhood. 
C.  Application requirements. The following shall be included in each application for a child day care facility (director's review for large family daycares, and conditional use permit for daycare centers in the residential zones): 
1.  The application shall indicate the number of children to be cared for, including the applicant's children under ten (10) years of age; the number of employees; hours of operation and outdoor playtime; and state license number. The application and site plan shall clearly show compliance with applicable standards. 
2.  A site plan (eight and one-half inches by eleven inches) showing: location and dimensions of existing residence and other structures, including: fencing, outdoor play structures and equipment, distance to property line, parking areas, access and traffic circulation. Additional site plan and/or application information may be requested at the discretion of the planning department. 
3.  An accurate traffic circulation plan showing parking, circulation and drop-off areas. 
D.  Conditions of approval. The operation of a child day care center or large family day care home, in compliance with a conditional use permit or director's review application, may be conditioned or limited by the permit, except as may be prohibited by state law applicable to a chartered city, in any manner deemed necessary by the review authority to ensure the preservation of the health, safety and general welfare of the community and the neighborhood where the facility is proposed. The scope of permit review and approval shall be limited as required by state law to the following. 
1.  Space and concentration. No proposed large family day care facility shall be located closer than three hundred (300) feet in all directions from any other large family day care facility, as measured from any point on the exterior walls of both structures. In no case shall a residential parcel be directly abutted by large family day care homes on two or more sides. 
2.  Noise. The operation of any child care facility shall comply with all provisions of the city noise ordinance. The review authority may conditions of approval to reduce noise impacts including: solid fencing or other sound attenuating devices, restrictions on outside play hours, location of play areas, and placement of outdoor play equipment. 
3.  Traffic circulation. The traffic circulation plan for all child day care facilities shall be designed to diminish traffic safety problems. A residence on a primary or secondary arterial street shall provide a drop-off/pickup area designed to prevent vehicles from backing onto the arterial roadway. The care provider may be required to submit a plan of staggered drop-off and pickup time ranges to reduce congestion in neighborhoods already identified as having traffic congestion problems. 
E.  Required findings for approval. No conditional use permit for a daycare center or a director's review for a large family day care facility shall be granted unless the review authority first makes all of the following findings, in addition to those required by section 17.32.090 (findings and decision for conditional use permits) or section 17.32.790 (findings and decision for director's review): 
1.  The facility complies with all applicable requirements of this Section; and 
2.  The facility complies with all applicable building and fire code provisions adopted by the state and administered by the county fire department, and the state department of social services licensing requirements. 
F.  Notification of proposed action. Not less than ten (10) working days prior to the date on which the decision will be made on the application, the city shall provide public notice in compliance to the applicant, and all owners of property within a three hundred (300) foot radius of the exterior boundaries of the proposed parcel. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.200 - Home Occupations. 
A.  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to provide the guidelines and restrictions for operating a home occupation (home-based business), from a residential dwelling in the city. It is intended that the home occupation functions as an office, and is secondary to the dwelling's main residential use. In addition, the home occupation shall not detract from nor become incompatible with the surrounding residential uses; and thus, will not interfere with the general welfare of the surrounding residential area. 
B.  Conditions for home occupations. No home occupation shall be approved unless it complies with this section and all pertinent city codes, ordinances and regulations: 
1.  Residency. The applicant who holds the home occupation permit and accompanying business license shall reside at the address location as stated on the home occupation permit and business license. 
2.  Boundaries. A home occupation shall be conducted only within the enclosed living area of the dwelling unit, accessory building, or the garage, without rendering the garage unusable as the required off-street parking space(s) for the dwelling unit. Home occupation activities shall not be visible or audible beyond the boundaries of the site. 
3.  Alterations. There shall be no alteration of any building or structure which would result in a change of the residential occupancy classification under the current the state building code. 
4.  Traffic and parking. The home occupation shall not generate vehicular traffic and/or vehicular parking which degrades or is otherwise detrimental to the residential nature of the neighborhood and thus becomes objectionable to neighboring residents and other affected by such parking or traffic. 
5.  Hours of operation. No customer or client may come to the premises except during the hours of 7 a.m. to 10 p.m. No deliveries may originate from or be made to the premises except during the hours of 8 a.m. to 6 p.m. 
6.  Commercial vehicles. No commercial vehicle which has a capacity of more than one-ton shall be parked or stored at the home occupation site other than a recreational vehicle. (The term "commercial vehicle" means as the term as described in the state vehicle code.) 
7.  Nuisance. The home occupation shall not create any radio or television interference or create discernible noise, glare, dust, odor, vibrations, or unreasonable disturbance in excess of that which is normal to a residential use of the premises. Nor may the home occupation cause or generate any other condition that interferes with the peace, health, safety or general welfare of people or property in the surrounding area. 
8.  Signs and advertising. There shall be no signs or structures advertising the home occupation business on the residential property. In addition, no other advertisement of the home occupation shall include the address of the residential dwelling where the home occupation is conducted. 
9.  Storage. There shall be no exterior storage of materials in the conduct of a home occupation. The storage of materials, equipment, inventory, supplies, and files for home occupation, is only permitted inside the dwelling unit or an entirely closed roofed accessory structure. 
10.  Rental property. No home occupation shall be conducted in a rental unit, without the owner or landlord's permission. 
11.  Transferability. Home occupations are valid only for the person and the address approved and are nontransferable. Only persons whose primary residence in the dwelling unit may engage in the home occupation. 
12.  Employees. A maximum of one employee is allowed at the home occupation, if located in an apartment or condominium unit; two employees is allowed if the home is within an urban residential zone; and three employees in rural residential zones. 
13.  Sales. No commodity shall be sold or displayed on the premises. 
14.  Specific conditions. The director may add specific conditions to the approval of a home occupation permit in order to address concerns which are not covered by the above conditions and which, in the director's opinion, are necessary to protect neighboring property from any potential adverse effects of the proposed home occupation. 
C.  Prohibited uses. The following uses shall not be allowed as a home occupation: 
1.  Ambulance service; 
2.  Animal training; 
3.  Body piercing; 
4.  Construction, preassembly and similar large woodworking operations; 
5.  Contractor and construction yards that cause or require outdoor storage; 
6.  Cosmetology services including barber and beauty shops; 
7.  Food handling, food processing, food warehousing, food packaging, or food distribution; 
8.  Forensic testing; 
9.  Limousine, taxi or tow truck services; recreational vehicle rentals or automobile leasing; food or ice cream vending vehicles; or other vehicles not normally incidental to a residential use where such motor vehicles would be parked or stored at the home occupation site. This provision does not preclude limited customer or client parking; 
10.  Mechanical and electronic repair utilizing, maintaining, or storing more mechanical or electronic equipment on the premises than is common to a residence; 
11.  On-site massage therapists; 
12.  Pet grooming (not prohibited in RR-1 and RR-2.5 zones, if on appointment basis only); 
13.  Rental establishments as described in section 17.12.040, the permitted uses section of the C zone; 
14.  Repair services related to automobiles, motorcycles, large household appliances, small engines, garden equipment, or other machinery; 
15.  Sales or production of drug paraphernalia; 
16.  Tattoo studio; 
17.  Taxidermy; 
18.  The manufacturing, sale, lease, or rental of firearms and/or ammunition; 
19.  Welding shop and/or metal fabrication; 
20.  Uses which are subject to director's review or a conditional use permit in the zone where the applicant's residence is located; 
21.  Those uses which the director determines are similar in nature to the uses listed above. 
D.  Application. The application for a home occupation shall be made in person to the planning department by resolution of the city council. The applicant shall fully disclose on the application form all hazardous materials (as defined in section 17.04.240) which will be stored on-site or used in conjunction with the home occupation. The city shall accept only those applications which have provided all of the information required on the application form which applies to the proposed home occupation. 
E.  Revocation. Home occupation permits may be immediately revoked by the director based upon a finding that any one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  That the use has changed either in nature or extent to the point that it differs substantially from the use requested in the approved application for the home occupation permit. 
2.  That the use fails to comply with any condition in subsection B of this section. 
3.  That the holder of the home occupation permit failed to allow inspections at a reasonable time for the purpose of investigating a complaint or to verify compliance of the home occupation with the required conditions. 
4.  That the holder of the home occupation permit failed to comply with any applicable city, county, state or federal ordinance, law or regulation including failure to obtain and/or renew a business license. 
The director shall notify in writing the holder of the home occupation permit of such revocation and the reasons thereof. The director's decision may be appealed in accordance with section 17.36.030. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.210 - Live-work. 
A.  Definition. As used in this ordinance: a "live-work" use is a business conducted within a dwelling unit or accessory structure by occupants of the dwelling unit. A live-work use is distinguished from a home occupation primarily in that a live-work use can include employees who are not residents of the home, involve a greater number of customers, be located in a larger percentage of a home or accessory building, and have appropriate on-site signage. 
B.  Purposes. The purposes of this ordinance are to: 
1.  Provide for the appropriate development of units that incorporate both living and working space; 
2.  Provide flexibility for the development of live-work units, particularly within existing buildings; 
3.  Allow for the transition of residential uses along primary arterial streets to office and commercial uses due to their proximity and access to higher volume traffic; 
4.  Protect existing, surrounding, and potential uses from conflicts with each other; and 
5.  Ensure that the exterior design of live-work buildings is compatible with the exterior design of surrounding buildings in the area, while remaining consistent with the predominant workspace character of live-work buildings. 
C.  Permitted locations for live-work units. Live-work units are permitted in urban and rural residential zones where the property faces and has access from a primary arterial street. 
D.  Uses permitted with a Director's Review. The following non-residential uses are allowed in live-work units: 
1.  Personal and household retail sales and services; 
2.  Business support services; 
3.  Offices; and 
4.  Other similar uses as determined appropriate by the planning director. 
E.  Prohibited uses. The following non-residential uses are prohibited in live-work units: 
1.  Restaurants and/or alcohol establishments; 
2.  Entertainment uses; 
3.  Construction yards; 
4.  Any uses involving hazardous materials; and 
5.  Any other uses that may result in a negative impact on surrounding uses, including traffic, noise and/or safety, as determined by the planning director. 
F.  Development standards. Construction of the live-work unit as a non-residential structure is permitted within the development standards of the zone that the property is located in, as well as all other applicable building and accessibility regulations. 
G.  Conditions of approval. 
1.  Parking. 
a.  Two covered or uncovered parking spaces shall be provided for the residential use of the live-work unit. 
b.  Required parking for the non-residential use will be based on the applicable parking standard as determined by the planning director. 
2.  Signage. 
a.  Wall business sign permitted: maximum height eighteen (18) inches; maximum length thirty (30) percent of façade width; roof sign prohibited. 
b.  Monument sign permitted: maximum forty-eight (48) inches in height, including base; maximum length seventy-two (72) inches; for maximum total of twenty-four (24) square feet per sign face. 
3.  Owner or employee residency required. The owner of the property or an employee of the live-work business shall be required to live on the premises. 
4.  Employees. Up to three persons other than residents of the dwelling may be employed, unless otherwise provided by the use permit. 
5.  Hours of operation. No customer or client may come to the premises except during the hours of 7 a.m. to 10 p.m. No deliveries may originate from or be made to the premises except during the hours of 8 a.m. to 6 p.m. 
6.  Number of live-work activities. No more than one live-work use is allowed per legal dwelling unit on the property. 
7.  Outdoor storage and activity. No outdoor storage of materials or equipment related to the business activity shall be permitted. No outdoor activity related to the business activity shall be permitted. 
8.  Nuisance. The live-work use shall not create discernible noise, glare, dust, odor, vibrations, or unreasonable disturbance in excess of that which is normal to a residential use, nor shall the live-work use cause or generate any other condition that interferes with the peace, health, safety or general welfare of people or property in the surrounding area. 
9.  Specific conditions. The director may add specific conditions to the approval of a live-work permit in order to address concerns which are not covered by the above conditions and which, in the director's opinion, are necessary to protect neighboring property from any potential adverse effects of the proposed home occupation. 
H.  Revocation. Live-work permits may be immediately revoked by the director based upon a finding that any one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  The use has changed either in nature or extent to the point that it differs substantially from the use requested in the approved application for the live-work permit. 
2.  The use fails to comply with any condition or intended purpose as described in this section. 
3.  The holder of the live-work permit failed to allow inspections at a reasonable time for the purpose of investigating a complaint or to verify compliance of the live-work use with the required conditions. 
4.  The holder of the live-work permit failed to comply with any applicable city, county, state or federal ordinance, law or regulation including failure to obtain and/or renew a business license. 
The director shall notify in writing the holder of the live-work permit of such revocation and the reasons thereof. The director's decision may be appealed in accordance with section 17.36.030. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.220 - Garage Conversions. 
    All garage conversions shall comply with all pertinent city codes, ordinances and regulations in addition to the following conditions: 
A.  Garage conversions. Garages serving and attached to existing single-family detached residences may be converted to expand the living area of such residences, provided that: 
1.  The property owner, in writing, absolves the city of all liabilities regarding any deed restrictions that may be applicable to the property. 
2.  The garage shall be replaced by two covered or uncovered, surfaced, off-street parking spaces on the site in a manner consistent with the character of the neighborhood. 
3.  Interior access from the garage to the house shall be kept. 
4.  There shall be no door access into the garage facing the street. 
5.  The conversion is accomplished in full accordance with all pertinent codes and ordinances as verified by obtaining permits and inspections from all appropriate agencies. 
6.  The garage conversion shall meet the design guidelines for enhanced architectural quality and compatibility. 
B.  Illegal garage conversions. Conversion of a garage to expand the living area of a residence or otherwise render the garage unusable for its original purpose without obtaining appropriate permits and inspections shall be deemed an illegal garage conversion. When a property owner is informed that such an illegal garage conversion exists on his property, the property owner shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Within thirty (30) days of becoming so informed, the property owner shall pay the required fees and request that the conversion be inspected by building and safety division. 
2.  Should building code violations be detected during the inspection of the premises, the building and safety division shall prepare a list of the deficiencies which must be corrected to bring the conversion, and if necessary the residence, into compliance with all applicable building codes. 
3.  The property owner shall then exercise one of the following options: 
a.  If the property owner desires to retain the garage conversion he shall correct the deficiencies cited by the building and safety division prior to the expiration of the building permit. Once the deficiencies are corrected and verified by inspection, the conversion shall be considered legal provided that two covered or uncovered, surfaced, off-street parking spaces are furnished on the site in a manner consistent with the character of the neighborhood; or 
b.  If the property owner does not desire to correct the conversion deficiencies as cited, he shall remove the conversion and restore the building to function as a garage in accordance with applicable building codes. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.230 - Guest Houses. 
A.  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this section is to provide a means for adding living space to a residential home or residential detached garage, which may serve as housing for guests. 
B.  Applicability. This section shall apply to all guest houses, which is defined as living facilities located on the same premises with the primary residence, provided for the sole use of family members, guests, or persons employed on the premises. Carriage units located above a detached garage are considered guest houses. 
C.  Standards. The following development standards shall apply to all guest houses, including carriage units, when specified: 
1.  The guest house may be constructed as a detached building or may be attached to the primary residence on a lot or parcel in the RR or R zone. 
2.  The minimum net area of a lot or parcel of land upon which a guest house may be constructed shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
3.  The guest house must be located within the buildable area of the lot or parcel, and conform to all property development regulations and standards of the zone in which it is located. If a guest house is attached to a garage located in the rear yard, the garage portion of the structure may be located in the same manner as stand-alone rear yard garages (allowed up to the rear and side property line), but any livable portion of the structure shall meet the rear and side yard setback. A carriage unit may be located above a detached garage that is located in the rear yard, and is accessed from an alley. 
4.  Only one guest house shall be permitted on any residential lot or parcel, in conjunction with the primary residential unit. A guest house is not permitted on a property with both a primary and a secondary dwelling unit. 
5.  The floor area of a guest house shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the existing living area of the main dwelling unit. 
6.  The maximum floor area for a guest house shall be five hundred (500) square feet. 
7.  The guest house shall be architecturally compatible with the main dwelling unit. 
8.  The guest house shall be located on the same lot as the primary dwelling and cannot be sold as a separate unit. 
9.  The guest house shares utility services with the main dwelling unit for gas, electricity, water and sewer. 
10.  A property owner may not build a guest house if the primary residence has a garage that has been converted into living space. 
11.  The guest house shall meet the design guidelines for enhanced architectural quality and compatibility. 
D.  Application. Any property owner seeking a permit for a guest house shall submit a director's review application. The Director shall approve the application so long as the guest house or carriage unit complies with all provisions of this section. In the event such application is denied, the appeals proceedings set forth in chapter 2.44 shall be available to the applicant. 
E.  Conversions. In order to legitimize an illegal guest house or carriage unit to a conforming legal second dwelling unit, the property owner shall file a director's review application and shall comply with the standards and requirements set forth in this section. 
F.  Violations. Any property owner with a guest house or carriage unit which does not comply with all the standards established herein is subject to prosecution for a zoning violation under section 17.04.220. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.240 - Accessory dwelling units. 
A.  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this section is to provide a means to develop accessory, independent living facilities that would accommodate a variety of increasingly common living arrangements, including those for multi-generational households. The enactment of this section does not legitimize illegal accessory dwelling units. 
B.  Applicability. This section shall apply to all accessory dwelling units, which is defined as an additional dwelling unit on a lot or parcel, which provides complete independent living facilities and may be rented. 
C.  Standards. The following development standards shall apply to all accessory dwelling units: 
1.  The accessory dwelling unit may be constructed as a detached building or may be attached to the primary residence on a lot or parcel in the RR or R Zone. 
2.  The minimum net area of a lot or parcel of land upon which an accessory dwelling unit may be constructed shall be seven thousand (7,000) square feet. 
3.  No more than one accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted on any residential lot or parcel. An accessory dwelling unit is not permitted on a residential lot which already has an existing accessory dwelling unit, a guest house, or a garage that has been converted to living space. 
4.  The accessory dwelling unit must be located within the buildable area of the lot or parcel, and conform to all property development regulations and standards of the zone in which it is located. 
5.  The floor area of an attached accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the existing living area of the main dwelling unit. 
6.  The minimum floor area for a detached accessory dwelling unit shall be four hundred (400) square feet. The maximum floor area for a detached accessory dwelling unit shall be no more than 10% of the square-footage of the lot (e.g. a maximum one thousand (1,000) square-foot 2nd dwelling unit on a ten thousand (10,000) square-foot lot), up to a maximum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet. 
7.  The accessory dwelling unit shall be architecturally compatible with the main dwelling unit. 
8.  The accessory dwelling unit shall be located on the same lot as the principal dwelling and cannot be sold as a separate unit. 
9.  One parking space is required for the accessory dwelling unit, in addition to the parking required for the main dwelling unit. The parking for the accessory dwelling unit shall be provided by a ten (10) feet by twenty (20) feet space located either inside a garage or carport, or on a driveway not used for access into the primary structure's garage. 
10.  The property must be occupied by one or more owner(s) of the property as a permanent and principal residence. The owner may live in either the principal or accessory dwelling unit and must have a fifty (50) percent or greater interest in the property. The owner-occupant must live in the structure for more than six months of each calendar year. 
11.  Accessory dwelling unit owners must sign and record an owner-occupancy covenant with the county recorder's office prior to receiving a permit to construct the accessory dwelling unit. 
12.  The accessory dwelling unit may have a separate address and mailbox. 
13.  The accessory dwelling unit may have separate utility meters from the primary dwelling unit, such as meters for water, gas and electricity. 
D.  Covenants, conditions, and restrictions. The covenants, conditions, and restrictions to run with the property shall include the following declarations: 
1.  That he/she/they are the owner(s) of the property located in the city, at the subject address as legally described, and that there are no other owners; 
2.  That he/she/they applied for a permit to construct and/or use an accessory dwelling unit on the property pursuant to this section and make(s) this covenant as required by this section; 
3.  That the owner(s) of the property will restrict the use of the principal and accessory dwelling units on the property in compliance with the requirements of this section; 
4.  That an owner with at least a fifty (50) percent interest in the property will occupy either the principal dwelling unit or the accessory dwelling unit for six or more months of each calendar year as the owner's principal residence, unless a waiver has been applied for and granted by the city planning department; 
5.  That if the owner(s) of the property are unable or unwilling to fulfill the requirements of this section for owner occupancy, then the owner(s) will remove those features of the accessory dwelling unit that make it a dwelling unit, as determined by the city planning department, including the removal of kitchen features such as, but not limited to gas, electrical and/or plumbing fixtures and connections; 
6.  That this covenant shall run with the land and be binding upon the property owner(s), his/her/their heirs and assigns, and upon any parties subsequently acquiring any right, title or interest in the property; 
7.  That the undersigned owners and their heirs, successors and assigns will inform all prospective purchasers of the property of the terms of this covenant; and 
8.  That this covenant will be recorded by the owner(s) in the real estate records of the county's assessor's office as a deed restriction, prior to issuance of the permit allowing construction and/or use of an accessory dwelling unit on the property. 
E.  Application. Any property owner seeking a permit for an accessory dwelling unit shall submit a director's review application. The director shall approve the application so long as the accessory dwelling unit complies with all provisions of this section. In the event such application is denied, the appeals proceedings set forth in chapter 2.44 shall be available to the applicant. 
F.  Conversions. In order to legitimize an illegal accessory dwelling unit to a conforming legal accessory dwelling unit, the property owner shall file a director's review application and shall comply with the standards and requirements set forth in this section. The director reserves the right to allow deviations, if there is a demonstrated difficulty or impracticality to modify the accessory dwelling unit to meet adopted requirements; nonetheless, all code requirements pertaining to fire and building safety must still be met. 
G.  Violations. Any property owner with an accessory dwelling unit which does not comply with all the standards established herein for accessory dwelling units is subject to prosecution for a zoning violation under section 17.04.220. 
H.  Temporary owner absence. If the city determines that the owner has violated owner-occupancy requirements, the owner shall: 
1.  Reoccupy the structure; 
2.  Remove the accessory dwelling unit, or those features of the accessory dwelling unit that makes it a dwelling unit, as determined by the city planning department, including the removal of kitchen features such as, but not limited to gas, electrical and/or plumbing fixtures and connections; or 
3.  Submit evidence showing good cause, subject to approval of the planning director, such as job dislocation, sabbatical leave, education or illness for a waiver of this owner-occupancy requirement to allow up to two years' absence from residence in the city. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.245 - Single-room Occupancy. 
A.  Definition. A single room occupancy (SRO) is a multiple-tenant building that provides permanent residency to one or two people in individual rooms, or to the single room itself, with tenants typically sharing kitchen facilities. 
B.  Purpose. Provide a form of affordable private housing for lower-income households, seniors, and persons with disabilities. 
C.  Standards. The following standards shall apply to all single-room occupancy buildings: 
1.  Each SRO housing unit shall have at least two hundred (200) square feet of floor area. 
2.  Each SRO housing unit shall have its own bathroom, including toilet, sink and shower. 
3.  A community kitchen with facilities for cooking, refrigeration, and washing utensils shall be provided on each floor, or each individual SRO housing unit shall have facilities for cooking, refrigeration, and washing utensils. 
4.  Facilities for community garbage storage or disposal shall be provided on each floor. 
D.  Application. Any property owner seeking a permit to construct an SRO, including the conversion of an existing building (e.g. hotel) shall submit a director's review application. The Director shall approve the application so long as the SRO complies with all provisions of this section. In the event such application is denied, the appeals proceedings set forth in chapter 2.44 shall be available to the applicant. 
E.  Violations. Any property owner with an SRO which does not comply with all the standards established herein for SROs is subject to prosecution for a zoning violation under section 17.04.220. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.250 - Mobilehomes and Manufactured Housing. 
    A mobilehome/manufactured housing unit located outside of mobilehome park shall comply with the requirements of this section: 
A.  Site requirements. The site, and the placement of the mobile home on the site shall comply with all zoning, subdivision, and development standards applicable to a conventional single-family dwelling on the same parcel. 
B.  Mobile home design and construction standards. A mobile home outside of a mobile home park shall comply with the following design and construction standards. 
1.  Roof. The roof of each mobilehome shall exhibit an angle line with an overhang of at least twelve (12) inches on all sides and shall consist of shingles or non-reflective exterior material customarily used on conventionally constructed dwellings. 
2.  Exterior Siding. Each mobilehome shall be covered with a non-reflective exterior material customarily used on conventionally constructed dwellings. The exterior covering material shall extend to the ground except when: 
a.  The exterior siding, trim, and roof shall be of the same materials and treatment found in conventionally built residential structures in the surrounding area, and shall appear the same as the exterior materials on any garage or other accessory structure on the same site. 
b.  A solid concrete or masonry perimeter foundation is used, in which case the covering material shall extend to six inches above final grade; or 
c.  Wood siding is used, in which case such siding is not permitted closer than six inches to final grade, provided that the last six inches to final grade is fully enclosed with other building code approved materials. 
3.  Foundation Systems. Each mobilehome shall be attached to a foundation system which shall be in accordance with health and safety code requirements as approved by city building and engineering services. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
Article V. - Solar, Wind, and Alternative Energy Uses 

17.08.270 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the solar, wind, and alternative energy uses section of this Code is to encourage investment in alternative energy uses in the city, while providing regulations and guidelines for the installation of these uses. The regulations and guidelines shall ensure that solar, wind, and alternative energy uses, whether as primary or accessory uses, are functionally effective and efficient, aesthetically pleasing in design, and complements the structures they are attached to, and the surrounding environment that they are located in. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.280 - Applicability. 
    All solar farms (solar photovoltaic electric generation facilities) shall comply with all applicable provisions of the city codes, the state building and utility codes, and the standards of this section. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.290 - Solar Farms. 
A.  Purpose and applicability. The purpose of the solar farm (solar photovoltaic electric generation facility) standards is to encourage investment in solar energy on parcels zoned RR-2.5 in the city, while providing guidelines for the installation of solar facilities that complement the surrounding environment. All solar farms shall comply with all applicable provisions of the city codes and the standards of this section. 
B.  Approvals required. As allowed only on properties zoned RR-2.5, the applicant shall submit for and receive approval of a conditional use permit and building permit prior to construction of a solar farm. 
C.  Design requirements. 
1.  No unscreened outdoor storage of any kind would be allowed on the site. 
2.  Barbed wire is acceptable on the top of the perimeter fence to provide site security, but razor wire is prohibited. 
3.  Restroom facilities shall be provided on the project site for use by maintenance staff. 
4.  Per the direction of the planning director, the applicant shall install landscaping along the perimeter of the project site for screening purposes. 
5.  Per the direction of the director of public works, the applicant shall dedicate right-of-way for all necessary street improvements. 
D.  Findings. 
1.  The solar farm will be in conformance with the general plan land use designation of non-urban residential and with general plan policy 3.6.6, which states, "consider and promote the use of alternative energy such as wind energy and solar energy." 
2.  The requested use at the location proposed will not: 
a.  Adversely affect the health, peace, comfort, or welfare of persons living in the surrounding area because the proposed use will be buffered from the surrounding residential zones by vegetation, berms, or other means and the panels and trackers generate minimal amounts of noise. 
b.  Be materially detrimental to the use, enjoyment, or valuation of property of other persons located in the vicinity of the site because the proposed panels are within the height regulations of the rural residential zones and are designed with adequate setbacks from the adjacent street. 
c.  Jeopardize, endanger or otherwise constitute a menace to the public health, safety, or general welfare because adequate sewer, water, drainage, and improvements will be part of the project. 
3.  The solar farm will not adversely affect other nearby uses because all aesthetic, noise, and other environmental concerns will be mitigated through various design features, including landscaping and screening, and the use of silent or low-noise equipment. 
4.  The proposed site is adequate in size and shape that accommodate the solar photovoltaic electric generation facility, landscaping, and other development features prescribed in the zoning ordinance or as otherwise required in order to integrate said use with the use in the surrounding areas. 
5.  The proposed site is adequately served by the surrounding streets, which are of sufficient width and improved as necessary to carry the anticipated daily vehicle trips such use would generate; and by other public and private service facilities, including sewer, water, fire, and police services as required. 
6.  The proposed use will not result in a significant effect on the environment because all potential impacts have been found to be less than significant with the inclusion of mitigation measures, or are determined to be acceptable due to overriding considerations. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.300 - Solar Energy Systems. 
A.  Purpose and applicability. The purpose of the solar energy system standards is to encourage investment in solar energy on all parcels in the city, while providing guidelines for the installation of those systems that are consistent with the architectural and building standards of the city. All solar energy systems shall comply with all applicable provisions of the city codes and the standards of this section. 
B.  Approvals required. The applicant shall submit for and receive approval of a building permit prior to installation of any solar energy system. 
C.  Ground-mounted solar energy systems. 
1.  All ground-mounted solar energy systems shall not be located within the required front, side, or rear building setbacks, or front yard area, and shall comply with all applicable height restrictions. 
2.  To the extent possible, without compromising the solar energy system's access to the sun, ground-mounted solar energy systems shall be screened from view at-grade from all adjacent streets and adjacent properties. 
D.  Roof-mounted solar energy systems. 
1.  Solar panels and accessory equipment shall be designed and located on a house in a manner that minimizes the detrimental impact to the aesthetic appearance of a house. 
2.  All solar energy system appurtenances such as, but not limited to, water tanks, supports, wiring and plumbing shall be screened to the maximum extent possible without compromising the effectiveness of the solar collectors, and shall be painted a color similar to the color of the surface upon which they are mounted. Solar collectors are exempt from the screening and color provisions of this subsection. 
3.  All roof-mounted solar collectors can be mounted at an optimum angle to the sun for maximum energy production. The maximum height of a solar collector shall be two feet, measured perpendicular to the roof surface, and may not exceed the maximum overall building height. The remainder of the solar energy system shall be below the level of the solar collector(s). 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.305 - Implementation of solar energy systems. 
A.  Purpose and intent. It is the purpose and intent of this section to provide standards and procedures for builders of new homes to install solar energy systems in an effort to achieve greater usage of alternative energy. 
B.  Applicability. These specific standards are applicable for all new single-family homes with a building permit issuance date on or after January 1, 2014. 
C.  Provision of solar energy systems. 
1.  A builder shall provide solar energy systems for new detached single family homes in accordance with the energy generation requirements as listed in Section 17.08.060 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. It is intended that no individual installed system shall produce less than 2 watts per square foot of each home built by the builder. For example a 2,000 square foot home would require builder to install a 4 kW system. A builder may also adjust the amount of solar installed after demonstrating to the building official that the zero net energy requirements can be met with the installation of a smaller system. 
2.  Installation of solar energy systems is required for all new single family detached homes within a production subdivision. A builder may also meet the solar requirement by paying a solar mitigation fee based on the square footage of the living space of each home that is built. 
3.  Builders shall demonstrate through building plan check their intention to meet the solar zero net energy requirement. 
4.  Builders shall build solar energy systems on model homes, reflective of the products that will be offered to homebuyers. 
5.  If a tract is built in phases, the solar energy generation requirement shall be fulfilled for each phase, or release of homes. 
6.  Solar energy systems shall meet the development standards and guidelines as described in the Lancaster Zoning Code. 
7.  Solar energy systems for multi-family developments may be provided on rooftops, or on solar support/shade structures. 
8.  Accessory dwelling units (ADU) that are exempt from the zero net energy requirements. 
9.  New single family residential units that comply with the zero net energy requirements shall not be required to comply with the landscaping and irrigation requirements of Section 17.08.110.A.12 and Section 8.30.040.B of the Lancaster Municipal Code with respect to the rear yard area." 
D.  Alternative methods of compliance. If site-specific situations make it impractical for a builder to meet the requirements of this section, the builder may propose an alternative method of compliance with the intent of this section. An alternative method of compliance shall be approved where the building official finds that the proposed alternative is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013; Ord. No. 1020, §§ 2, 3, 2-14-2017) 
17.08.310 - Vertical-axis Wind Turbine Systems (VAWTS). 
A.  Purpose and intent. It is the purpose and intent of this section to promote the safe, effective and efficient construction and use of VAWTS on residential lots within the city limits of the city. These regulations are intended to assure that VAWTS are designed and located in a manner that minimizes visual, noise, and safety impacts on the surrounding community. Commercial wind turbines in residential zones are subject to a conditional use permit. 
B.  Applicability. These specific standards are applicable for all vertical axis wind turbine system in residential zones allowed subject to approval of a director's review in accordance with article VI of chapter 17.32. 
C.  Definitions. The following are definitions of specialized terms and phrases used in this section. Definitions of general terms and phrases are located in section 17.04.240 (definitions). 
    "Director" means the planning director of the city. 
    "FAA" means Federal Aviation Administration. 
    "Guy wires" means wires or cables used in tension to support a tower. 
    "Tower" means the portion of the VAWTS upon which the turbine is mounted. 
    "Tower height" means the height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower measured from the ground to the top of the tower, excluding the VAWTS, blades and wind-measuring devices. 
    "USGS" means the United States Geological Survey. 
    "Vertical axis wind turbine system" ("VAWTS") means a small scale, non-commercial vertical axis wind turbine system, designed with a vertical axis, suitable for residential zones consisting of a wind turbine, tower, blades, associated controls and conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity that does not exceed the allowable rated capacity under the emerging renewables fund of the renewables investment plan administered by the state energy commission and which will be used primarily to reduce on-site consumption of utility power by converting mechanical energy into electricity. For the purposes of this section, "wind turbine" shall mean the same as VAWTS. 
D.  Restriction on Use of Electricity Generated by VAWTS. A VAWTS shall be used exclusively to supply electrical power for on-site consumption. Electrical power generated by the VAWTS exceeding on-site consumption may be used by the utility company in exchange for a reduction in the cost of electrical power supplied by that company to the parcel for on-site use, as long as no net revenue is produced by such excess electrical power. VAWTS, as allowed pursuant to this section shall not be used for commercial production or profit. 
E.  Type of Device. Vertical axis wind turbines system (VAWTS) shall meet the following guidelines. All other noncommercial and commercial wind energy conversions system shall meet the requirements outlined in article XI, wind energy conversion systems and shall be subject to a conditional use permit. 
F.  Property Development Regulations. A VAWTS shall be subject to all applicable regulations of the residential zone in which it is proposed, except that the following standards shall take precedence over the regulations of the residential zones to the extent that they differ. The following shall be deemed to be conditions of approval of every VAWTS unless specifically modified under the director's review and approval process. 
1.  No part of a VAWTS shall be located within or over drainage, utility, or any other established easements. Each VAWTS shall be setback from the nearest above-ground public communication or electrical line by a distance which is equivalent to the height of the VAWTS. 
2.  Blade Clearance. No part of a VAWTS blade shall extend within fifteen (15) feet of the ground, trees, or any other structure. 
3.  Only one VAWTS shall be allowed per residence. 
4.  Devices mounted on a building may require strengthening of the existing structure to bear the additional weight and stress created by the VAWTS for which a building permit shall be obtained. 
G.  Yard Requirements. The following shall apply for building and ground mounted VAWTS in all residential zones: 
1.  VAWTS shall be located behind the primary building outside of the front, side and rear yard setbacks (refer to section 17.08.060). 
2.  Tower height shall not exceed the maximum height of the zone in which the VAWTS is located (refer to section 17.08.060). 
Diagram showing allowed location of VAWTS

H.  VAWTS Standards. 
1.  Cage Width. Maximum seventy-eight (78) inches (six and one-half feet). 
2.  Cage Height. Maximum eighty-four (84) inches (seven feet). 
3.  California Energy Commission Approval. The equipment shall meet the state energy commission standards for approved small wind turbines (VAWTS) [www.consumerenergycenter.org]. 
4.  Compliance with Aviation Safety Standards. The VAWTS shall comply with all applicable FAA requirements, including any necessary approvals for installations close to airports and other facilities with flight operations in the vicinity such as fox field, and plant 42. 
5.  Design. A VAWTS must be designed and constructed in accordance with the following: 
a.  Colors. The colors used in the construction materials or finished surface shall be muted and visually compatible with surrounding development. 
b.  Lighting. If required by FAA requirements, all required lights shall be shielded from adjacent properties, and no other lights shall be placed upon the tower. 
c.  Noise. Noise from a VAWTS shall conform with normally acceptable noise standards of sixty-five (65) dBA at property line. 
d.  Visual Effects. Any VAWTS that is placed within the viewshed of a designated scenic highway or vista shall be assessed for its visual effects, and appropriate conditions relating to setting, buffers, and design of the facility. 
e.  Climbing Apparata. All climbing apparatus for ground-mounted VAWTS must be located at least fifteen (15) feet above the ground, and the structure must be designed to prevent climbing within the first fifteen (15) feet. 
f.  Automatic Overspeed Controls. VAWTS shall be equipped with manual and automatic overspeed controls to limit the blade rotation speed to within the design limits of the VAWTS. 
g.  Access Doors. If a VAWTS is equipped with access doors, all access doors shall be lockable. 
6.  Grid Interconnection. The renewable energy must be permanently interconnected to the electrical distribution grid of the utility serving the customer's electrical load. The VAWTS shall interconnect to the electricity distribution system and must comply with applicable electrical codes and utility interconnection requirements. 
7.  Maintenance. VAWTS shall be maintained in an operational condition that poses no potential safety hazards. 
8.  Removal. Within six months after the VAWTS has ceased to operate the permittee shall remove the VAWTS, clear the site of all equipment, and restore the site as nearly as practicable to its condition prior to the installation of the VAWTS. Failure to remove such VAWTS shall constitute as a public nuisance. 
I.  The planning director can require additional design criteria or other information as deemed necessary to integrate the proposed VAWTS with the surrounding area. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.320 - Non-commercial Wind Energy Systems (NC-WES). 
A.  Purpose and Intent. It is the purpose and intent of this section to promote the safe, effective and efficient construction, and use of NC-WES in the rural residential zones (RR-1 and RR-2.5 only). These regulations are intended to assure that NC-WES are designed and located in a manner that minimizes visual, noise, and safety impacts on the surrounding community. 
B.  Applicability. These specific standards are applicable for all non-commercial wind energy systems in the rural residential zones (RR-1 and RR-2.5 only), and subject to approval of a director's review in accordance with article VI of chapter 17.32. The definitions contained in section 17.04.240 regarding wind energy conversion systems shall apply to this section. 
C.  Development Standards. An NC-WES shall be subject to all applicable regulations of the rural residential zones (RR-1 and RR-2.5 only) in which it is proposed, except that the following standards shall take precedence over the regulations of the rural residential zones to the extent that they differ. 
1.  Accessory Use. A NC-WES is considered to be an ancillary structure and may only be placed on a parcel already developed with a primary use, or placed on a parcel concurrent with the development of a primary use. 
2.  Minimum Lot Size. The minimum parcel size shall be forty thousand (40,000) square feet. 
3.  Location of NC-WES. A NC-WES shall be located: 
a.  Behind the primary building within the buildable area of the parcel (exclusive of required front, side, and rear yard areas), and located a minimum of thirty (30) feet from any property line. (Note: setback distances shall not apply to guy wires or anchors). 
b.  Shall not be located within or over drainage, utility, or other established easements. 
c.  Each wind turbine shall be setback from the nearest above-ground public communication or electrical line by a distance which is equivalent to the height of the wind turbine. 
4.  Blade Clearance. No part of an NC-WES blade shall extend within fifteen (15) feet of the ground, trees, or any other structure. 
5.  Maximum Tower Height. Tower height shall not exceed sixty-five (65) feet above grade on any parcel of five acres or less. Parcels greater than five acres in size may have a maximum tower height of eighty (80) feet. 
6.  Maximum Blade Rotor Area Diameter. The overall diameter of the blade area shall not exceed twenty-four (24) feet. 
7.  Compliance with Aviation Safety Standards. The NC-WES shall comply with all applicable Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) requirements, including any necessary approvals for installations within an adopted airport land use plan, air installation compatibility use zone (AICUZ), or other recognized over-flight area. 
8.  Wind Turbine Approval. Wind turbines must be approved under the emerging technologies program of the state energy commission or any other small wind certification program recognized by the AWEA. 
9.  Design. An NC-WES must be designed and constructed in accordance with the following: 
a.  Colors. The colors used in the construction materials or finished surface shall be muted and visually compatible with surrounding development. 
b.  Lighting. Lighting of the tower shall only be permitted if required by, and done in conformance with, the requirements of the FAA. 
c.  Noise. Noise from an NC-WES shall not exceed sixty-five (65) decibels at any property line. 
d.  Visual Effects. Any NC-WES that is placed within the view shed of a designated scenic highway or vista shall be assessed for its visual effects, and appropriate conditions relating to setting, buffers, and design of the facility. 
e.  Climbing Apparatus. All climbing apparatus must be located at least fifteen (15) feet above the ground, and the tower must be designed to prevent climbing within the first fifteen (15) feet. 
f.  Automatic Overspeed Controls. An NC-WES shall be equipped with both manual and automatic overspeed controls to limit the blade rotation speed to within the design limits of the NC-WES. 
g.  Access Doors. If an NC-WES is equipped with access doors, all access doors shall be lockable. 
10.  Signs. One sign, limited to eighteen (18) inches in length and one (12) inches in height, shall be posted at the base of the Tower. The sign shall include a notice of no trespassing, a warning of high voltage, and the phone number of the property owner to call in the event of an emergency. 
11.  Maintenance. NC-WES shall be maintained in an operational condition that poses no potential safety hazards. 
12.  Removal. Within six months after the operation of an NC-WES has ceased the permittee shall remove the NC-WES, clear the site of all equipment, and restore the site as nearly as practicable to its condition prior to the installation of the NC-WES. Failure to remove such NC-WES as required above shall constitute a public nuisance. 
Diagram showing allowed location of NC-WES (RR-2.5 and RR-1 only)

D.  Review and Decision Process. 
1.  Application. A director's review application in accordance with article VI of chapter 17.32 shall be filed for a NC-WES meeting the requirements of this section. 
2.  Notice of Application. The applicant shall submit as part of the director's review, a list of all owners of real property as listed on the latest county assessor's equalized assessment roll, located within three hundred (300) feet of the boundaries of the parcel on which the NC-WES is proposed. Written notices shall be given by mail to all such owners of the intent to consider the application for a NC-WES at least ten (10) days prior to a decision on the application. 
3.  Consideration by Planning Director. The planning director shall review the application for conformance with the requirements of this section and consider any comments received prior to making a decision on the request. The planning director shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. Any decision of the planning director may be appealed to the planning commission in accordance with chapter 2.44. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.330 - Electric Vehicle Charging Stations. 
    Electric Vehicle Charging Stations (EVCS). New residential development shall provide for EVCS in the manner prescribed as follows: 
A.  Garages serving each new single-family residence and each unit of a duplex shall be constructed with a gang box (four inches by four inches) connected to a conduit linking the garage to the electrical service, with available "Level 2" plug-in voltage of two hundred forty (240) volt, in a manner approved by the building and safety official, to allow for the future installation of electric vehicle supply equipment to provide an EVCS for use by the resident. 
B.  In new multiple-family projects of ten (10) dwelling units or less, twenty (20) percent of the total parking spaces required (all of the twenty (20) percent shall be located within the required covered parking) shall be provided with a gang box (four inches by four inches) connected to a conduit linking the covered parking spaces or garages with the electrical service, in a manner approved by the building and safety official, to allow for the future installation of electric vehicle supply equipment to provide EVCSs at such time as it is needed for use by residents. EVCSs shall be provided in disabled person parking spaces in accordance with state requirements. 
C.  In new multiple-family projects of more than ten (10) dwelling units, 10% of the total parking spaces required (all of the 10% shall be located within the required covered parking) shall be provided with a gang box (four inches by four inches) connected to a conduit linking the covered parking spaces or garages with the electrical service, in a manner approved by the building and safety official. Of the total gang boxes provided, fifty (50) percent shall have the necessary electric vehicle supply equipment installed to provide active EVCSs ready for use by residents. The remainder shall be installed at such time as they are needed for use by residents. EVCSs shall be provided in disabled person parking spaces in accordance with state requirements. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
Article VI. - Specific Provisions for Designated Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permits 

17.08.340 - Residential Planned Development (RPD). 
A.  Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of the residential planned development (RPD) is to allow for project designs that do not entirely meet the regulatory standards in this chapter, but do meet the design objectives of the general plan and design guidelines. The RPD promotes high-quality, well-planned developments with residential features and amenities beyond those typical of conventional development, including innovative site layout and design, high-quality architecture, enhanced pedestrian connections and provision of trails, parks and open space. The RPD also allows for project design that is sensitive to the unique physical characteristics of the site (such as clustering units to avoid development in flood-prone areas), as well as infill scenarios, or other circumstances that warrant special methods of development. The RPD would reduce developmental problems in hillside areas and preserve areas of natural scenic beauty through integrated planning and design, and unified control of development. It is further the purpose of this section to establish development standards for the RPD, with the expectation that they will result in a project that is superior to conventional development, in exchange for greater flexibility and intensification of land use. 
B.  Applicability. These specific standards, as well as those listed in section 17.08.060, specific to infill residential lots, and section 17.08.080, pertaining to infill residential development, are applicable for all residential planned developments in zones in which they are allowed subject to the granting of a conditional use permit. 
C.  Standards. The following standards shall apply to all residential planned developments: 
1.  Area. The proposed development plan shall encompass a gross area of not less than the acreage specified below by the zone in which the property is located: 
Zone Minimum Area RR 10 acres R, MDR, HDR 5 acres  
2.  The proposed development plan for an area less than specified above may be considered if the subject property is considered infill development or when there is no effective way to develop the property under conventional standards. 
3.  Density. In an RPD, the number of dwelling units shall be within the density range for the subject property as specified by the zone. For infill RPD, a developer may build up to eight residential units per acre on land zoned R-7,000, in accordance with the provisions of section 17.08.080 (infill residential development). 
4.  Type of Structures. Dwelling units may be single-family attached or detached structures, duplexes or multiple-family residential structures depending upon adjacent development and the compensating features of the development plan. The commission may approve places of public assembly, recreational buildings and accessory buildings if such facilities are for the primary use of persons residing within the planned development project and located so as not to be detrimental to adjacent properties. 
5.  RPD Development Standards. A builder shall adhere to the development standards as listed in section 17.08.060 and the design and performance standards listed in section 17.08.070, unless the builder proposes standards that will result in a more innovative and superior product, and makes the finding that the project will meet or exceed the design goals and objectives of the general plan and design guidelines. For infill RPD, the builder shall also adhere to the development standards listed in section 17.08.080. 
6.  Open Space and Trails. Open space, paseos and trails shall comprise not less than fifteen (15) percent of the net lot or parcel area exclusive of required yards, provided, however, that where the applicant submits evidence to the satisfaction of the commission that the particular development will contain compensatory characteristics which will provide as well or better for planned residential development within the intent of this section. "Infill" RPDs that may not practically accommodate these open space features shall instead provide amenities in context of the surrounding environment, including enhanced pedestrian connections, pocket parks or tot lots, etc. Subject to the approval of the commission, open space shall include one or more of the following designated uses or facilities for the use and enjoyment of all the occupants of the planned residential development or appropriate phase thereof: 
a.  Common open space developed for recreational purposes; 
b.  Areas of scenic or natural beauty forming a portion of the proposed development; 
c.  Present or future recreational areas of noncommercial nature including parks and playgrounds. Where specifically approved by the commission, green fees or similar charges related to use of a golf course or similar open recreational use may be permitted, provided such charges are incidental to operation of said facilities, are not primarily commercial in nature, and do not alter the character of said recreational facility; 
d.  Hiking, equestrian or bicycle trails; 
e.  Landscaped portions adjacent to streets or highways which are in excess of minimum required rights-of-way or yards; 
f.  Other similar areas determined appropriate by the commission. In approving said open space, the commission shall give consideration to the project to be developed, the characteristics of such open space, the manner in which the open space is to be improved and maintained, and such other information as the commission deems pertinent. Reservation of open space shall be made a condition of approval. Such reservation shall be by public dedication, establishment of a maintenance district, common ownership, or other satisfactory means to insure the permanent reservation of and, where appropriate, perpetual maintenance of required open space. 
7.  Distribution of Open Space. Projects developed in phases shall be designed so that each successive phase will contain sufficient open space to independently qualify under the provisions of subsection C.5., provided however, that where the applicant submits development plans indicating to the satisfaction of the commission that the proposed development will provide as well or better for planned residential development within the intent of this section, the commission may approve a division of open space encompassing more than one phase. Where a division of open space will encompass more than one phase, the applicant shall provide the commission with a map indicating cumulative allocation and utilization of open space for each successive phase in each subsequent application. 
8.  Landscaping. The RPD shall adhere to the provisions of section 17.08.110 (landscaping) unless the builder proposes a landscaping plan with the finding that the project will meet or exceed the design goals and objectives of the general plan and design guidelines. 
9.  Street circulation and Connections. The RPD shall be designed to integrate with the adjacent and surrounding land uses through the use of enhanced circulation and connections, with complete streets allowing for safe vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle use. Subject to the approval of the commission, street circulation and connections shall include one or more of the following designated features: 
a.  Street calming features, including corner bulb-outs, mid-block bump-outs, stamped paving, etc; 
b.  Pedestrian connection features, including cul de sac pedestrian access, mid-block pedestrian paseos, pedestrian-only pathways, widened parkways, etc; 
c.  Bicycle pathways and trails; 
d.  Other features and mechanism in accordance with the master plan of trails and bikeways. 
10.  Utilities. The applicant shall submit to the commission, and it shall be made a condition of approval, satisfactory evidence that the applicant has made arrangements with the serving utilities to install underground all new facilities necessary to provide service in the development. 
11.  Development Program. The commission shall consider and may approve an appropriate program indicating the development of open space related to the construction of dwelling units, which shall become a condition of approval. Where development is to be completed in phases, the said development may, with the approval of the commission, be coordinated between phases as approved in subsection C.6. The commission may modify, without a hearing, this condition pertaining to the development program based upon an affirmative showing, in writing, of hardship. 
12.  Findings for RPD. In addition to all other consistency and health and safety findings applicable to the project, the following findings shall be made in reviewing and approving a residential planned development application for a conditional use permit: 
a.  The residential planned development meets the goals of the city general plan, pertaining to community design, and the objectives to "enhance overall community form, create a vibrant sense of place," and to "improve the city's visual identity by utilizing design standards that instill a sense of pride and well-being in the community." 
b.  The residential planned development adheres to the adopted city design guidelines and the design and performance standards listed in this section, and is consistent with the mission statement of "implementing quality design for timeless architecture that enhances the community's image, pride and quality of life." 
c.  The residential planned development is comprehensive, covers a logical planning area, and provides the opportunity for unique and creative designs that are not possible under the city's typical development regulations. 
13.  Findings for Infill RPD. In addition to the findings listed in subsection C.11, infill RPDs shall meet the findings listed in section 17.08.080.C. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
Article VII. - Mobilehome Parks and Mobilehome Park (MHP) Zone 

17.08.350 - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of the mobilehome park (MHP) zone is to provide the means necessary to implement the city general plan, specifically the "urban residential, moderate density" land use designation set forth in the text of the general plan and as delineated on the general plan map. The MHP zone is intended for the exclusive development of mobilehome parks. All mobilehome parks shall be developed in accordance with the standards of this section. Mobilehome parks are intended as an alternative mode of affordable housing to the residents of the city. 
    The MHP zone sets forth standards for mobile-home parks in order to promote a better living environment. Where the city does not have the authority to adopt regulations, the mobile home parks act, government code section 18200 et seq. shall apply. It shall also be the intent of this zone to apply all mobilehome park zone requirements contained herein to all new mobilehome parks created after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and to apply these same requirements to any additions to existing mobilehome parks created after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Existing lots may develop in the MHP zone but no new lots may be created in the MHP zone with a gross area of less than ten (10) acres. 
    It shall not be the intent of this chapter to render previously legally created mobilehome parks which do not comply with the new mobilehome park zone requirements of this chapter to be nonconforming where these parks complied with the ordinances in effect at the time of their creation. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.360 - Applicability. 
    Mobilehome parks located in the MHP zone are subject to site plan review. Mobilehome parks located outside the MHP zone in a residential zone are subject to a conditional use permit, as provided in article I of chapter 17.32. Mobilehome parks located outside the MHP zone shall comply with the development requirements which would be imposed on a single-family residential development in that particular zone including, without limitation, any density considerations which might be applicable. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.370 - Prohibition. 
    A person shall not use any premises in the MHP zone except as hereafter specifically permitted in this chapter and subject to all regulations and conditions enumerated in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.380 - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in the MHP zone: 
A.  A mobilehome on each designated mobile home space within an approved mobilehome park; 
B.  One conventional single-family detached dwelling per mobilehome park. Said dwelling to be for the exclusive use of the caretaker or manager, responsible for operating the park, as a residence and an office. Parking shall be provided in accordance with section 17.08.140, off-street parking; 
C.  Parks, playgrounds, riding and hiking trails, golf courses, lakes, structures, facilities, clubhouses, community centers and similar uses; providing that all such uses are designed for and limited to use by residents of the mobilehome park and their guests, and further provided that such uses are not permitted on the individual mobilehome space; 
D.  Public uses (i.e., parks, libraries and fire stations); 
E.  Water reservoirs, dams, treatment plants, gauging stations, pumping stations, tanks, wells, and any use normal and appurtenance to the storage and distribution of water. Exception: This use is not subject to site plan review; 
F.  Senior mobilehome park in accordance with section 17.08.305. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.390 - Accessory and temporary uses. 
A.  The following uses are considered as accessory uses to the permitted uses in mobilehome parks: 
1.  Awnings, enclosed or unenclosed; storage sheds or cabinets; fences, walls or windbreaks, carports, porches, ramps, stairways, garages; 
2.  Maintenance or storage buildings; 
3.  Solar energy systems, whether mounted on or attached to a mobilehome, building, or mounted on the ground; 
4.  Swimming pools and associated uses and structures. All heated pools erected or constructed after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be heated primarily by a solar energy system or any other water heating system which has been demonstrated to be equal or superior to solar systems in energy efficiency. 
B.  The following uses are considered as temporary uses in the MHP zone: 
1.  Building materials, storage of, use in the construction of a building or building project for a permitted use, during the construction and thirty (30) days thereafter, including the contractor's temporary office, provided that any lot or parcel of land so used shall be part of the building project, or on property adjoining the construction site. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.400 - Uses subject to director's review and approval. 
    If site plans or other pertinent information for the proposed use are first submitted to and approved by the director in accordance with article VI of chapter 17.32, premises in the MHP zone may be used for the following uses: 
A.  Home occupation subject to the requirements of section 17.08.320; 
B.  Public utilities (i.e., gas, electric and telephone facilities); 
C.  Limited convenience commercial and retail uses designed to serve residents of the mobilehome park. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.410 - Uses subject to conditional use permit. 
    The following uses may be permitted provided a conditional use permit has first been obtained as provided in article I of chapter 17.32, and while such permit is in full force and effect in conformity with conditions of such permit: 
A.  Uses necessary to the maintenance of the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.420 - Mobilehome conversions. 
    Any proposal for conversion of an existing mobilehome park shall comply with the requirements of chapter 11.12. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.430 - Park development standards. 
    In addition to the development standards established in the mobile home parks act, the following minimum development standards shall apply: 
A.  Mobilehome park area: 10 gross acres. 
B.  Mobilehome park density: 
1.  Mobilehome park zone: Consistent with the MDR zone classification. 
2.  Outside mobilehome park zone: Shall not exceed the density specified by residential zone in which the park is located. 
C.  Mobilehome park street frontage: 200 feet, continuous frontage on a dedicated public street. 
D.  Public street front yard, rear and street side setback for mobilehome park site: 20 feet. Parking is not permitted in these yards. 
E.  Interior side yard and rear setback, for mobilehome park site: 10 feet along each boundary line of the mobilehome park. 
F.  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
G.  Perimeter public streets and access: Shall be provided in accordance with director's requirements and city standards. 
H.  Parking: Each mobilehome space shall be provided with 2 paved parking spaces, both of which must be covered. Each parking space shall not be less than 9 x 20 feet in size and may be tandem. 
I.  Guest parking: One guest space for each 4 mobilehome spaces to be located within 200 feet of the spaces they serve. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.440 - Perimeter. 
    The mobilehome park shall be designed and developed in a manner compatible with and complementary to existing and potential residential development in the immediate vicinity of the project site. Site planning on the perimeter shall give consideration to protection of the property from adverse surrounding influences, as well as protection of the surrounding areas from potentially adverse influences within the development. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.450 - Landscaping and screening. 
    All yards and setbacks required for mobile home parks shall be landscaped and shall appear similar to conventional residential developments. A decorative masonry wall six feet in height shall screen the mobile home park and shall be located twenty (20) feet from the back of the sidewalk on a street frontage and on the property line elsewhere. The landscaping shall be permanently maintained and shall consist predominantly of drought-resistant trees and vegetation in accordance with title 8, chapter 8.50, landscaping installation and maintenance; and title 8, chapter 8.30, residential landscaping installation and maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.460 - Signs. 
    A person shall not use any sign except as specifically permitted in this section and subject to all regulations and conditions set forth in this title. The following signs are permitted or required, as specified, in all mobilehome parks: 
A.  There shall be no more than one wall sign or single- or double-faced freestanding sign designating the name of the mobilehome park premises, facing or adjacent to each street from which there is access to the property. The height of a freestanding sign shall not exceed eight feet, measured vertically from the base at ground level to the apex of the sign. The total sign area of all wall and freestanding signs (excluding directional signs) shall not exceed 1/10 square-foot for each linear-foot of street frontage, and no sign shall exceed a total sign area of thirty-two (32) square feet. Freestanding signs may be lighted only by continuous internal light. 
B.  One directional sign, not to exceed ten (10) square feet in area, may be placed at each entrance or exit driveway of the mobilehome park. No such sign shall exceed a height of three feet measured vertically from the base at ground level to the apex of the sign. Directional signs may be lighted only by continuous internal light. 
C.  There shall be a directory diagram readily visible from all entrances to the park on which is posted a map of the park showing the location of all facilities, the layout and names of all interior streets, and the location and lot number of all mobilehome spaces. Such diagram shall be of a size to be easily readable by a person with normal vision, shall be illuminated during the hours of darkness, and shall be protected from the elements by being placed in a permanent glass or plastic device. 
D.  Each mobilehome shall be identified by a space number conspicuously posted and of such size and type so as to be clearly readable after dark and in accordance with city standards. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
17.08.470 - Senior mobilehome park. 
    The purpose of the senior mobilehome district overlay is to provide various development and preservation incentives to make the development and maintenance of senior mobilehome parks attractive to mobilehome park owners and developers while, at the same time, providing assurances that existing senior mobilehome parks within the overlay district remain available to seniors. Senior mobilehome parks shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  Zoning Map Designation. Adoption of a senior mobilehome park overlay (MHP-S) shall be by a zone change in accordance with chapter 17.24. Such zone change may be initiated by either the mobilehome park owner or the city. 
B.  Qualification for Inclusion of Properties within the Senior Mobilehome Park Overlay (MHP-S). Properties that are designated to be within the senior mobilehome park overlay zone shall be those properties operated as or proposed to be developed as a senior mobilehome park in which at least one occupant of each mobilehome is fifty-five (55) years or older. 
C.  Land Use Regulations. At least eighty (80) percent of the spaces in mobilehome parks in the senior mobilehome park overlay district shall be occupied by at least one person fifty-five (55) years or older. If an existing mobilehome park met this qualification on August 14, 2007, and fell below the eighty (80) percent requirement between that date and the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, the senior mobilehome park overlay district shall be applied to that mobilehome park, and that park shall be required to operate as a senior mobilehome park by renting spaces and mobilehomes only when at least one occupant of the mobilehome is fifty-five (55) years or older. The signage, advertising, park rules and regulations, and leases for spaces in mobilehome parks in the senior mobilehome park overlay district shall state the park is a senior park. 
D.  Development New or Expansion of Existing Senior Mobilehome Park. A site plan review shall be required for any proposal to develop a new senior mobilehome park or expand an existing senior mobilehome park. A new senior mobilehome park and the expansion area of an existing senior mobilehome park shall comply with the development standards, perimeter treatment, landscaping, screening signage requirement, and use restrictions of this article. 
E.  Limitations on Rentals. Spaces and mobilehomes in a mobilehome park in the senior mobilehome overlay district shall be rented only to occupants who meet the age requirement set forth in subsection A. provided, however, that if the occupants of a space or mobilehome who do not meet this requirement rented the space or mobilehome before the adoption of this chapter, they shall be allowed to remain, and provided further that when such occupants cease to occupy a space or mobilehome, the home and space cannot thereafter be rented except to occupants who meet that age requirement. 
F.  Exemption from Abatement of Nonconforming Uses. Notwithstanding the provisions of article VII of chapter 17.32, senior mobilehome parks that have become nonconforming as to the underlying general plan or zoning designation shall be deemed to be legal and conforming uses. 
G.  Expansion of Existing Senior Mobilehome Parks. Notwithstanding the provisions of article VII of chapter 17.32, the expansion of an existing senior mobilehome park shall not terminate the legal and conforming status of any previously existing structures or uses in the mobilehome park. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
Article VIII. - Reasonable Accommodation for Persons with Disabilities 

17.08.500 - Reasonable Accommodation. 
A.  Purpose. The reasonable accommodation ordinance provides a procedure to request reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities seeking equal access to housing under the federal fair housing act and the state fair employment and housing act in the application of zoning laws and other land use regulations, policies and procedures. 
B.  Applicability. A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any person with a disability (or their representative), when the application of zoning law or other land use regulation acts as a barrier to fair housing opportunities. A request for reasonable accommodation may include a modification or exception to the standards for the siting, development and use of housing that would result in the removal of regulatory barriers and provision of equal housing opportunity. 
C.  Application requirements. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be submitted on an application form provided by the planning department, or in the form of a letter, to the planning director and shall contain the following information: 
1.  The applicant's name, address and telephone number. 
2.  Address of the property for which the request is being made. 
3.  Record owner of property. In the event the nature of the requested accommodation is one that would ordinarily require the consent of the landlord or property owner, such consent shall be submitted, in writing, with the application. 
4.  Description of current uses of the property. 
5.  A description of the impairment of major life activities for which reasonable accommodation is requested. 
6.  Description of the requested accommodation that is being requested. 
7.  The reason why the reasonable accommodation is necessary to ensure equal access to specific property. 
D.  Review authority and procedure. The planning director, or the planning director's designee, shall make a written determination within forty-five (45) days and either grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation based on findings listed in this section and in consistency with the fair housing act. 
E.  Findings. The written decision to grant or deny the request for reasonable accommodation shall be consistent with the fair housing act and shall be based on consideration of the following findings: 
1.  The housing accommodation will be used by an individual disabled under the fair housing act. 
2.  The request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make specific housing available to an individual with a disability under the fair housing act. 
3.  The requested reasonable accommodation would not impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city. 
4.  The requested reasonable accommodation would not require a fundamental alteration in the nature of a city program or law, including but not limited to land use and zoning. 
5.  The requested reasonable accommodation would not impair the reasonable use of adjacent properties. 
F.  Decision. The decision shall be based on the ability to make the findings listed in this section, in consistency with the fair housing act, as well as consideration of the accommodation's physical attributes, and whether there are alternative reasonable accommodations which may provide an equivalent level of benefit. 
G.  Appeal of determination. A determination by the reviewing authority to grant or deny a request for reasonable accommodation may be appealed to the planning commission in compliance with section 17.32.820. 
H.  Confidentiality. All information provided in conjunction with a request for reasonable accommodation shall be kept confidential, and shall only be shared with persons properly designated to make or assess a decision to grant or deny the reasonable accommodation request, or unless disclosure is required by law. 
I.  Non-transferability. A reasonable accommodation is personal to the applicant and shall not be transferable to, or inure to the benefit of, subsequent owners, tenants, or occupants. 
(Ord. No. 989, § 1, 4-9-2013) 
Chapter 17.10 - MIXED USE ZONES 
Article I. - In General 

17.10.010 - In general. 
    As used in this title, "mixed use zones" means the MU-N, MU-C and MU-E zones. 
(Ord. No. 946, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
Article II. - Mixed Use (MU) Zones 

17.10.020 - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of the MU zones are to implement the "Mixed Use" land use category of the city's General Plan. This section regulates developments that combine residential uses with one or more of the following uses: commercial, office professional, light industrial, or community facilities. These regulations facilitate safe, comfortable, and attractive mixed use developments that support pedestrian connections/activities and public transit. The city requires a higher standard of design quality in the Mixed Use zones, in exchange for increased development flexibility for the developer. 
    It shall not be the intent of this title to render previously legally created building lots or legally constructed buildings which do not comply with the new property development regulations or other requirements of this title to be nonconforming where these lots or buildings complied with the ordinances in effect at the time of their creation or construction. However, proof of compliance with ordinances in effect at the time of creation or construction shall be the sole burden of the applicant or property owner. Such proof may include building permits, minutes of council or commission action, case files, or other documentation. An exception to this may be for a development that is located in an adopted vision plan, in which the existing development may be required to conform in design to match the vision plan. 
(Ord. No. 946, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.10.030 - Purposes of the Mixed Use zones. 
    The three mixed use zones under the Mixed Use category each allow for a combination of residential and commercial, office professional and community facilities. The three mixed uses are differentiated by their intent and concentration of development type, in consideration of their specific locations and proximity to surrounding uses and public transportation access. 
A.  Mixed Use-Neighborhood (MU-N). This zone emphasizes compact residential development, built in close proximity to daily commercial/office uses and services, offering pedestrian connections and gathering spaces, including trails and neighborhood parks. Typical developments in the mixed use neighborhood zone include attached multi-family uses, such as apartments and condominiums, small-lot single-family subdivisions, and smaller commercial and office uses. Neighborhoods containing these developments would have a highly connected street pattern, such as a grid block layout for small-lot single family developments. 
B.  Mixed Use-Commercial (MU-C). This zone emphasizes a more fully integrated residential and commercial mixed use development, characterized by "destination features" and social gathering areas. Mixed use commercial developments are typically located along major arterial streets, and are intended to contribute to the local streetscape through vertical elements of multi-storied structures, built closer to the front property line. 
C.  Mixed Use-Employment (MU-E). This zone is intended to provide an area for non-retail employment uses in close proximity to residential uses. Mixed use employment development would typically include multi-family residential uses in conjunction with office professional, business park-type, and some light industrial uses. This zone is not intended for heavier industrial uses. 
D.  Mixed Use-Transit Oriented Development (MU-TOD). These zones provide the foundation for a complementary mixture of appropriately intensive commercial and high-density residential land uses in close proximity to a defined transit facility. Adopted and incorporated by reference into this category are the following: 
1.  Lancaster T.O.D. Zones as adopted by the city council on February 24, 2015, generally covering one hundred eighty-six (186) acres within the Downtown Lancaster Transit Village District as established by the Lancaster General Plan. 
(Ord. No. 946, § 1, 7-13-2010; Ord. No. 1003, §§ 1, 2, 2-24-2015) 
Editor's note- The Lancaster TOD Zones referenced in § 17.10.030 D.1. are on file in, and available from, the city clerk's office. They are also available by going online to: www.cityoflancasterca.org/TOD. 
17.10.040 - Applicability of standards. 
    A person shall not use any premises in the MU zones, except as hereafter permitted in this title and subject to all regulations and conditions enumerated in this title. Development and new land uses proposed within the Mixed Use zones shall comply with the standards in this Section for the applicable zones, as follows. 
A.  Use. Only the land uses allowed by Section 17.10.050 shall be established in the applicable zone. 
B.  Site specifications and building placement. Each proposed structure shall comply with the build-to line, setback, and buildable area requirements in Section 17.10.060 as required for the applicable zone, as well as the design requirements listed in Section 17.10.070. 
C.  Building size and massing. Each proposed structure shall adhere to the size, massing, and height standards established by Section 17.10.060 for the applicable zone, as well as the design requirements listed in Section 17.10.070. 
D.  Parking. On-site parking shall be provided, located, and designed in compliance with Section 17.10.060 for the applicable zone. 
E.  Development and building types. All developments shall substantially resemble one of the development and building types listed in Section 17.10.060, or feature primary characteristics of the development and building types. 
F.  Other design requirements. All other requirements listed in Section 17.10.060, Section 17.10.070 and all applicable guidelines in the Lancaster Design Guidelines shall apply. 
G.  Cargo containers utilized exclusively for the storage of emergency supplies to be used for the benefit of the public by a recognized governmental agency, such as the Los Angeles County Fire Department, in the event of a disaster or emergency situation, may be approved in the MU zones through a director's review. Placement of a cargo container for the storage of private supplies is not allowed. 
(Ord. No. 946, § 1, 7-13-2010; Ord. No. 964, § 1, 5-24-2011) 
17.10.050 - Uses and permit requirements. 
A.  Ratio of uses. 
1.  When a development is located on a project site that is located within 660 feet of an intersection of two major arterial streets, a minimum of 25 percent of the development shall be non-residential uses, as measured by ground floor area. 
2.  When a development is located on a project site that is located within 660 feet of an intersection of two secondary arterial streets, or an intersection of a major arterial with a secondary arterial, a minimum of 10 percent of the development shall be non-residential uses, as measured by ground floor area. 
3.  Single-family structures shall not face arterial streets. 
B.  Uses and permit requirements. 
Mixed Use - Uses Matrix USES MU-N MU-C MU-E P = permitted use/D = director's review/C = conditional use N/A = not allowed Retail/Service: Retail store P P P Grocery store/mini mart/neighborhood market* P P P Personal services P P P  Tattoo/body piercing N/A D D  Pawn shops N/A D D Restaurants/café/bakery/deli* P P P Bar/nightclub/dance club* N/A C C Art gallery P P P Bank/credit union P P P Entertainment (theater, live music, karaoke, comedy, etc.)* D D D Health and fitness services D D D Automotive sales and services N/A C C Automotive repair N/A D P Gas station* D D P Car wash C C C Nightclub without alcohol [C] [C] [C] Office/Professional: Professional office P P P Medical/dental office P P P Light industrial uses N/A N/A P Lodging: Hotel/motel* C P D Bed and breakfast* D P D Conference/meeting room space D P D Public/Semi-Public: Government office P P P Day care center P P P Church/religious institution C P D Post office P P P Private school, trade and vocational schools C P P Recreation/museum/cultural D P P Residential: Detached single-family unit (4 or fewer subdivision) P N/A N/A Detached single-family unit (5 or more subdivision) P P N/A Condominium/apartment/studio/loft units (15 or fewer units) P P P Condominium/apartment/studio/loft units (16 or more units) C C C Assisted living facility (15 or fewer units) P P P Assisted living facility (16 or more units) C C C Live/Work units (new structure) P P P Live/Work units (conversion of existing structure) D D D Temporary/Accessory/Other uses: Home occupation/artist studio/home office P P P Day care as residential accessory use D D D Carriage unit (studio) located above detached garage P P N/A Outdoor sales and promotional activities D D D Carnivals and circuses 1 D D D Christmas tree lots D D D Automated banking, movie rental, food vending machines P P P Stealth wireless telecommunications facilities N/A D D Prohibited uses: Outdoor storage on private property Manufacturing/heavy industrial Adult only/sexually-oriented businesses Check cashing/payday loans/bail bonds Mini-storage  
*Alcohol uses require a CUP 
1 Subject to the provisions of Chapter 9.46. 
(Ord. No. 946, § 1, 7-13-2010; Ord. No. 999, § 4, 8-26-2014; Ord. No. 1007, § 5, 10-13-2015) 
17.10.060 - Development and design regulations by building types. 
A.  Allowed building types. 
Mixed Use - Allowed Building Types and Corresponding Development Standards 1. Single-family house See section 17.10.060 B 2. Apartment/condominium building (small) See section 17.10.060 C 3. Apartment/condominium building (large) See section 17.10.060 D 4. Commercial/office building See section 17.10.060 E 5. Mixed-use building See section 17.10.060 F 6. Light-industrial office building See section 17.10.060 G  
B.  Single-family house. A single-family house is designed as a residence for one household, with its primary entrance accessed from the fronting sidewalk through the front yard. 
1.  Development standards. 
Development Standards Front driveway access Alley access Site specifications.  Minimum lot size. 4,750 sq. ft. 3,500 sq. ft.  Minimum width. 50 ft. with maximum 
12'-wide driveway 40 ft. A  Minimum depth. 85 ft. 75 ft. B Building placement.  Front build-to line. 10 to 18 ft. 10 to 16 ft. C  Required porch encroachment coverage. Up to 6 ft. into front setback, minimum 6' × 12' D  Side yard. 0' with minimum 10' building separation. 
The street side yard facing a corner shall have 10' landscaping. E  Rear yard. 10 ft. F  Minimum frontage ratio. 65% 70% G Building size and massing.  Building height. 1 or 2 stories Parking.  Location of on-site 2-car garage. Minimum 40' from front property line. Detached garage may abut rear property line. Minimum 40' from front property line, and minimum 26' from back of alley for sufficient back-up clearance. H  Number of parking spaces. 2 parking spaces in an enclosed 20' by 20' garage. Carriage unit.  Location of carriage unit above detached garage. Not allowed. Maximum 500 sq. ft., with provision of 1 additional on-site, covered or uncovered parking space. Private yard space.  Required usable yard space. Minimum 10% of lot area, with a minimum 15' width and depth.  
a.  No single-family structure shall face an arterial street. 
b.  Windows of a façade along a zero-lot line facing a neighboring side yard shall be small and have a high sill height, typically 6 feet above the finished floor, or have translucent glazing. 
c.  A 50% reduction in private yard space may be granted if common open space or park is provided elsewhere in the neighborhood, and is no further than 1/4 mile from the residence. Minimum 12' width and depth for private yard or patio will apply. 
d.  A 4-foot pedestrian pathway, separate from the vehicular driveway, shall be provided to connect the building entrance to the street sidewalk. 
e.  A covered breezeway, connecting the primary residence to the detached garage, is permitted, provided it is not enclosed. 


C.  Apartment/condominium building (small - 2 to 15 units). A small apartment or condominium building is a structure containing multiple dwellings. Ground floor and second floor units are accessed directly from the sidewalk via a pedestrian pathway. 
1.  Development standards. 
Development Standards Front driveway access Alley access Site specifications.  Minimum lot size. 10,000 sq. ft. 6,000 sq. ft.  Minimum width. 100 ft. with maximum 
26'-wide driveway 60 ft. A  Minimum depth.  80 ft. B Building placement.  Front build-to line. 12 to 18 ft. C  Required porch encroachment coverage (2 to 4 units). Minimum 1 unit with porch encroachment up to 6 ft. into front setback, minimum 6' × 12' D  Side yard (interior lot). 5 ft., 10 ft. for 2 nd story portion, 15 ft. for 3 rd story portion. 
The street side yard facing a corner shall have 10' landscaping. E  Rear yard. 10 ft. F  Minimum frontage ratio. 60% 70% G Building size and massing.  Building height. 1 to 3 stories Parking.  Location of on-site parking. Minimum 40' from front property line. Minimum 40' from front property line, and minimum 26' from back of alley for sufficient back-up clearance. H  Number of parking spaces (units with attached garage). 2 spaces within an enclosed garage, for each unit and one uncovered off-street guest parking for every 4 dwelling units. Open space.  Required usable open space. 8% of lot area, with a minimum 20' width and depth. Landscaping.  Required landscaping. 15% of lot area.  
a.  On-site parking for residents in apartment/condominium buildings must be within enclosed garages. Podium-style parking is also allowed. On-site surface parking shall be used for guests. 
b.  Garages shall include a 100 cu. sq. ft. shelving area for storage. This storage area is intended to encourage residents to use garages for vehicle parking. 
c.  Detached carports are prohibited, unless the carport incorporates energy-efficient technologies, such as solar panels. 
d.  Parking requirements may be reduced, at the discretion of the director, if the builder can sufficiently demonstrate, through research and analysis that the development warrants fewer parking than is required. Such parking reductions may be granted if the development is located near public transit, or if the builder pays in-lieu parking fees for future public parking or transportation improvements. 
Site Diagrams - Multi-family Structure



D.  Apartment/condominium building (large - 16+ units). A large apartment or condominium building is a structure containing multiple dwellings accessed from a common entrance. Ground floor units are accessed directly from the sidewalk via a pedestrian pathway. 
1.  Development standards. 
Development Standards Front driveway access Site specifications.  Minimum lot size. 40,000 sq. ft.  Minimum width. 160 ft. A  Minimum depth. 160 ft. B Building placement.  Front build-to line. 12 to 20 ft. C  Optional porch or stoop encroachment coverage. Up to 6 ft. into front setback, minimum 6' × 12'  Side yard (interior lot). 10 ft., 15 ft. for 2 nd story portion, 18 ft. for 3 rd story portion.  The street side yard facing a corner shall have 15' landscaping. D  Rear yard. 10 ft. E  Minimum frontage ratio. 60% F Building size and massing.  Building height. 2 to 4 stories  Building height (major arterials). 2 to 5 stories Parking.  Location of on-site parking. Minimum 40' from front property line. G  Number of parking spaces (units with attached garage). 2 spaces within an enclosed garage, for each unit and one uncovered off-street guest parking for every 4 dwelling units.  Number of parking spaces (detached covered garage structure). Studio and one-bedroom units: 1.5 covered parking spaces 
Two and three-bedroom units: 2 covered parking spaces 
Guest parking: 1 space for every 4 dwelling units Open space.  Required usable open space. 8% of lot area, with a minimum 50' width and depth. Landscaping.  Required landscaping. 15% of lot area.  
a.  On-site parking for residents in apartment/condominium buildings must be within enclosed garages. Podium-style parking is also allowed. On-site surface parking shall be used for guests. 
b.  Garages shall include a 100 cu. sq. ft. shelving area for storage. This storage area is intended to encourage residents to use garages for vehicle parking. 
c.  Detached carports are prohibited, unless the carport incorporates energy-efficient technologies, such as solar panels. 
d.  Parking requirements may be reduced, at the discretion of the Director, if the builder can sufficiently demonstrate, through research and analysis that the development warrants fewer parking than is required. Such parking reductions may be granted if the development is located near public transit, or if the builder pays in-lieu parking fees for future public parking or transportation improvements. 
Site Diagrams - Multi-family Structure



E.  Commercial/office building. A building designed for occupancy by retail, service, and/or office uses. Office buildings may be multi-storied, with retail and service uses on the ground level. 
1.  Development standards. 
Development Standards Front driveway access Alley access Site specifications.  Minimum lot size. 10,000 sq. ft. 5,000 sq. ft.  Minimum width. 100 ft. 60 ft. A  Minimum depth. 75 ft. B Building placement.  Front build-to line. 0 to 12 ft. 0 to 6 ft. C  Front build-to line (major arterials). 10 to 18 ft.  Dining patio encroachment. Up to front property line. D  Side yard. 5 ft. E  Rear yard. 10 ft. F  Minimum frontage ratio. 60% 75% G Building size and massing.  Building height. 1 to 2 stories  Building height (major arterials). 1 to 5 stories Parking.  Location of on-site parking. Minimum 36' from front property line. H  Number of parking spaces. See parking requirements in Section 17.12.220 
(Off-street parking standards in Commercial zone.) Open space.  Required usable open space (may include dining patio encroachment). 5% of lot area. Landscaping.  Required landscaping. 15% of lot area. 10% of lot area.  
a.  Dual building entrances shall be provided; one facing the street frontage, connected to the sidewalk; another facing the parking area. 
b.  Reciprocal driveway access between multiple parcels, connecting adjacent parking lots, is required where feasible. 
c.  Truck loading docks shall be a minimum of 40' from front property line, and screened from street view. 
d.  Parking requirements may be reduced, at the discretion of the Director, if the builder can sufficiently demonstrate, through research and analysis that the development warrants fewer parking than is required. Such parking reductions may be granted if the development is located near public transit, or if the builder pays in-lieu parking fees for future public parking or transportation improvements. 
e.  Signs for commercial developments shall adhere to the standards in Sections 17.12.140 through 17.12.210 of the Zoning code (Commercial zone), as well as the design and performance standards in Section 17.10.070. 
f.  Signs for office developments shall adhere to the standards in Sections 17.12.810 through 17.12.870 of the Zoning code (Office Professional zone), as well as the design and performance standards in Section 17.10.070. 
Site Diagrams - Commercial/office Building


F.  Mixed-use building. Mixed-use buildings are designed to accommodate a combination of both commercial/office and residential uses. "Vertical" mixed-use developments are designed with retail, service, and/or office uses on the ground floor, with upper floors used for those uses or for residential dwelling units. "Horizontal" mixed-use developments have retail, service and/or office uses on the same project site as residential uses, but not within the same building. The different uses are connected by pedestrian pathways. 
1.  Development standards. 
Development Standards Front driveway access Alley access Site specifications.  Minimum lot size. 10,000 sq. ft. 5,000 sq. ft.  Minimum width. 100 ft. 60 ft. A  Minimum depth. 80 ft. 75 ft. B Building placement.  Front build-to line. 0 to 12 ft. 0 to 6 ft. C  Front build-to line (major arterials). 10 to 18 ft.  Dining patio encroachment. Up to front property line. D  Side yard. 5 ft. E  Rear yard. 10 ft. F  Minimum frontage ratio. 60% 75% Building size and massing.  Building height. 1 to 4 stories  Building height (major arterials). 1 to 5 stories Parking.  Location of on-site parking. Minimum 36' from front property line. G  Number of parking spaces. For residential and commercial/office uses, the number of parking spaces shall be in accordance with the requirements listed by use in this section. Parking spaces between residential and commercial/office uses shall not be shared, and be specifically identified on site as private residence parking versus public customer parking. Open space.  Required usable open space (may include dining patio encroachment). 5% of lot area. Landscaping.  Required landscaping. 15% of lot area. 10% of lot area.  
a.  For "vertical" mixed use developments, residential uses shall be located above non-residential uses. 
b.  For "horizontal" mixed use developments, non-residential uses shall be oriented closer to the street than residential uses. 
c.  Dual building entrances shall be provided; one facing the street frontage, connected to the sidewalk; another facing the parking area. 
d.  Reciprocal driveway access between multiple parcels, connecting adjacent parking lots, is required where feasible. 
e.  Truck loading docks shall be a minimum of 40' from front property line, and screened from street view. 
f.  Parking requirements may be reduced, at the discretion of the Director, if the builder can sufficiently demonstrate, through research and analysis that the development warrants fewer parking than is required. Such parking reductions may be granted if the development is located near public transit, or if the builder pays in-lieu parking fees for future public parking or transportation improvements. 
g.  Signs for commercial developments shall adhere to the standards in Sections 17.12.140 through 17.12.210 of the zoning code (Commercial zone), as well as the design and performance standards in Section 17.10.070. 
h.  Signs for office developments shall adhere to the standards in Sections 17.12.810 through 17.12.870 of the zoning code (Office Professional zone), as well as the design and performance standards in Section 17.10.070. 
Site Diagrams - Mixed Use Development


G.  Light-industrial building. Light-industrial buildings are allowed in the Mixed Use-Employment zone. These are buildings designed to accommodate office professional, technology and research, and light manufacturing uses, with a screened outdoor area for shipping and deliveries by trucks. 
1.  Development standards. 
Development Standards Front driveway access Site specifications.  Minimum lot size. 15,000 sq. ft.  Minimum width. 80 ft. A  Minimum depth. 160 ft. B Building placement.  Front build-to line. 12 to 20 ft. C  Side yard. 5 ft. D  Rear yard. 10 ft. E  Minimum frontage ratio. 60% F Building size and massing.  Building height. 1 to 4 stories Parking.  Location of on-site parking. Minimum 40' from front property line. G  Number of parking spaces. See parking requirements in Section 17.16.210 
(Off-street parking standards in Industrial zone.) Open space.  Required usable open space. 3% of lot area. Landscaping.  Required landscaping. 10% of lot area.  
a.  Reciprocal driveway access between multiple parcels, connecting adjacent parking lots, is required where feasible. 
b.  Truck loading docks shall be a minimum of 40' from front property line, and screened from street view. 
c.  Signs for light industrial developments shall adhere to the standards in Sections 17.16.140 through 17.16.200 of the Zoning code (Industrial zone), as well as the design and performance standards in Section 17.10.070. 
Site Diagrams - Light Industrial Building


(Ord. No. 946, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.10.070 - Design and performance standards. 
    The following design and development standards shall be met in all mixed use zones: 
A.  Site design. Develop projects that enhance the sense of place and reflect a commitment to functional efficiency, quality, and neighborhood context. 
1.  Utilize a grid, or modified-grid block pattern to maximize access and circulation efficiency, with direct pedestrian access to buildings and building entrances that are oriented toward the street, wherever possible. Where culs-de-sac do exist, design them open-ended to provide pedestrian and bicycle access to other uses and amenities. Ensure easy access to public transit stops. 
2.  For residential developments, utilize alleys for access into rear-loading garages, wherever possible. Articulate alleys using enhanced paving, landscape pockets, and adequate and decorative lighting. 
3.  Design loading and service areas away from street frontage. 
4.  Carefully design, locate and integrate utilitarian aspects, including trash containers, mail boxes, vending machines, utility boxes, and other similar structures. Use a combination of solid masonry walls, berm and landscaping for screening. 
5.  Provide attractive lighting for safety and comfort, consistent with building style, materials, finishes and colors. 
6.  Use "safe by design" criteria for visibility, lighting, and access control. Maintain visibility of doors and windows from the street and from within the development. 
7.  Provide noise-attenuating protection for noise-sensitive uses and provide privacy for residential uses. 
B.  Pedestrian connections and amenities. Develop projects with safe and aesthetically-pleasing pedestrian connections, bringing varying uses into close proximity to each other. 
1.  Use a combination of trees and landscaping for all pedestrian areas, including but not limited to plazas and walkways, for shade and definition. Include amenities such as patios, accent lighting, outdoor seating areas, and other similar enhancements to encourage use and social gathering. 
2.  Incorporate paseos, or walk/bike trails, separated from vehicular paths, to provide connectivity throughout developments and to adjacent amenities and services. 
3.  Where appropriate, use traffic calming measures to reduce the speed of automobiles within developments and in local residential streets through corner bulbouts and mid-block bumpouts, tree plantings, enhanced paving at crosswalks, and traffic circles or round-a-bouts. 
C.  Building architecture and form. Provide articulation on all building façades, and include variation in massing, roof form and wall planes. Architecture shall be provided at a pedestrian scale, through the reduction of large wall planes and massing. 
1.  Articulate walls using details such as insets, awnings, canopies, wing walls, trellises, arcades and colonnades. 
2.  Use multiple colors, materials, textures, and applied finishes to help break up wall massing. Avoid blank walls, but also avoid façade repetition. 
3.  Provide distinctive entries and window treatments. 
4.  Establish continuity and consistency in the design and location of signage. 
5.  For all non-residential uses, include parapets to conceal rooftop equipment, chimneys, cooling towers, and solar panels. When possible, place equipment in an enclosure on the ground, in lieu of rooftop. 
D.  Transitions and buffering. Encourage transitions between proposed higher intensity developments and adjacent, less intensive uses to keep disturbance to a minimum. 
1.  Avoid placement on a project site, elements that may conflict with neighboring residential properties, or other sensitive uses. 
2.  Carefully examine the placement of buffers, buildings and parking, where more intense uses are adjacent to sensitive uses, such as residential development. At the same time, provide access between uses. 
3.  Step down heights of structures at the edge of developments to be compatible with those in adjacent projects. 
4.  Enhance buffers with additional width or increased landscaping. Plant trees and shrubs in voids created by wall variations, at an appropriate scale. 
5.  Vary setbacks and wall alignments to soften the edge of the development. 
6.  Offset windows from one another between residential units. 
7.  Provide a clear distinction between public and private spaces, through the use of height separation, fencing, berm, or a combination of these elements. 
E.  Open space and common areas. Provide open space and common areas to enhance quality of life, and to encourage opportunities for social gathering and interaction. 
1.  For single-family residential developments, create centralized pocket parks where possible, to serve the neighborhood. 
2.  For multi-family residential developments, provide centralized open space and community facilities, to serve residents of the development. 
3.  For commercial, office and employment centers, provide open space plaza areas for activity, interaction and rest. Provide seating with trees and other furniture providing shade. Decorate plaza areas with enhanced landscaping, lighting, and other ornamental amenities. 
4.  Create recognizable focal points by using community amenities in public open spaces and other commonly used community spaces. 
F.  Parking and access. Locate parking areas away from street view, while ensuring functional vehicular access. 
1.  Use a combination of low masonry walls, berm or landscaping, where no building is screening parking from street view. 
2.  Use reciprocal access drives to connect with adjacent properties. 
3.  Design on-site circulation system to minimize pedestrian and vehicle conflicts. 
4.  Design parking lots by dividing a large parking lot into a series of smaller, connected lots. 
5.  Use paving materials varied in texture and color where pedestrian and vehicular areas overlap to minimize the negative impact of large expanses of asphalt. The use of stamped concrete, stone, brick, or granite pavers, exposed aggregate or colored concrete is preferred. 
6.  For commercial shopping centers, provide functional, but aesthetically pleasing, cart return areas that are architecturally integrated with the building and site. 
G.  Signs. Promote the reasonable, orderly, and effective display of street graphics to foster high quality developments and enhance the economic vitality of business and industry. 
1.  Ensure that signs associated with multitenant buildings are complementary to one another; a sign program should be prepared in conjunction with applications for development. 
2.  Place signs in accordance with façade rhythm, scale and proportion. Signs shall not cover or obscure windows, doors, storefronts, building entrances, cornices, columns, or other architectural elements or details. 
3.  Offer a clear, simple message that is unique to a particular business. The number of lettering styles should be limited, and the use of identifiable symbols should contrast with back-ground materials to achieve readability. 
4.  Construct signs with durable and weatherproof materials so that they will not discolor, face, crack, rust, or erode. 
5.  Signs should show depth and cast shadows. Depth and shadows can be created by mounting individually cut letters and symbols on the sign base or carving letters and by symbols into the base or carving letters and symbols into the base of the sign. 
6.  Sign materials and colors should complement the building façade. Basic and simple color applications are encouraged and vibrant and fluorescent colors should be avoided. 
7.  The color of letters and symbols should contrast the base or background color of the sign to maximize readability. 
8.  Integrate signage and lighting. Appropriate methods of sign illumination include unobtrusive and attractive external fixtures, individually illuminated letters, and colorful exposed neon tubing script. 
9.  Sign lighting should be directed and shielded to illuminate the sign and not to spill over to other parts of the building or site. 
10.  In order to avoid sign clutter, signage shall only be allowed on façades that have building entrances. 
11.  The following signs are prohibited in the MU zones: internally illuminated plastic cabinet signs ("can signs"), pole-mounted or lollipop signs, roof-mounted signs and billboards. 
(Ord. No. 946, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
Article III. - Specific Provisions for Designated Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permits 

17.10.080 - Mixed-use Planned Development (MPD). 
A.  Purpose and intent. A developer may choose to propose a project that does not entirely meet the standards in Section 17.10.060, but does meet the overall design intent, through the submittal of a mixed-use planned development (MPD) application. The purpose and intent of the MPD is to allow for greater flexibility and creativity in design, to encourage well-planned neighborhoods and developments, and to provide for appropriate use of land which is sufficiently unique in its physical characteristics. 
B.  Applicability. The following standards are applicable for all mixed-use planned developments in zones in which they are allowed, subject to the granting of a conditional use permit. 
C.  Standards. The following standards shall apply to all mixed-use planned development: 
1.  Area. The proposed development plan shall encompass a gross area of not less than 3 acres. 
2.  Open Space. The open space requirements listed in Section 17.10.060 shall apply for mixed-use planned developments. 
3.  Landscaping. The landscaping requirements listed in Section 17.10.060 shall apply for mixed-use planned developments. 
D.  Findings. In reviewing and approving a mixed-use planned development application for a conditional use permit, the following findings shall be made: 
1.  The mixed-use planned development meets the goals of the Lancaster General Plan, pertaining to community design, and the objectives to "enhance overall community form, create a vibrant sense of place," and to "improve the city's visual identity by utilizing design standards that instill a sense of pride and well-being in the community." 
2.  The mixed-use planned development adheres to the Lancaster Design Guidelines and the design and performance standards listed in Section 17.10.070, and is consistent with the mission statement of "implementing quality design for timeless architecture that enhances the community's image, pride and quality of life." 
3.  The mixed-use planned development is comprehensive, covers a logical planning area, and provides the opportunity for unique and creative designs that are not possible under the city's typical development regulations. 
(Ord. No. 946, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
Chapter 17.12 - COMMERCIAL ZONES 
Article I. - In General 

17.12.010 - In general. 
    As used in this title, "commercial zones" means the C, CBD, CPD, H, OP and RC zones. 
(Ord. 711 § 14, 1995: prior zoning ord. § 220.000) 
Article II. - General Commercial (C) Zone 

17.12.020 - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of the C zone is to provide the means necessary to implement the city general plan, specifically the "regional," "subregional," and "general commercial" categories, with the exception of that portion of the general commercial designation which lies within the central business district, as set forth in the text of the general plan and as delineated on the general plan map. This zone is also intended to allow the development of neighborhood, community, regional and travel oriented commercial uses within the city. This zone is intended to be consistent with applicable goals, objectives, policies and specific actions set forth by the general plan. This zone is intended to provide for the daily commercial needs of residents of the city and adjoining areas, visitors and businesses, in an urban environment with full urban services. 
    The provisions of the C zone, including but not limited to the property development regulations and design requirements contained herein, are intended to apply to all new building lots created and to all new construction, including new additions, permitted after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. 
    It shall not be the intent of this title to render previously legally created building lots or legally constructed buildings which do not comply with the new property development regulations or other requirements of this title to be nonconforming where these lots or buildings complied with the ordinances in effect at the time of their creation or construction. However, proof of compliance with ordinances in effect at the time of creation or construction shall be the sole burden of the applicant or property owner. Such proof may include building permits, minutes of council or commission action, case files or other documentation. 
(Ord. 711 § 15 (part), 1995: prior zoning ord. § 221.010) 
17.12.030 - Prohibition. 
    A person shall not use any premises in the C zone, except as hereafter permitted in this title and subject to all regulations and conditions enumerated in this title. 
(Ord. 711 § 15 (part), 1995: prior zoning ord. § 221.020) 
17.12.040 - Permitted uses. 
    The permitted uses of the C zone are grouped into categories of similar uses rather than an exhaustive list of single uses. Extensive examples are given for purposes of clarifying the types of uses allowed by each category. In addition, specific exceptions and development requirements have been applied to certain categories of uses where concerns may arise as to their impact on neighboring properties and the visual attractiveness of the city as a whole. The following categories of uses are permitted in the C zone subject to any stated exceptions, development requirements, and approval of the site plan as follows: 
A.  Existing Residential Uses. This category may continue to be used as a permitted use. Expansion of existing residential uses shall be limited to a cumulative total of no more than 500 square feet of floor area. 
B.  Automobile, Motorcycle, Truck, Tractor and Boat Sales, Service, Repair, Accessories and Parts. This category includes but is not limited to motor vehicle dealerships; auto parts stores; tires, batteries and accessories stores; brake shops; muffler shops; radiator shops; repair shops, service stations, and similar uses. All repair activities shall be conducted within an enclosed building. Note: Auto repair uses and tire sales on lots within 300 feet of residentially zoned property shall be required to obtain a conditional use permit. (See Section 17.12.080A.) 
  This category does not include car washes; establishments engaged in the sale, rental, service or repair of heavy equipment; auto body and paint shops; auto upholstery shops; automobile impound yards; and similar uses. 
C.  Churches, Religious, Fraternal or Social Organizations. This category includes but is not limited to churches, temples, convents, monasteries, and other places used exclusively for religious worship, and the customary incidental educational and social activities therewith; temporary tent revival meetings (operated at one particular location and provided such location is not within 300 feet of any public park, school or residential zone, and not longer than 7 days in any 6-month period); fraternities; lodge halls; societies, and sororities. 
  This category does not include any use which could be construed as a privately owned business. 
D.  Communication Facilities and Services, Public and Private. This category includes but is not limited to communications equipment, duplicating, faxing services, lithographers, microwave stations, photocopying, photo engravers, printers or publishers, radio and television broadcast studios, telegraph offices, telecommunication/telecommuting offices and similar computer communications network services, telephone repeater stations, and tourist information centers. Ground or roof mounted satellite antennae shall be screened from view. 
  This category does not include radio and television transmission towers or wireless telecommunication facilities. (See Section 17.40.640.) 
E.  Eating and Drinking Establishments. This category includes but is not limited to restaurants, cafes, delicatessens, fast food operations, ice cream shops, and take-out food operations; any of which may include outdoor dining. Bars, bona fide restaurants, nightclubs, and other similar uses which meet the definition of an incidental or primary on-sale liquor establishment (as defined in Section 17.42.020) shall be required to obtain a conditional use permit. 
F.  Financial Institutions and Services. This category includes but is not limited to banks, credit unions, finance companies, savings and loans, and similar uses. 
  This category does not include pawnshops, establishments which conduct check cashing services for a fee or donation, or establishments which do not loan money as part of their business operations. 
G.  Offices-Business, Government or Professional. This category includes but is not limited to general business offices; federal, state, county, city or special district offices, libraries and court facilities; associations; unions; and offices conducting accounting, dental, engineering, escrow, insurance, legal, medical, mortgage brokerage, real estate, security, and commodity brokerage, or similar professional services. 
  This category does not include bail bond services. 
H.  Public Safety Facilities and Services. This category includes but is not limited to ambulance services, fire stations, highway patrol stations, police stations, and similar uses. 
I.  Public Utilities. This category is limited to the following uses: 
1.  Publicly owned uses necessary to the maintenance of the public health, safety, convenience and welfare; 
2.  Water reservoirs, dams, treatment plants, gauging stations, pumping stations, tanks, wells, and any uses normal and appurtenant to the storage and distribution of water. Exception: This use is not subject to site plan review (Section 17.12.120). 
J.  Recycling Facilities. This category is limited to reverse vending machines and is subject to the criteria and standards of Section 17.40.300. 
K.  Rental Establishments. This category includes but is not limited to auto, clothing, equipment, furniture, hospital equipment, mini-storage, recreational vehicles, and similar rental uses. 
  This category does not include the rental of heavy equipment. 
L.  Repair Services. This category includes but is not limited to appliance repair, gunsmiths, jewelry repair, locksmiths, shoe repair, watch repair, and similar repair services. All repairs shall be conducted within an enclosed building. 
en; ; This category does not include the repair of automobiles or heavy equipment. 
M.  Retail Sales Establishments. This category includes but is not limited to bona fide antique stores, apparel stores, appliance stores, bookstores (including used books), convenience stores (without alcohol sales), craft stores, computer stores, department stores, drugstores or food stores (without alcohol sales), gift shops, hardware stores, jewelry stores, telephone stores, discounted and wholesale/warehouse type stores, and similar retail sales operations. 
  This category does not include adult-oriented businesses, an incidental or primary off-sale liquor establishment as defined in Section 17.42.020, mini-marts, pawnshops, secondhand stores (does not include bona fide antique stores), surplus stores, and establishments engaged in the sale of heavy equipment, or establishments engaged in the sale of any item otherwise prohibited by law. 
N.  Schools-Business and Professional. This category includes but is not limited to art, barber, beauty, dance, music, real estate, and similar schools. 
  This category does not include any school specializing in gymnastics, health and fitness services, manual training,* martial arts, shop work,* or training in the repair and maintenance of machinery or mechanical equipment.* (*See Section 17.16.040P.) 
O.  Services-Business or Personal. This category includes but is not limited to adult day care, adult day health care, answering service, bail bond services, barber and beauty shops, check cashing, credit bureaus, family day care home (large and small), day care center, dry cleaners and laundries, mortuaries, moving and storage, parcel delivery terminals, tailors, and other similar services. 
  This category does not include services which are industrial in nature such as pest control, industrial gases and chemicals, and similar services. 
P.  Other Uses. This category includes those uses which do not fall into any other C zone category, provided such uses are neither temporary, subject to director's review, nor uses subject to conditional use permit in this zone, and provided such uses are, in the opinion of the director, consistent with the purpose and intent of this zone and similar to other uses permitted herein. 
(Ord. 896 § 1 (Exh. A § 5), 2008; Ord. 753 § 1 (Exh. A § 3), 1999; Ord. 711 § 15 (part), 1995: prior zoning ord. § 221.021) 
17.12.050 - Accessory uses. 
    The following uses are considered as accessory uses to the permitted uses in the C zone: 
A.  Accessory buildings and structures customarily used in conjunction therewith; 
Cargo containers shall not be used as accessory buildings or structures, and shall not be placed on private real property at any time except as permitted in conjunction with temporary uses allowed in Section 17.12.060. 
1.  This subsection does not apply to the following real property: 
a.  Real property owned, leased, rented, occupied or used by a public agency or entity; 
b.  Real property owned, leased, rented, occupied or used by a nonpublic or private school. For purposes of this subsection, "nonpublic school" means a private, nonsectarian school that enrolls individuals with exceptional needs pursuant to an individualized education program and is certified by the California Department of Education. For purposes of this subsection, "private school" means a full-time day school that provides instruction in the several branches of study required to be taught in the public schools of the state, by persons capable of teaching, and that files an annual private school affidavit as required by the California Department of Education. For purposes of this subsection, "private school" does not include a school that provides instruction in a building used for residential purposes. A nonpublic or private school is not exempt unless it is operating in conformity with all pertinent land use and technical code regulations. 
c.  Real property utilized for the placement of cargo containers that are used exclusively for the storage of emergency supplies to be used for the benefit of the public by a recognized governmental agency, such as the Los Angeles County Fire Department, in the event of a disaster or emergency situation. Placement of a cargo container for the storage of private supplies is not included in this exemption. Placement of cargo containers for this purpose shall be approved through a director's review. 
B.  Automobile body and fender repair, and painting and upholstering when such uses are incidental to the sale of new automobiles, provided: 
1.  That all operations are conducted within an enclosed building, and 
2.  That the use does not exceed 25% of its total area being devoted to service or repair, body and fender repair, painting or upholstering, and 
3.  That the use does not exceed one paint spray booth, and 
4.  That all areas or structures used shall be located or soundproofed so as to prevent annoyance or detriment to adjacent or abutting property, and 
5.  That all damaged or wrecked vehicles awaiting repair shall be effectively screened so as not to be visible from adjacent or abutting property of the same elevation, and 
6.  That all repair activities as described in this section shall be confined to the hours between 7 a.m. and 9 p.m. daily, and 
7.  That no damaged or wrecked vehicles shall be stored for purposes other than repair and shall not constitute an automobile impound yard, and 
8.  That dismantling of vehicles for purposes other than repair or the sale of used parts is prohibited, and 
9.  That adequate off-street parking be available to permit such activity; 
C.  Minor repair of boats which repair is incidental to the sale of boats provided all operations, other than the storage of boats held for sale, are conducted within an enclosed building; 
D.  Day nursery for children provided such services are offered by an employer solely for use by the children of the employees; 
E.  Manufacturing, processing, packaging, treating and storage related to, incidental to, and operated in conjunction with the business conducted on the premises, provided: 
1.  That such activity is restricted to the ground floor of the building or buildings and does not occupy more than 25% of said ground floor area, and 
2.  That not more than 5 employees are engaged in such activity, and 
3.  That a commercial appearance is maintained by providing office or window display space or both, along the entire street frontage of the building or buildings, except doorways, to a depth of not less than 2 feet, and 
4.  That any portion of the building or buildings devoted to such activity is not nearer than 50 feet to any residential zone, and 
5.  That the building is constructed, that the machinery and equipment are installed and maintained, and that the activity is conducted in such a way, that all noise, vibration, dust, odor and all other objectionable consequences will be confined or reduced to an extent necessary to ensure that no annoyance or injury will result to persons or property in the vicinity, and 
6.  That any such activity is conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building; 
F.  Rental, leasing or repair of articles which are sold on the premises, provided such rental, leasing or repair is incidental to the retail sales of such articles; 
G.  Electric Vehicle Charging Station. An electric vehicle charging station (EVCS) shall be permitted as an accessory use within any existing legal single-family or multiple-family residential garage or carport, or within any existing legal commercial parking space in a parking lot or in a parking garage, subject to all applicable city code requirements and the following: 
1.  Electric vehicle charging stations (EVCS) for public use shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The EVCSs shall be located in a manner which will be easily seen by the public for informational and security purposes and shall be illuminated during evening business hours; and 
b.  Be located in desirable and convenient parking locations which will serve as an incentive for the use of electric vehicles; and 
c.  The EVCS pedestals shall be protected as necessary to prevent damage by automobiles; and 
d.  The EVCS pedestals shall be designed to minimize potential damage by vandalism and to be safe for use in inclement weather; and 
e.  Complete instructions and appropriate warnings concerning the use of the EVCS shall be posted on a sign in a prominent location on each station for use by the operator; and 
f.  One standard nonilluminated sign, not to exceed 4 square feet in area and 10 feet in height, may be posted for the purpose of identifying the location of each cluster of EVCSs; and 
g.  The EVCS may be on a timer that limits the use of the station to the normal business hours of the use(s) which it serves to preclude unauthorized use after business hours. 
2.  Electric vehicle charging stations for private use shall: 
a.  Be located in a manner which will not allow public access to the charging station; and 
b.  Comply with subsections G.1.c., d. and e. of this section. 
H.  Mini Wireless Telecommunication Facilities. This category includes all mini wireless telecommunication facilities subject to the requirements of Section 17.40.640. 
I.  Cargo containers that are present on private real property, for any use or purpose, on the effective date of this section shall be removed within six months from the effective date, unless the property owner obtains the requisite approvals and permits in conjunction with temporary uses allowed in Section 17.12.060 and otherwise complies with all regulations pertaining to cargo containers. 
This subsection does not apply to real property owned, leased, rented, occupied or used by a public agency or entity, or by a nonpublic or private school, as defined in Section 17.12.050.A. of this code. 
(Ord. 753 § 1 (Exh. A § 2 (part)), 1999; Ord. 713 § 3 (part), 1995; Ord. 711 § 15 (part), 1995: prior zoning ord. § 221.022) 
(Ord. No. 921, §§ 5, 6, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 964, § 1, 5-24-2011) 
17.12.060 - Temporary uses. 
    The following uses are considered as temporary uses in the C zone: 
A.  The placement and use of a temporary office in conjunction with a construction or development project undertaken pursuant to an active building permit. A temporary office shall be placed on the lot or parcel which is part of the project, or on property adjoining the construction or development site with the written consent of the property owner. The placement of a temporary office shall not occur until the building permit is obtained. The temporary office shall be removed within thirty (30) days after the permit is expired, revoked, or finalized. 
B.  Use of commercial coaches as temporary offices subject to the provisions of Article X of Chapter 17.40 and this zone. 
C.  1.  Storage of building materials, machinery and equipment used in conjunction with a construction or development project undertaken pursuant to an active building permit. Storage shall be on the lot or parcel which is part of the project, or on property adjoining the construction or development site with the written consent of the property owner. Storage shall not occur until the building permit is obtained. Storage shall be removed within thirty (30) days after the permit is expired, revoked, or finalized. 
2.  Cargo containers may be used for the temporary construction storage described in (1) of this subsection. A cargo container approved pursuant to this subsection shall not require a separate permit. The number and location of cargo containers used for temporary construction storage shall be subject to the review and prior written approval of the building official and directors of planning and housing and neighborhood revitalization or their duly authorized representatives. Application for approval of cargo containers for temporary construction storage shall be made on a city-approved form and shall indicate the number of the building permit obtained for the construction or development project for which the temporary construction storage is requested, the size of each cargo container, the proposed location of each container on the property, and the date on which each container shall be placed on the property. 
3.  The time period for which a cargo container may be used for temporary construction storage is limited to the time when the building permit is active. An active building permit means one that has not expired, been revoked, or been finalized. Cargo containers used for temporary construction storage shall be removed from the property within thirty (30) calendar days of the expiration, revocation or finalization of a building permit. 
4.  Cargo containers used for temporary construction storage shall not exceed eight feet in width, eight feet six inches in height, and forty (40) feet in length. 
5.  Cargo containers used for temporary construction storage shall conform to the following standards: 
a.  Cargo containers shall be set back a minimum of five feet from any property line and a minimum of ten (10) feet from any structure. 
b.  Cargo containers shall not be stacked on top of each other or on any other structure. 
c.  Cargo containers shall not encroach upon, block, obstruct, or reduce in any manner any required exits, windows or vent shafts of structures, or any parking spaces, driveways, private streets, or public rights of way. 
d.  Cargo containers shall not be used for human habitation or occupied by individuals for any reason. 
e.  Cargo containers shall not have any electrical, plumbing, heating or air conditioning installations or systems, and shall not be connected to a power source. 
f.  Refuse, garbage, trash and debris, as well as hazardous substances, as defined by state or federal law, shall not be placed or stored in, against, on, or under a cargo container at any time. 
D.  1.  Cargo containers may be used for temporary storage of items related to the use of commercial-zoned property, including but not limited to business inventory, office furniture, office supplies, office equipment and other items, when a structure is undergoing rehabilitation, repair, remodeling, alteration or other construction work under an active building permit. 
2.  The number and location of cargo containers used for temporary commercial storage shall be subject to the review and prior written approval of the building official and directors of planning and housing and neighborhood revitalization or their duly authorized representatives. A cargo container approved under this subsection shall not require a separate permit. Application for approval of cargo containers for temporary commercial storage shall be made on a city-approved form and shall indicate the number of the building permit obtained for the repair, remodeling, alteration or other work for which the temporary commercial storage is requested, the size of each cargo container, the proposed location of each container on the property, and the date on which each container shall be placed on the property. 
3.  The time period for which a cargo container may be used for temporary commercial storage is limited to the time when the building permit is active. An active building permit means one that has not expired, been revoked, or been finalized. Cargo containers used for temporary commercial storage shall be removed from the property within thirty (30) calendar days of the expiration, revocation or finalization of a building permit. 
4.  Cargo containers used for temporary commercial storage shall not exceed eight feet in width, eight feet six inches in height, and forty (40) feet in length. 
5.  Cargo containers used for temporary commercial storage shall conform to the standards set forth in Section 17.12.060.C.5. 
E.  1.  Cargo containers may be used for emergency storage of items related to the use of commercial-zoned property, including but not limited to business inventory, office furniture, office supplies, office equipment and other items, when a structure becomes uninhabitable due to fire, flood, earthquake, vandalism, or other such act against the structure. 
2.  Cargo containers used for emergency storage shall require a container permit. The number and location of cargo containers used for emergency commercial storage shall be subject to the review and prior written approval of the directors of planning and housing and neighborhood revitalization or their duly authorized representatives. Upon such approval, and payment of a container permit fee in an amount established by city council, a container permit shall be issued. 
3.  Cargo containers may be used for emergency commercial storage for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) calendar days. This use may be extended for an additional ten (10) calendar days upon the prior written approval of the directors of planning and housing and neighborhood revitalization. 
4.  Cargo containers used for emergency commercial storage shall not exceed eight feet in width, eight feet six inches in height, and forty (40) feet in length. 
5.  Cargo containers used for emergency commercial storage shall conform to the standards set forth in Section 17.12.060.C.5. 
F.  1.  Cargo containers may be used for storage of items related to the use of commercial-zoned property, including but not limited to business inventory, office furniture, office supplies, office equipment and other items, in conjunction with relocation to or from a property or in preparation for storage of such items at a storage facility. 
2.  Cargo containers used for relocation storage shall require a container permit. The number and location of cargo containers used for relocation storage shall be subject to the review and prior written approval of the directors of planning and housing and neighborhood revitalization or their duly authorized representatives. Upon such approval, and payment of a container permit fee in an amount established by city council, a container permit shall be issued. 
3.  Cargo containers may be used for relocation storage for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) calendar days. This use may be extended for an additional ten (10) calendar days upon the prior written approval of the directors of planning and housing and neighborhood revitalization. 
4.  Cargo containers used for relocation storage shall not exceed eight feet in width, eight feet six inches in height, and forty (40) feet in length. 
5.  Cargo containers used for relocation storage shall conform to the standards set forth in Section 17.12.060.C.5., except as provided in 6. of this subsection. 
6.  Cargo containers used for relocation storage may be placed in parking lots so long as no more than 10% of the provided parking spaces are used for this purpose. 
G.  Cargo containers that are present on private real property, for any use or purpose, on the effective date of this section shall be removed within six months from the effective date, unless the property owner obtains the requisite approvals and permits in conjunction with temporary uses allowed in this section and otherwise complies with all regulations pertaining to cargo containers. 
This subsection does not apply to real property owned, leased, rented, occupied or used by a public agency or entity, or by a nonpublic or private school, as defined in Section 17.12.050.A. of this code. 
(Ord. 711 § 15 (part), 1995; prior zoning ord. § 221.023) 
(Ord. No. 921, § 7, 6-9-09) 
17.12.070 - Uses subject to director's review and approval. 
    If site plans or other pertinent information for the proposed use are first submitted to and approved by the director in accordance with Article VI of Chapter 17.32, premises in the C zone may be used for the following uses: 
A.  Access to property lawfully used for a purpose not permitted in the C zone provided no other practical access to such property is available and such access will not alter the character of the premises in respect to permitted uses in the C zone; 
B.  Body piercing establishments; 
C.  Carnivals, subject to the provisions of Chapter 9.46; 
D.  Christmas Trees and Wreaths. This use is limited to the seasonal sale of such items, between November 1st and December 25th, both dates inclusive, to the extent permitted by other statutory and ordinance provisions. Any structures, facilities and materials used in connection with the sale of Christmas trees and wreaths shall be removed from the premises by December 31st of the same calendar year, and the property restored to a clean condition; 
E.  Consignment store; 
F.  Crops, field, tree, bush, berry and row, including nursery stock, flowers and vines, provided that no sludge or biosolid material shall be applied to any land as a soil amendment, roadside stands, retail sale of crops grown on the premises, and signs advertising products produced on the premises; 
G.  Day care center; 
H.  Health and Fitness Services. This category includes but is not limited to exercise/aerobic centers, figure salons, gymnasiums, health and fitness centers, health spas, martial arts schools, and similar uses; 
I.  Outdoor Sales and Promotional Activities. Outdoor sales and promotional activities in private parking lots, on private pedestrian ways, and on public sidewalks, incidental to a use conducted primarily within a building located on the premises as follows: 
1.  Parking lot sales may be allowed only where: 
a.  The use on the site complies with current parking standards, and 
b.  No more than 10% of the provided parking spaces are to be used for this purpose, and 
c.  Placement of the activity in the parking lot shall not significantly disrupt the circulation pattern on the site, and 
d.  Such sales are scheduled between January 15th and November 15th and shall not exceed a total of 12 days in any calendar year. 
2.  Private pedestrian way sales may be allowed where: 
a.  Placement of the activity on the pedestrian way allows for a clear aisle for pedestrian traffic of not less than 5 feet in width, and 
b.  Such sales are scheduled between January 15th and November 15th and shall not exceed a total of 12 days in any calendar year. 
3.  Sidewalk sales may be allowed where: 
a.  Placement of the activity allows for a clear aisle of not less than 5 feet in width, and 
b.  Such sales are scheduled between January 15th and November 15th and shall not exceed a total of 12 days in any calendar year, and 
c.  Insurance has been obtained by type and in an amount specified by the city attorney, and 
d.  An encroachment permit has been obtained from the department of building and engineering services; 
J.  Reserved; 
K.  Pawnshops; 
L.  Pumpkins and Other Seasonal Agricultural Products. This use is limited to the sale of such items from October 1st through Thanksgiving Day, to the extent permitted by other statutory and ordinance provisions. Any structures, facilities and materials used for the sale of pumpkins and other seasonal agricultural products shall be removed from the premises not later than 7 days following the closure of the sales operation. No other outdoor sales shall be permitted until property has been restored to a clean condition; 
M.  Recycling Facilities. The following recycling facilities may be allowed: 
1.  Small Collection Facility. Subject to the criteria and standards of Section 17.40.310, 
2.  Large Collection Facility. Subject to the criteria and standards of Section 17.40.320; 
N.  Residential Uses. This category is limited to the following uses: 
1.  Congregate living health facility, 
2.  Mobilehome or other residence for use by caretaker and his immediate family in accordance with Article VIII of Chapter 17.40, 
3.  Residential care facility for the elderly, 
4.  Rooming and boarding houses, 
5.  State authorized, certified or licensed family care home, foster home or group home serving 6 or fewer mentally disordered or otherwise handicapped persons or dependent and neglected children, if such homes provide care on a 24 hour a day basis. (Required by Section 5116 of the Welfare and Institutions Code); 
O.  Secondhand stores; 
P.  Shopping centers and other commercial centers of more than 2 net acres but no greater than 10 net acres. (See definition in Section 17.04.240.) This category may include many of the categories listed for this zone; 
Q.  Storage containers for goods and merchandise during the holidays or for special events. Placement shall be within loading areas or utilize nonessential parking areas behind the buildings so as not to restrict the use of heavily used parking areas during such holidays or special events. The use of such containers shall not exceed 3 months in any calendar year; 
R.  Surplus stores; 
S.  Tattoo parlors; 
T.  Minor, Co-located and Stealth Wireless Telecommunication Facilities. This category includes all minor wireless telecommunication facilities, as defined by this chapter, subject to Section 17.40.640 and the height limits of the C zone. Co-located telecommunication facilities within 100 feet of property with a residential zoning designation may be constructed over the required 35 foot height limit subject to review by the director of community development. Stealth telecommunications facilities located more than 100 feet from residentially zoned property may be constructed over the 50 foot height limit, subject to review by the director of community development. See Section 17.40.640 for submittal requirements and design standards; 
U.  Wine-tasting establishment, including dining and sales associated with such operation, operated under a Type 02 liquor license issued by California State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control ("State ABC"). In approving such use, the director may impose conditions of operation as provided in Chapter 17.42, except that distance separation requirements shall not be mandatory; 
V.  Temporary alcohol sales, subject to the requirements of Section 17.42.140. 
W.  Small wind energy systems (co-located), subject to the requirements of section 17.40.690. 
(Ord. 896 § 1 (Exh. A § 6), 2008; Ord. 758 § 1 (Exh. A § 4 (part)), 1999; Ord. 753 § 1 (Exh. A § 4), 1999; Ord. 711 § 15 (part), 1995: prior zoning ord. § 221.024) 
(Ord. No. 941, § 1, 2-9-2010; Ord. No. 999, § 5, 8-26-2014; Ord. No. 1016, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
17.12.080 - Uses subject to conditional use permits. 
    The uses subject to permit in the C zone are grouped into categories of similar uses rather than exhaustive lists of single uses. Extensive examples are given for purposes of clarifying the types of uses included in each category. The following categories of uses may be permitted in the C zone, provided that a conditional use permit has first been obtained as provided in Article I of Chapter 17.32, that such permit is in full force and effect, and that the uses are in conformity with conditions of such permit for: 
A.  Those uses identified in Section 17.12.040, Permitted uses, as requiring a conditional use permit. This category includes but is not limited to automobile repair and tire sales. 
B.  Activity node (development of) subject to the requirements of Section 17.08.365. 
C.  Entertainment and Recreation. This category includes but is not limited to amusement rides; bingo, billiard, dance, or pool halls; bowling alleys; card rooms; carnivals and circuses for longer than 10 days; golf driving ranges; miniature golf courses; night clubs; shooting ranges; skating rinks; all types of theaters; video game arcades, and similar uses. 
D.  General Uses. This category includes only the following uses: 
1.  Automobile body shop; 
2.  Automobile upholstery shop; 
3.  Alcohol sales establishments as defined in and subject to the requirements of Section 17.42.020, including: 
a.  Incidental off-site alcohol sales establishment, 
b.  Incidental on-site alcohol sales establishment, 
c.  Primary off-site alcohol sales establishment, 
d.  Primary on-site alcohol sales establishment, 
e.  Bona fide restaurant, 
f.  Liquor store, 
g.  Mini-mart with alcohol sales; 
h.  Nightclub with alcohol sales; 
4.  Butane and propane service stations; 
5.  Car wash; 
6.  Dry cleaning plant-Wholesale; 
7.  Earth stations; 
8.  Fortunetelling; 
9.  Heliports or helistops; 
10.  Laundry plants-Wholesale; 
11.  Mini-marts and Nightclub without alcohol; 
12.  Model studio; 
13.  Radio or television transmission towers; 
14.  Revivals or tent meetings, of more than 7 days' duration; 
15.  Textile products manufactured from previously prepared materials. 
E.  Long-Term Health Care Facility. 
1.  Intermediate care facility; 
2.  Intermediate care facility/developmentally disabled; 
3.  Intermediate care facility/developmentally disabled-Habilitation; 
4.  Intermediate care facility/developmentally disabled-Nursing; 
5.  Nursing facility; 
6.  Skilled nursing facility. 
F.  Public Utilities. This category includes only the following uses: 
1.  Electric transmission substations and generating plants including microwave facilities used in conjunction therewith; 
2.  Gas distribution depots; 
3.  Publicly owned uses necessary to the maintenance of the public health, convenience or general welfare; 
4.  Public utility service yards. 
G.  Residential Uses. This category includes only the following uses: 
1.  Multiple-family project, as a separate development in the C zone (subject to the provisions of the HDR-1 zone except where specifically modified by the conditional use permit); 
2.  Multiple-family project, combined with commercial development as a mixed use where said apartments are attached to the commercial building (for example, as the second story of a commercial retail center), subject to the provisions of Section 17.12.230, Design requirements; 
3.  Transitional homeless shelters. 
H.  Shopping Centers and Other Commercial Centers of Greater Than 10 Net Acres. This category may include many of the categories listed for this zone. 
I.  Transient Residential. This category is limited to only the following uses: 
1.  Hotels; 
2.  Motels; 
3.  Recreational trailer parks in accordance with Section 17.40.540; 
4.  Travel trailer parks in accordance with Section 17.40.550. 
J.  Structures over 50 feet or 3 stories in height. 
K.  Major Wireless Telecommunication Facilities. This category includes all major wireless telecommunication facilities subject to the requirements of Section 17.40.640. Co-located and stealth communication facilities are subject to director's review. 
(Ord. 896 § 1 (Exh. A §§ 7-9), 2008; Ord. 753 § 1 (Exh. A § 5), 1999; Ord. 711 § 15 (part), 1995: prior zoning ord. § 221.025) 
(Ord. No. 1007, § 5, 10-13-2015) 
17.12.090 - Interpretation. 
    Where a conflict in interpretation occurs regarding application of Section 17.12.040, 17.12.050, 17.12.060, 17.12.070, 17.12.080 or 17.12.110 to any specific case the director shall determine the interpretation. 
(Ord. 711 § 15 (part), 1995: prior zoning ord. § 221.026) 
17.12.100 - Adjustments. 
    The director may reduce the required minimum lot width, minimum lot depth and yard requirements by an amount not to exceed 10%; may increase the maximum height regulations and maximum sign area by an amount not to exceed 10% of the amount specified by the C zone; where the director makes a finding in writing that the applicant has demonstrated: 
A.  That there are special circumstances or exceptional physical characteristics applicable to the property including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings involved which are not generally applicable to other properties in the same vicinity with the same zoning; and 
B.  That an adjustment (if authorized) will not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations on other properties in the same vicinity with the same zoning; and 
C.  The strict application of the requirements that are sought to be reduced or increased would result in practical difficulties and unnecessary hardship which is inconsistent with the purpose of the requirements; and 
D.  That approval of the application will not diminish the visual appearance of the property or neighborhood; and 
E.  Where applicable, that approval of the application will result in the need for less grading and disturbance of soils and natural vegetation. Where applicable, that approval of the application will result in the retention or preservation of native vegetation; particularly Joshua trees, California Juniper, or Creosote shrubs. 
    Any reduction or increase greater than those specified in this section shall be subject to the granting of a variance. 
(Ord. 711 § 15 (part), 1995: prior zoning ord. § 221.027) 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 2, 12-13-2016) 
17.12.120 - Site plan review required-Fees. 
A.  A site plan (with vicinity map) and building elevations, drawn to scale and reflecting the accurate dimensions of the buildings and property, shall be required of any person seeking to erect new buildings or structures, make additions to any existing buildings or structures, site temporary commercial coaches, or otherwise grade, improve or develop any lot or portion thereof for a permitted use prior to the issuance of any grading or building permit. The site plan shall be accompanied by an appropriate development application and both shall be filed with the planning department. The director or his designated representative shall review the site plan for conformance with the provisions of this title. The site plan shall demonstrate conformance with height regulations, property development regulations, sign regulations or a sign program required by the city for multiple-tenant projects, off-street parking requirements, the adopted City of Lancaster Design Guidelines, any other requirements established for the adopted zoning designation in which the property(ies) is (are) located, and any other applicable city ordinances, standards, guidelines or policies. In addition to the conditions and requirements imposed by the ordinance codified in this title and other city ordinances, standards, guidelines and policies, the director may place conditions on the approval of the site plan where the director finds that such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. At such time as the site plan complies with the requirements of the ordinance codified in this title and other city ordinances, standards, guidelines or policies, the site plan shall be approved by the director or his designated representative. The site plan approval shall be valid for 2 years from the date of approval. A site plan shall be considered "used" when the slab of a major building in the project is poured and inspected, although circumstances in each case may vary and the final determination as to "use" of a site plan review shall be made by the director. Three one-year extensions of the approval may be granted by the director provided such written request for an extension is received not less than 60 days prior to expiration, and any significant environmental changes which have occurred since the original approval have been addressed. Any extension granted shall be conditioned to comply with the city's current design guidelines as adopted by the city council, unless the applicant can demonstrate to the director's satisfaction that such compliance will impose an undue hardship on the project. In the event the site plan or an extension thereof is denied, the applicant may appeal the decision in accordance with Section 17.36.030. All projects constructed in accordance with an approved site plan shall be permanently maintained as approved. Any desired subsequent changes shall be submitted for approval as an amendment to the site plan. Prior to occupancy the site shall be inspected for compliance with the site plan. All improvements shall be installed and functioning before occupancy will be allowed. 
Where the director determines that the requirements of this section surpass the city's need for project review of a particular development proposal, the director may exercise discretion and apply the provisions of Article VI of Chapter 17.32, Director's Review, in its place. 
B.  Fees Required. When the appropriate development application is filed per subsection A of this section it shall be accompanied by the filing fee established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 711 § 15 (part), 1995: prior zoning ord. §§ 221.040, 221.041) 
(Ord. No. 924, § 1, 8-25-09; Ord. No. 956, § 3, 1-11-2011) 
17.12.130 - Property development regulations. 
A.  General Regulations. 
1.  No new building or commercial coach shall be erected, constructed, moved onto, or established on an existing legal lot or parcel of land unless said building or commercial coach shall comply with all of the regulations set forth in city ordinances, standards, guidelines or policies and subsection B of this section or Article X of Chapter 17.40, Commercial Coaches as Temporary Offices, which are pertinent to its placement on said lot or parcel. 
2.  No existing building or commercial coach located on an existing legal lot or parcel of land shall be convened, enlarged or moved unless said building, or addition thereto, shall comply with all of the regulations set forth in city ordinances, standards, guidelines, or policies and subsection B of this section or Article X of Chapter 17.40, Commercial Coaches as Temporary Offices, which are pertinent to its placement on said lot or parcel. 
3.  No new lot shall be created and no building, or portion thereof, existing on such new lot shall be used, unless said lot and said building location shall comply with all of the regulations set forth in city ordinances, standards, guidelines or policies and subsection B of this section which are pertinent to the area and dimensions for new lots and the placement or location of buildings on said lot. 
B.  C Zone. Wherever property is designated as a C zone on the zoning map the following regulations, specific or general, shall apply: 
1.  Lot Dimensions. The following minimum lot dimensions shall apply to all lots created after the adoption of this section, except those lots created within the boundaries of an approved shopping center to accommodate individual tenants. (Those lots which were legally created, prior to the adoption of this section, in compliance with ordinances in effect at the time of their creation need not comply unless involved in a new subdivision or change in lot configuration other than a lot line adjustment as provided in Title 16 of this code.) 
Minimum Minimum Minimum Zone Lot Area Lot Width* Lot Depth C 10,000 sq. ft. 100 ft. 100 ft.  
* Also denotes minimum street frontage. 
  See Section 17.40.070, 17.40.080, 17.40-.090A or 17.40.090B in the event public use or required street dedication would reduce the net lot area, lot width, or lot depth of an existing lot to less than the required minimum. 
2.  Yard Requirements. 
a.  Additions or modifications to buildings or uses, either constructed or having received building permit approval, or having been legally established prior to May 4, 1983, may be allowed with respect to yards of lesser dimension than required in this subsection where, in the opinion of the director, allowing less than full compliance with the yard requirements would impose no substantial detriment to abutting property or improvements thereon. In rendering a decision on whether to allow a reduction of the required yard, the director shall consider whether: 
  (See Sections 17.40.093, 17.40.095 and 17.40.097 in the event yard requirements must be reduced for street widening or transit stops.) 
1)  There are special circumstances or exceptional characteristics applicable to the property involved which are not generally applicable to other properties in the same vicinity with the same zoning; 
2)  An adjustment (if authorized) will constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations on other properties in the same vicinity with the same zoning; and 
3)  The strict application of the yard requirements would result in practical difficulties and unnecessary hardship which is inconsistent with the purpose of the yard requirements. 
  In no case shall the director's approval of the reduction of a required yard relieve the applicant/property owner from complying with minimum landscape requirements established by this title, unless such relief is specifically approved by the director. (See Sections 17.40.093, 17.40.095 and 17.40.097 in the event yard requirements must be reduced for street widening or transit stops.) 
b.  Setbacks, building placement, and building design shall be provided as follows. Guidance in the application of these requirements is provided by adopted city design guidelines and various diagrams contained within this code: 
1)  Street Frontages. 
a)  Street Frontage-Build-To Line. A "build-to" line for street frontages is established as follows. This "build-to" line shall apply to all street frontages adjacent to a property where pedestrian or vehicular access is available from that frontage: 
(1)  Arterial Street: Zero (0) to twelve (12) feet. 
(2)  All Other Streets: Zero (0) to six (6) feet. 
b)  Building Placement. Except as provided in Section 17.12.130.B.2.b.1) c), building placement on a property shall comply with the following requirements. 
(1)  New buildings, or additions to existing buildings, shall be designed and located so that a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the street frontage(s) has buildings located at the established "build-to" line for the parcel. 
(2)  Vehicular driveways and parking areas shall not be located between the façade of a building located at the "build-to" line and the back of the public sidewalk. 
(3)  In areas of the site where buildings are not located at the established "build-to" line, a minimum landscaped area of ten (10) feet in width shall be provided from the back of the sidewalk to any parking area. Such width may be reduced by the approving authority where a parkway design is used to separate the sidewalk from the street curb. Landscaping installation and maintenance shall be in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 8.50. 

Example of Building Placement at Build-To Line for 50% of Street Frontage 
Diagram Courtesy of Sargent Town Planning 
c)  Exceptions to Building Placement Requirements. Exceptions to the requirement for building placement established in subsection may be granted by the approval authority in the following circumstances: 
(1)  In the case of a commercial center, an exception may be granted where an anchor tenant requires a specific dimension for a "view corridor" from the adjacent street. 
(2)  On a corner lot situation, an exception may be granted to reduce the minimum fifty (50) percent requirement on one of the frontages where another frontage exceeds the minimum requirement and the overall intent of the build-to line requirement is met. 
(3)  Where people-oriented activity areas, such as outdoor dining locations, are provided at the build-to line and designed in such a way as to meet the intent of the "build-to" line, an exception may be granted. 
(4)  Where a drive-through lane is provided between the building and the "build-to line", an exception may be granted if the building provides, as required in Section 17.12.130.B.2.b.2), sufficient design features facing the street frontage(s). 

Example of Placement of Outdoor Activity Areas Along Street Frontage at Build-To Line 
Diagram Courtesy of Sargent Town Planning 
2)  Building Design Requirements. All buildings located entirely or partially at the "build-to" line shall meet the requirements as stated below. Determination of the appropriate building design elements shall be guided by Section 17.12.230 and the adopted city design guidelines. 
a)  Building Façades facing Street Frontage(s). 
(1)  Buildings shall generally be oriented so that the rear of the building does not directly face the adjacent street frontage(s). The approving authority may approve an exception to this where sufficient design elements, including but not limited to building fenestration, building materials, pedestrian access points into and through the building, and other techniques are provided to meet the design intent of the code. 
(2)  Design of building façades facing a street shall provide the appearance of a storefront. Design elements may include arcades, patios, awnings, and overhangs as appropriate to enhance appearance and use of the space. 
b)  Public Entrances. 
(1)  Except as provided under subsection ii., all buildings located entirely or partially at the "build-to" line shall have a public entrance directly facing the street frontage, and provide direct pedestrian access to the entrance from the adjacent street frontage. 
(2)  A public entrance may be located on the side of a building not directly facing a street frontage provided that the entrance is clearly visible to people from the adjacent street, direct public access is provided, and the building façade directly facing the street has sufficient fenestration and other design elements and treatment to create a visible connection with that street frontage. 

Building Entrance and Treatment for Side-On Design 
Diagram Courtesy of Sargent Town Planning 
3)  Interior side yard and rear yard: Ten (10) feet where abutting residential zone. 
3.  Height Regulations. The height of buildings shall be as follows: 
a.  No building or structure in the C zone shall exceed a height of 50 feet or 3 stories, whichever is less. This section does not apply to conditional use permit uses which shall be subject to Article I of Chapter 17.32. (See Article XII of Chapter 17.40 for general exceptions.) 
b.  No commercially used building in the C zone which is within 100 feet of any RR, SRR, or R zone shall exceed a height of 2 stories or 35 feet, whichever is less. 
c.  No building may be constructed which would shade any existing active solar energy system on adjoining property without the consent of the affected property owner. 
d.  Exception for Solar Systems. Solar collectors may exceed the height limit when mounted on the roof of a legal, conforming building. The right to exceed the height limit shall be exercised only in the event that: there is no other practical means or location for achieving an efficient placement on the building or site in question; such collectors may exceed the height limit only to the extent necessary to achieve efficient placement; in no case shall such solar collectors (or related equipment) encroach more than 5 feet beyond the limit. Also the placement of a solar collector shall not shade or otherwise diminish the efficiency of existing solar collectors on neighboring property, or preclude such property from sufficient solar access to successfully operate a solar energy system sufficient to serve the needs of the business or occupants. 
4.  Reserved. 
5.  Landscaping. No landscaping shall be placed in a manner which shades or would ultimately shade any existing solar energy system from the sun on a contiguous lot. 
6.  Outside display. All displays shall be located wholly within an enclosed building with the exception of the following: 
a.  Amusement rides and devices; 
b.  Automobile sales, limited to automobiles, tractors, and trucks under 2 tons held for sale and rental only; 
c.  Automobile service stations, limited to automobile accessories and facilities necessary to the dispensing of petroleum products only; 
d.  Boat sales, limited to boats held for sale or rental only; 
e.  Carnivals-Commercial; 
f.  Christmas trees and wreaths, sale of; 
g.  Crops, field, tree, bush and row, including nursery stock, flowers and vines; 
h.  Electric distribution substations; 
i.  Equipment rental; 
j.  Gas metering and control stations, public utility; 
k.  Mobilehome sales, limited to mobilehomes held for sale or rental only; 
l.  Parking lots; 
m.  Pumpkins and other seasonal agricultural products, sale of; 
n.  Recreational vehicle sales, limited to recreational vehicles held for sale or rental only; 
o.  Signs, existing outdoor advertising; 
p.  Temporary outdoor sales subject to Section 17.12.070; 
q.  Trailer sales, box and utility, limited to trailers held for sale only. 
(Ord. 711 §§ 15, 44 (part), 1995: prior zoning ord. § 221.050) 
(Ord. No. 907, § 5, 10-28-2008; Ord. No. 1016, § 3, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 1028, § 1, 7-11-2017 ) 
17.12.140 - Signs. 
    A person shall not use, install, or construct any sign in the C zone except as specifically permitted in this section. Signs shall be subject to all regulations and conditions, including without limitation submittal of a sign plan, set forth in the ordinance codified in this title and any other ordinance now existing or hereafter adopted by the city regulating the installation, use and/or construction of signs. A comprehensive sign plan for multiple-tenant projects or an individual sign plan for single-tenant projects, must be submitted to and approved by the director or a designated representative. Sign plans must be fully dimensioned, including the proposed sign location, elevations, colors and materials. A person who has first obtained approval of the sign plan and all required permits and inspection approval shall be permitted to use, install or construct signs as specified in the C zone. 
(Ord. 711 § 15 (part), 1995: prior zoning ord. § 221.060) 
17.12.150 - Signs-General provisions. 
A.  The provisions of this section regulating signs shall not apply to the following signs except as otherwise indicated herein: 
1.  Official notices issued by any court, public body or public officer; 
2.  Notices posted by any public officer in performance of a public duty, or for any person in giving legal notice; 
3.  Traffic, directional, warning or informational signs or banners required or authorized by the public authority having jurisdiction over such signs; 
4.  Official signs used for emergency purposes only; 
5.  Permanent memorial or historical signs, plaques or markers; 
6.  Public utility signs, provided such signs do not exceed 3 square feet in area; 
7.  Any signs for a shopping center of 10 net acres or more which are lawfully erected in accordance with a city-approved sign program required as a condition of approval of the conditional use permit authorizing the shopping center; 
8.  Any signs for a shopping center of less than 10 net acres which are lawfully erected in accordance with a city-approved sign program required as a condition of the site plan approval. 
B.  Prohibited Signs. The following signs shall be prohibited in the C zone and may not be included in any sign plan. 
1.  Signs which contain or utilize: 
a.  Any exposed incandescent lamp, 
b.  Any revolving beacon light, 
c.  Any continuous or sequential flashing operation, except signs displaying time of day, atmospheric temperature or having programmable electronic public service messages only, 
d.  Any system for display of time of day, atmospheric temperature or programmable electronic public service messages in which: 
1)  The messages are not public service in nature, or 
2)  The proposed display has any illumination which is in continuous motion or which appears to be in continuous motion, or 
3)  The message is changed at a rate faster than one message every 4 seconds, or 
4)  The interval between messages is less than one second, or 
5)  The intensity of illumination changes, or 
6)  The display is located less than 100 feet on the same side of the street, or 200 feet across the street, from residentially zoned property; 
2.  Any notice, placard, bill, card, poster, sticker, banner, sign, advertising or other device calculated to attract the attention of the public which any person posts, prints, sticks, stamps, tacks or otherwise affixes, or causes the same to be done to or upon any street, right-of-way, public sidewalk, crosswalk, curb, lamppost, hydrant, tree, telephone pole or lighting system, or upon any fixture of the police or fire alarm system of the city of Lancaster or the county of Los Angeles; 
3.  Any sign which is placed in a manner which would obstruct a driver's or pedestrian's vision and thus create a hazard, or potential hazard, to the public health, safety or welfare; 
4.  Any strings of pennants, banners or streamers, clusters of flags, strings of twirlers or propellers, flares, balloons, and similar attention-getting devices, including noise-emitting devices, with the exception of the following: 
a.  Automobile sales uses only may utilize pennants, banners or streamers subject to the following conditions: 
1)  All such displays must be positioned horizontally and parallel to the ground and shall maintain a minimum height of 14 feet and a maximum height of 18 feet from grade level. 
2)  All lines supporting such devices shall be secured in a taut manner and shall exhibit no more than 5 inches sag or droop at midline. No more than 3 such lines may be placed above one another and such lines shall be located along street frontages only. 
3)  All pennants, banners or streamers shall be maintained in good condition. Such devices which have become torn, tattered, faded or otherwise fallen into disrepair shall be removed or replaced. 
b.  National state, local governmental, institutional or corporate flags properly displayed, 
c.  Holiday decorations in season used for an aggregate period of 60 days in any one calendar year; 
5.  Awning or entrance canopy signs; 
6.  Devices dispensing bubbles and free-flowing particles of matter; 
7.  Devices projecting, or otherwise reproducing the image of a sign or message on any surface or object; 
8.  New outdoor advertising signs; 
9.  Pole signs; 
10.  Portable signs; 
11.  Projecting signs; 
12.  Revolving signs of any kind; 
13.  Roof signs; 
14.  Sidewalk signs; 
15.  Signs advertising or displaying any unlawful act, business or purpose; 
16.  Signs emitting or amplifying sounds for the purpose of attracting attention; 
17.  Temporary signs, except as otherwise specifically permitted by this title. 
C.  General Sign Regulations. The following regulations apply to all signs in the C zone: 
1.  In no case shall a lighted sign or lighting device thereof be placed or directed so as to permit the beams and illumination therefrom to be directed or beamed upon a street, sidewalk or adjacent premises so as to cause glare or reflection that may constitute a traffic hazard or nuisance. 
2.  Existing outdoor advertising signs are subject to Section 17.40.210. 
3.  Signs, except outdoor advertising signs, may be single-, double- or multi-faced, provided that: 
a.  The distance between the faces of any double-faced sign, other than a "V" shaped projecting sign, shall not exceed 36 inches. 
b.  The separation between the intersecting faces of any multi-faced sign shall not exceed 12 inches. 
4.  Any sign located on vacant and unoccupied property, and which was erected for an occupant or business unrelated to the present occupant or business, or any sign which pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer exists shall be removed within 30 days after the purpose for, or use utilizing such sign has been removed from such property. 
5.  Any permitted sign may be a changeable copy sign. 
6.  All signs shall be designed in the simplest form and be free of any exposed bracing, angle iron, guy wires, cables or similar devices. 
7.  The exposed backs of all signs visible to the public shall be suitably covered, finished and properly maintained. 
8.  All signs shall be maintained in good repair, including display surfaces which shall be kept neatly painted or posted. 
9.  Any sign which does not conform to the provisions of this title shall be made to conform or shall be removed as provided in subsection B.4. of Section 17.32.850 except as provided in Section 17.32.850B.4.c. 
10.  Except where otherwise specifically provided by this title, sign regulations established pursuant to this title shall not apply to signs within a building, arcade, court or other similarly enclosed area where such signs are not visible to the public without entering such facilities. 
11.  The height of all signs shall be measured from the highest point of the sign. 
D.  Computation of Sign Area. Computation of the surface area of any sign face shall consist of all lettering, figures, symbols, designs and pictures, together with all framing, background material, colored or illuminated areas, and attention-attracting devices forming an integral part of the overall display, but excluding all support structures, except that: 
1.  Superficial ornamentation of a non-message-bearing character which does not exceed 5% of the surface area of the sign face shall be exempted from computation. 
2.  Wall signs painted on or affixed directly to a building wall or façade, and having no discernible boundary, shall have the areas between letters, words intended to be read together, and any device intended to draw attention to the sign message included in any computation of surface area of the sign face. 
3.  Signs placed in such a manner, or bearing a text, as to require dependence upon each other in order to convey meaning shall be considered one sign and the intervening areas between the signs shall be included in any computation of surface area of the sign face. 
4.  Spherical, cylindrical or other 3-dimensional signs shall be considered to have 2 faces. The area of each sign face shall consist of 1/2 of the total area of the 3-dimensional sign. 
(Ord. 711 § 15 (part), 1995: prior zoning ord. § 221.061) 
17.12.160 - Business signs. 
    Business signs may be permitted in the C zone subject to Section 17.12.230, and the restrictions of this section. For more information concerning specific types of signs see Section 17.04.240, Definitions. 
A.  Wall Business Signs. 
1.  Area Permitted. 
a.  Each ground floor business establishment fronting on and/or oriented toward one or more streets may be permitted (See Section 16.04.060 of this code for the definitions of the different classifications of streets): 
1)  On lots or parcels abutting or directly across a local or collector street from residentially zoned property, a maximum of one square foot of wall sign area for each one linear foot of building frontage;* 
2)  On all other lots or parcels a maximum of 3 square feet of wall sign area for each one linear foot of building frontage; 
3)  If building identification signs are used, the area of such signs shall be subtracted from the area permitted for wall signs. 
* EXCEPTION. In instances where businesses abut residentially zoned property but the proposed signs do not face toward residentially zoned property, the director may determine the amount of signage to be permitted not to exceed the maximum of 3 square feet for each one linear foot of building frontage. 
b.  Where a ground floor business establishment fronts only on a parking lot, alley, open mall, landscaped open space, or other public way, the exterior building wall facing such parking lot, alley, open mall, landscaped open space, or other public way shall be considered a building frontage for purposes of computing permitted wall sign area. 
c.  A ground floor business establishment having entrances intended for and regularly utilized by the public on the side of a building not considered to be building frontage by this section shall be permitted one wall sign on each such side provided the sign does not exceed 1/2 the sign area permitted on the building frontage of said business. Where a business has more than one building frontage recognized by this section, an average of the permitted sign areas shall be used in computation. The combined area of all signs shall not exceed that specified in subsection A.1. of this section. 
d.  Except as provided in subsection A.1.c. of this section, permitted sign area shall be used only on the face of the building wall for which it was calculated. No sign area may be transferred from one building frontage to another. 
e.  Any building containing business establishments which front only on an indoor mall having a limited number of entrances, shall be considered a single establishment for the purpose of computing the wall sign area permitted on the exterior walls of such building. 
f.  Each ground floor business establishment shall be permitted a minimum sign area of 20 square feet for each building frontage. 
g.  Each business establishment located above the ground floor which has an individual entrance from the outside of the building may be allowed a wall sign near the individual entrance in accordance with the area permitted for ground floor uses under subsection A.1.a.1) of this section. Such business establishments which are served by a common entrance may not have signs above the ground floor. 
h.  Each business establishment located on the ground floor or second floor having no building frontage shall be permitted a maximum of 4 square feet of sign area facing the street. Such business establishments may not have signs above the ground floor. 
2.  Height Permitted. Wall business signs shall not extend above: 
a.  Eighteen inches below the top of the wall of a single-story building; 
b.  The lowest point of a sloping roof of a single-story building. 
3.  Projection Permitted. Wall business signs shall not project more than 18 inches from the building wall to which they are attached. Freestanding signs may not project over the public right-of-way. 
4.  Lighting. Wall business signs may be internally or externally lighted, but any continuous or sequential flashing operation is prohibited. 
B.  Freestanding Business Signs. Monument signs and post signs are the only freestanding business signs permitted in the C zone. 
1.  Frontage. Freestanding business signs may be permitted on any lot or parcel of land for each street frontage having a continuous distance of 150 feet or more. Such signs may also be permitted as provided in subsection B.9. of this section. 
2.  Area Permitted. 
a.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the maximum freestanding business sign area that shall be permitted for each street frontage or for each combination of frontages considered to be a single frontage under either subsection B.9.a. or b. of this section is: 
1)  On lots or parcels where the street frontage abuts or is directly across a local or collector street from residentially zoned property, 50 square feet total sign area; 
b.  On all other lots or parcels, 150 square feet total sign area. 
  Where the locational requirements of Section 17.12.140 et seq. permit additional freestanding business signs on the same frontage, sign area allocated for each sign may be any proportion provided that the sum does not exceed the maximum permitted sign area established herein for a specific frontage or combination of frontages and that they conform to all other requirements of Section 17.12.140 et seq. 
3.  Height Permitted. Freestanding business signs shall not exceed a maximum height of 12 feet measured vertically from ground level at the base of the sign, or 3 feet below the roof line, whichever is least. 
4.  Location of Signs on All Lots and Parcels. 
a.  Freestanding business signs shall not be located nearer than 50 feet from any lot line, other than a lot line adjoining a street. 
b.  Freestanding business signs shall not be located nearer than 150 feet from any other freestanding business sign on the same frontage on the same lot, parcel of land, or within any shopping center. 
c.  Freestanding signs shall be directed toward the street frontage from which the area of the sign is computed. 
5.  Projection. 
a.  Freestanding business signs shall not project over the roof of any building or structure. 
b.  Freestanding business signs shall not project over any public right-of-way. 
6.  Movement. Freestanding business signs shall not rotate, move or simulate motion in any way. 
7.  Lighting. Freestanding business signs may be internally or externally lighted, but any continuous or sequential flashing operation is prohibited. 
8.  Other requirements for monument signs. 
a.  Sign copy shall be displayed within one sign structure. No other signage shall be attached to or placed on the monument sign. 
b.  All electrical service to the sign shall be underground and hidden from view. 
9.  Exceptions. 
a.  If a lot or parcel of land is a corner lot, the distances of any 2 intersecting street frontages may be combined and considered as a single frontage for the purpose of erecting and/or maintaining a single freestanding business sign adjacent to the corner formed by the intersecting street frontages, provided that: 
1)  The total combined distance of the 2 street frontages is 150 feet or more with no frontage less than 50 feet; and 
2)  No street frontage shall be used in combination as described herein more than once; and 
3)  Such sign or signs comply with all area, height, projection, lighting, movement, and locational requirements established elsewhere in this title. 
b.  If any application for director's review, including a site plan and an architectural sketch of the proposed sign, is first submitted to and approved by the director as provided in Article VI of Chapter 17.32, the street frontages of 2 or more contiguous lots or parcels of land may be combined and considered as a single frontage for the purpose of jointly erecting and/or maintaining one freestanding business sign, provided that: 
1)  The combined street frontage is 150 feet or more; and 
2)  Such lots or parcels of land share a common street frontage; and 
3)  Such sign complies with all area, height, projection, lighting, movement and locational requirements established elsewhere in this title; and 
4)  If one such lot is a corner lot, only frontage along the street common to all lots or parcels of land so combined shall be used in these computations and all other frontages shall be considered separately. 
c.  If an application for director's review, including a site plan and an architectural sketch of the proposed sign, is first submitted to and approved by the director as provided in Article VI of Chapter 17.32, one monument sign 42 inches or less in height may be erected and/or maintained on a lot or parcel of land having less than 150 feet of continuous street frontage. However if a monument sign greater than 42 inches in height or a post sign is desired by the applicant the director, in approving any such application shall make the following findings in addition to those specified in Section 17.32.790: 
1)  That no freestanding business sign currently exists on the subject property; and 
2)  That it is not practical for the applicant to combine the street frontage of said property with the frontage of one or more contiguous properties in order to comply with the minimum frontage requirement pursuant to subsection B.1. of this section; and 
3)  That surrounding buildings, structures or topographical features would substantially obstruct the visibility of a wall sign as permitted by this section for a distance of 100 feet, on one or both sides of such sign, measured along the center line of the street upon which such property fronts; and 
4)  That the requested sign is necessary for the effective identification of businesses located on said premises; and 
5)  That the requested sign will not obscure or significantly detract from existing legal signing located on surrounding properties; and 
6)  That the requested sign does not constitute a detriment to public health, safety and welfare; and 
7)  That the requested sign is in compliance with all other provisions of this title. 
d.  If the obstruction referred to in subsection B.9.c.3) of this section is a nonconforming sign, the director shall require, as a condition of approval, that the proposed sign be removed no later than the date specified by this title for removal of the nonconforming sign. Such date for removal shall not be extended except in the instance where the amortization period for said nonconforming sign has been extended by the approval of an application for nonconforming use and structure review. In such instance, the new removal date shall not extend beyond the new amortization period established for said nonconforming sign. 
  The maximum permitted area of such sign shall be in the following ratio: 
1)  On lots or parcels where the street frontage abuts or is across a local or collector street from residentially zoned property, 1/2 square foot of sign area for each foot of street frontage up to a maximum of 50 square feet total sign area; and 
2)  On all other lots or parcels, 11/2 square feet of sign area for each foot of street frontage up to a maximum of 150 square feet total sign area. 
e.  Proposals for shopping centers of more than 2 net acres but no greater than 10 net acres shall require the submittal of an overall sign program which is subject to the director's review and approval. Shopping centers of greater than 10 net acres in size shall require an overall sign program as a condition of the required conditional use permit. 
C.  Under Marquee Sign. Each business establishment may be permitted under marquee signs subject to the following restrictions: 
1.  Area permitted: Maximum of 3 square feet total sign area. 
2.  Number permitted: 
a.  Maximum of 2 per tenant; and 
b.  One for each entrance. 
3.  Height above sidewalk: Shall not be less than 8 feet. 
4.  Lighting. Under marquee signs may be internally or externally lighted, but any continuous or sequential flashing operation is prohibited. 
D.  Window Signs. Each business establishment may be permitted display window signs subject to the following restrictions: 
1.  Area permitted: Maximum of 25% of the window area. 
2.  Lighting. Window signs may be internally or externally lighted, but any continuous or sequential flashing operation is prohibited. 
E.  Incidental Business Signs. Each business establishment may be permitted incidental business signs provided: 
1.  That such signs are wall signs or window signs or are displayed within an existing freestanding sign structure; and 
2.  That such signs do not exceed 3 square feet in sign area or 6 square feet in total sign area; and 
3.  That the sum of the sign areas of all such signs does not exceed 10 square feet. 
4.  Incidental business signs may be internally or externally lighted but any continuous or sequential flashing operation is prohibited. 
(Ord. 711 § 15 (part), 1995: prior zoning ord. § 221.063) 
17.12.170 - Building identification signs. 
    Building identification signs may be permitted in the C zone subject to the following restrictions: 
A.  Area Permitted. One wall-mounted sign may be permitted provided: 
1.  Such sign does not exceed 6 square feet in sign area where located less than 30 feet above ground level measured at the base of the building below said sign; or 
2.  Such sign does not exceed 2% of the exterior wall area of the building wall on which it is mounted, excluding penthouse walls, where located more than 30 feet above ground level measured at the base of the building below said sign. 
3.  The area of the building identification sign shall be subtracted from the area permitted for wall signs. 
B.  Height Permitted. Such signs shall not extend above a line 18 inches below the highest point of a parapet wall or the lowest point of a sloping roof. 
C.  Lighting. Building identification signs may be internally or externally lighted but any continuous or sequential flashing operation is prohibited. 
(Ord. 711 § 15 (part), 1995: prior zoning ord. § 221.064) 
17.12.180 - Temporary signs. 
    Temporary signs may be permitted in the C zone subject to the following restrictions: 
A.  Area Permitted. Temporary signs which are posted or erected for 90 days or less shall not exceed 16 square feet in sign area or 32 square feet in total sign area as defined in Section 17.04.240. Temporary signs which have obtained a permit pursuant to subsection G of this section and which are posted or erected for more than 90 days shall not exceed 32 square feet in sign area or 64 square feet in total sign area. 
B.  Height Permitted. 
1.  Freestanding temporary signs shall not exceed 6 feet in height. 
2.  Temporary signs which are posted, attached or affixed to buildings of more than one story shall not be higher than the finished floor line of the second floor of such building. 
3.  Temporary signs which are posted, attached or affixed to a single-story building shall not extend above: 
a.  Eighteen inches below the top of the wall of the building; 
b.  The lowest point of a sloping roof of the building. 
C.  Projection Permitted. Where temporary signs are attached to a wall such signs shall not project more than 18 inches from the building wall to which they are attached. 
D.  Lighting. Temporary signs shall not be lighted. 
E.  Placement. Temporary signs shall not be placed on public property (see Section 17.12.150 B.2.), or in any manner that would endanger the public (see Section 17.12.150.B.3.). 
F.  Duration. No temporary sign shall be posted for more than 90 days without obtaining a sign permit pursuant to subsection G of this section. No sign permit for a temporary sign shall be valid for more than one year. Upon written request for an extension, the director may grant an extension for up to one additional year, upon making a finding in writing that the sign is otherwise in compliance with the requirements of Section 17.12.140 et seq. and that the extension is necessary to accomplish the purposes for which the sign has been posted. No additional extensions may be granted. All temporary signs shall be removed within 14 calendar days after occurrence of the event, if any, which is the subject of the temporary sign. The date of the posting shall be permanently and legibly marked on the lower right-hand corner of the sign face. 
G.  Permit Required. Any person who proposes to post or erect a temporary sign for more than 90 days shall file an application for a sign permit with the department of community development. The applicant shall also file a statement of responsibility as required in subsection I of this section. 
H.  Standards for Approval. 
1.  Within 7 working days the director or his designated representative shall act upon the application for a temporary sign permit. 
2.  The action on the application shall be based on character; location; design, including design elements such as material, letter style, colors, sign type, and shape; and the provisions of Section 17.12.140 et seq. 
3.  If the action is to disapprove, the notice of disapproval shall specify the reasons therefor. 
I.  Statement of Responsibility. Each person desiring to post or erect a temporary sign(s), regardless of duration, shall submit to the department of community development a statement of responsibility in a form approved by the director with a description sufficient to identify the temporary sign(s), the locations of the sign(s) to be posted, and certifying a named individual who is responsible for removing each temporary sign. In the event the responsible individual fails to remove the temporary sign(s) as required by subsection F of this section, the temporary sign(s) shall be deemed abandoned and may be removed by the city, the cost of which removal shall be payable by the responsible individual. 
J.  Removal of Unauthorized, Unmaintained or Dangerous Signs. 
1.  Temporary signs for which a statement of responsibility has not been submitted and, if required, a permit has not been obtained, are subject to immediate removal by the city without compensation. The city may, at its option, also pursue legal action under Section 17.04.220. 
2.  Temporary signs which are deemed by the city to constitute a threat to the public health and safety are subject to immediate removal by the city without compensation. (Some examples might include signs which are not secured against the wind or are placed in a manner which would interfere with the vision of drivers or pedestrians.) The city's cost of removal shall be payable by the responsible individual. 
3.  Temporary signs for which a statement of responsibility has been submitted and, if required, a permit has been obtained, and which do not pose a threat to public health and safety but are otherwise posted in violation of Section 17.12.140 et seq. shall be subject to removal in accordance with the following procedures. The city shall provide written notice to the responsible individual for each temporary sign established pursuant to subsection I of this section, that the sign is in violation of Section 17.12.140 et seq.; shall specify the nature of the violation; and shall direct the responsible individual therefor to remove or alter such temporary sign. 
  If the responsible individual fails to comply with the notice within 3 working days after such notice is mailed, the sign(s) shall be deemed abandoned, and may be removed by the city, the cost of which shall be payable by the responsible individual to the city. 
(Ord. 711 § 15 (part), 1995: prior zoning ord. § 221.065) 
17.12.200 - Directional and/or information signs. 
    Freestanding or wall-mounted directional and/or information signs may be permitted in the C zone subject to the following restrictions: 
A.  Area Permitted. Directional and/or informational signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in sign area or 24 square feet in total sign area. 
B.  Height Permitted. 
1.  Wall-mounted directional and/or information signs shall not extend above a line 18 inches below the highest point of a parapet wall or the lowest point of a sloping roof. 
2.  Freestanding directional and/or informational signs shall not exceed 10 feet in height measured from the base of the sign. 
C.  Lighting. Directional and/or information signs may be internally or externally lighted but any continuous or sequential flashing operation is prohibited. 
D.  Location of Signs. All such signs shall be located on-site. 
(Ord. 711 § 15 (part), 1995: prior zoning ord. § 221.067) 
17.12.210 - Special purpose signs. 
    The following special purpose signs may be permitted in the C zone as provided herein: 
A.  Community Identification Signs. If a site plan is first submitted to and approved by the director, as provided in Article VI of Chapter 17.32, freestanding community identification signs may be permitted in any zone at or near the entrance to an unincorporated community subject to the following restrictions: 
1.  Area Permitted. Such signs shall not exceed 96 square feet in sign area or 192 square feet in total sign area. 
2.  Height Permitted. Such signs shall not exceed a maximum height of 12 feet measured vertically from the base of the sign. 
3.  Lighting. Community identification signs may be internally or externally lighted but any continuous or sequential flashing operation is prohibited. 
4.  Design. Such signs shall be architecturally related to the area in which they are located. 
B.  Civic Organization Signs. If a site plan is first submitted to and approved by the director, as provided in Article VI of Chapter 17.32, freestanding civic organizations signs may be permitted in any zone at or near the entrance to the city subject to the following restrictions: 
1.  Area Permitted. Such signs shall not exceed 50 square feet in sign area or 100 square feet in total sign area. 
2.  Height Permitted. Such signs shall not exceed 12 feet in height measured vertically from the base of the sign. 
3.  Lighting. Civic organization signs shall be unlighted. 
4.  Design. Such signs shall be architecturally related to the area in which they are located. 
C.  Bulletin or Special Event Signs. One freestanding or wall-mounted bulletin or special event sign may be erected and maintained on each lot or parcel of land in the C zone developed for a publicly owned, charitable, religious or educational institution subject to the following restrictions: 
1.  Area Permitted. Such sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in sign area or 100 square feet in total sign area. 
2.  Height Permitted. 
a.  A wall-mounted sign shall not extend above a line 18 inches below the highest point of a parapet wall or the lowest point of a sloping roof. 
b.  A freestanding sign shall not exceed 12 feet in height measured vertically from the base of the sign. 
3.  Lighting. Bulletin or special event signs may be internally or externally lighted, but any continuous or sequential flashing operation is prohibited. 
4.  Design. Such sign shall be architecturally related to the structure to which it is appurtenant. 
5.  Location of Sign. A freestanding sign shall not be located nearer than 25 feet to any lot line. 
D.  Fuel Pricing Signs. Fuel pricing signs shall be monument signs and are permitted for each business offering gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel for sale subject to the following restrictions: 
1.  Area Permitted. 
a.  One sign, not to exceed 30 square feet in sign area or 60 square feet in total sign area, shall be permitted for each street frontage. 
b.  If said business is located on a corner, one sign, not to exceed 50 square feet in sign area or 100 square feet in total sign area, shall be permitted at the corner in lieu of separate signs on each of the intersecting frontages. 
c.  The area per sign face of a combined freestanding business and fuel pricing sign shall not exceed the sum of the permitted areas per sign face of the 2 combined signs, nor shall permitted sign areas be transferred between sign faces of a combined freestanding business and fuel pricing sign. 
2.  Height Permitted. 
a.  No separate freestanding sign shall exceed 12 feet in height at a corner or 5 feet in height elsewhere. Such height shall be measured vertically from the base of the sign. 
b.  No combined business and fuel pricing sign or no business sign to which fuel pricing panels are mounted shall exceed the maximum permitted height of a freestanding business sign as established in Section 17.12.160. 
3.  Lighting. Fuel pricing signs may be internally or externally lighted, but any continuous or sequential flashing operation is prohibited. 
4.  Location of Sign. A separate freestanding sign shall not be located nearer than 25 feet from any existing freestanding sign or from any lot line, other than a lot line adjoining a street. 
E.  Outdoor Menu Signs for Restaurants with Drive-Through or Car Service. Outdoor menu signs shall be separate freestanding signs and may be permitted for each business offering food to drive-through or car service customers subject to the following restrictions: 
1.  Area Permitted. One sign, not to exceed 24 square feet in total sign area may be permitted for each business. In the event the business has more than one drive-through service facility, 2 signs may be permitted which may share the total sign area permitted herein but shall not exceed it. 
2.  Height Permitted. No outdoor menu sign shall exceed a height of 6 feet. 
3.  Lighting. Outdoor menu signs may be internally or externally lighted but any continuous or sequential flashing operation is prohibited. 
4.  Design. Such signs shall be designed to serve the needs of the motorist customer and shall be permanently affixed to the ground. 
5.  Location of Sign. No outdoor menu sign shall be located in any required yard. 
F.  Temporary Window Signs. Temporary window signs may be placed in the display windows of a business at which a merchandise sale or change in the status of the business is taking place subject to the following restrictions: 
1.  Area Permitted. Such signs shall not cover more than 25% of the display window area. 
2.  Height Permitted. The height of the display window where the sign is placed. 
3.  Lighting. No lighting other than what permanently exists in the display window. 
4.  Location of Signs. Such signs shall be placed on display windows only and shall not be placed on the glass of any door. 
5.  Time. Such signs may be permitted for up to 10 days in any calendar month. 
G.  Time, Temperature, and Public Service Message Signs. Signs using any system for the display of time of day, atmospheric temperature, or programmable electronic messages shall be wall, post or monument signs and may be permitted subject to the prohibitions in Section 17.12-.150B and the following restrictions: 
1.  Area Permitted. One sign not to exceed 24 square feet in total sign area may be permitted for each street frontage, up to a maximum of 2 for each business. 
2.  Height Permitted. No such sign shall exceed a height of: 
a.  For monument or post signs: 12 feet; 
b.  For wall signs: not less than 18 inches below the top of the wall of a single-story building. 
3.  Location of Sign. Such signs shall be placed not closer than 500 feet to any business already using this type of sign. 
4.  Other. Such signs must not violate the restrictions imposed by Section 17.12.150 B.1.d. 
(Ord. 711 § 15 (part), 1995: prior zoning ord. § 221.068) 
17.12.220 - Off-street parking. 
    The automobile parking facilities required by this section shall be provided and permanently maintained as such unless and until a substitute has been provided which is in full compliance with the provisions of this title. The following parking requirements shall be complied with in the C zone: 
A.  General Conditions. The provisions of this section shall apply at the time that: 
1.  A building or structure is erected; or 
2.  An existing building or structure is altered or enlarged to increase the occupancy capacity. 
B.  Parking Requirements by Use. 
1.  For all uses, the developer, property owner, or authorized agent shall determine the number of parking spaces sufficient for the proposed use, and shall provide justification acceptable to the director of development services and/or the planning commission to support the determination. 
2.  Mixed-Use, in Conjunction with Multi-Family Residential Use. The developer, property owner, or authorized agent shall determine the number of parking spaces sufficient for the non-residential portion of the mixed-use development, and shall provide justification acceptable to the director of development services and/or the planning commission to support the determination. The parking requirement for the multi-family portion shall be consistent with Section 17.08.100 of the residential zones. 
3.  Multi-Family Uses. The parking requirement for multi-family uses shall be consistent with Section 17.08.100 of the residential zones. 
4.  All uses shall provide parking for disabled persons in accordance with federal and state requirements. 
(Ord. 711 § 15 (part), 1995: prior zoning ord. §§ 221.070-221.075) 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 4, 12-13-2016) 
17.12.230 - Design requirements. 
    The following design requirements shall be met for development in the C zone: 
A.  General requirements applicable to all development: 
1.  Access. 
a.  Automobile. 
1)  Driveways providing access to the site may be required to be combined, relocated, or otherwise limited in order to minimize traffic conflicts and improve public safety. All driveways shall be constructed to comply with current city standards. All driveway locations are subject to the approval of the director of public works. 
2)  Entry drives into parking areas shall be of sufficient depth to provide for vehicle stacking appropriate to the size, location and intensity of the project served. 
3)  Access to drive-through facilities shall have a sufficient depth to provide vehicle stacking for not less than 7 automobiles at a depth of 24 feet per automobile per drive-through facility. (One bank teller station equals one such facility.) Such stacking space shall be designed in a manner which will not restrict access to or from parking spaces, aisles or driveways. 
4)  Private internal roadways shall be constructed at the minimum widths necessary for safe traffic circulation in order to minimize heat absorption and storm water runoff. 
b.  Pedestrians and Bicycles. 
1)  On-site pedestrian walkways serving all commercial buildings, freestanding or common walls as in a shopping center, shall be installed in a manner which will promote direct, safe and convenient pedestrian access to public sidewalks, crosswalks and transit stops with minimal interruption by vehicular traffic. Where the walkways are interrupted by traffic the design of the crosswalk shall be intended to slow the speed of traffic. 
2)  Such pedestrian walkways shall be provided to each abutting street which is served by a sidewalk. The walkways shall be clearly designated through the use of raised walkways, decorative paving, placement of lighting, landscaping, shading devices, or other design features. 
3)  Pedestrian walkways and seating should be visible from buildings, parking facilities, and rights-of-way to the greatest degree possible to provide surveillance of these areas. 
4)  Access for bicycles shall be provided for all sites abutting or adjacent to planned bicycle and/or trail routes. 
5)  Bicycle parking shall be provided in a convenient location near the entrance of the building. 
c.  Public Transit. 
1)  Opportunities for turnouts, shelters and pedestrian access shall be provided at a location which is convenient to building entrances for all sites abutting expressways or arterial streets that are served by public transit routes. 
2)  If deemed necessary by the city for project mitigation, the city will consult with the bus company to determine appropriate improvements per the transportation demand and trip reduction measures of Ordinance No. 633. 
2.  Paving. Parking areas, as well as the maneuvering areas and driveways used for access thereto shall be paved with: 
a.  Concrete surfacing to a minimum thickness of 31/2 inches with expansion joints as necessary; or 
b.  Asphalt surfacing, rolled to a smooth, hard surface having a minimum thickness of 2 inches after compaction, and laid over a base of crushed rock, gravel or other similar material compacted to a minimum thickness of 4 inches. 
c.  For commercial truck parking and drive aisles, asphalt surfacing rolled to a smooth hard surface having a minimum thickness of 3 inches after compaction and, at a minimum, designed to accommodate a traffic index (TI) of 6.5 as calculated in accordance with the latest edition of the CalTrans Highway Design Manual. Large commercial projects may need a greater TI based upon their use. 
d.  Other alternative material that will provide at least the equivalent in service, life and appearance of the materials and standards which would be employed for development pursuant to subsection A.2.a. or b. 
e.  The director of public works, at the request of the director, shall review and report on the adequacy of paving where alternative materials are proposed under subsection A.2.d. The director of public works may approve such alternative materials if, in his opinion, the evidence indicates compliance with subsection A.2.d. 
3.  Size and Marking of Spaces. 
a.  Standard parking spaces shall exhibit dimensions of 9 feet wide by 20 feet long or 10 feet wide and 18 feet long in 90-degree parking, or 9 feet wide by 18 feet long in 45- or 60-degree parking, with required disabled person parking spaces as provided by federal and state law. 
b.  Compact parking spaces may exhibit dimensions between 9 feet wide by 18 feet long to 8 feet wide by 16 feet long. Such spaces shall be labeled "compact" in a manner acceptable to the director. 
c.  No parking shall occur in the first 10 feet of a required front or street side yard. 
d.  Where parking abuts an alley, the improved alley may be used as an aisle subject to approval of the parking lot design. (See the following diagrams for parking design options.) 
4.  Circulation. Entrances and exits shall be clearly identified. Vehicular circulation should be "one-way" in each aisle or "two-way" if the aisle width is a minimum of 20 feet. No aisle shall be less than 12 feet in width. 
5.  Location of Parking Spaces. Parking spaces used to meet requirements for commercial centers shall not be located in the rear of the center unless direct customer access to the buildings is permitted from these locations. 
6.  Loading Spaces. Number and location of such spaces shall be required as specified by the director. 
7.  Shopping Cart Storage. Those uses which require shopping carts for use by their customers shall provide designated storage areas in the parking lot area. Shopping cart storage areas shall be shown on the site plan as distinct and separate from the parking spaces and identify the cart storage capacity. Such storage areas shall not be placed in any required parking space. 






8.  Buffering. A masonry wall of not less than 5 nor greater than 6 feet in height shall be provided at the property line where the activities of a commercial use are anticipated to be incompatible with existing commercial or industrial uses or to protect an area from adverse climatic conditions (wind, blowing sand, etc.). It shall be the burden of the applicant to prove to the satisfaction of the director or a designated representative that the project will not create or be subject to conditions necessitating a wall at the time of site plan review if a wall is not desired. 
9.  Building Design. 
a.  Shopping centers shall be designed with a common architectural theme for all buildings in the center, including freestanding uses. The center shall utilize building style, form, size, color and materials that are compatible with adjoining development, planned or existing. 
b.  Building placement shall complement the design of adjoining sites to facilitate the convenient and logical functioning of neighboring uses. Where more than one building is to be developed on the site, the buildings shall be laid out in clusters or as necessary to create outdoor patios, courts and walkways in a landscaped setting. Building and parking layout shall be varied to avoid a "strip commercial appearance." 
c.  Roof treatment shall be the same on the entire periphery of the building, except where a different treatment is required by the city building code. Where screening of rooftop equipment is necessary such screening shall be designed to complement the architecture of the building. 
d.  Building components such as windows, doors, eaves and parapets shall have good proportions and relationships to one another and shall utilize canopies and/or overhangs to shade windows during summer months. Buildings should be designed to utilize natural light for internal illumination through the use of courts, skylights, and other design options. 
e.  Building articulations should be utilized to minimize the visual effects of large expanses of blank wall. 
f.  Utility doors, access panels, fire doors, loading docks, and other openings shall be treated as part of the architectural composition of buildings. 
g.  An exterior color scheme for all buildings or additions thereto shall be submitted with the building elevations for approval. The color scheme for existing neighboring buildings shall be indicated and considered. 
h.  Solar access and prevailing winds should be considered in building design and orientation. 
i.  Additions to existing buildings shall generally conform to the design of the existing building. New building size, materials and color shall be consistent with the scale and design of the building to which it is attached. 
j.  The use of corrugated metal buildings is prohibited in this zone. 
k.  Shower facilities shall be provided for employees as follows: 
1)  Freestanding buildings not within a shopping center or other commercial center which have a gross floor area of 50,000 square feet to 100,000 square feet shall provide one shower for each gender and 0.5 clothing lockers for each required bicycle parking space. An additional shower for each gender shall be provided for each additional 100,000 square feet of gross floor area or portion thereof. 
2)  Shopping centers or other commercial centers shall provide showers and lockers at the same rate as subsection A.9.k.1) of this section for the total gross square footage of the center. The center may consolidate the showers in a common facility within the center rather than providing them by individual use. 
3)  The floor area for showers shall not be included in the calculations for parking requirements for a freestanding building or shopping center or other commercial center. 
10.  Landscaping. 
a.  Landscape designs shall be consistent throughout a project site. Unrelated and random choice or placement of plant materials shall be avoided; however, variety may be employed to intensify distinction between spaces or to strengthen a sense of entry, place or movement, or to promote energy conservation. 
b.  The type, scale and proportion of landscape materials shall be appropriate to the site and/or structures to which they relate. 
c.  Landscaping should be placed in a manner which will minimize the provision of hiding places for criminals near doors, windows, or other possible points of building entry as well as allow patrol officers a clear view of such points of entry. 
d.  Plant material shall be selected for interest in its structure, texture, color, ultimate growth and water efficiency. Plants that are native or climate adaptive to the high desert area of Lancaster and/or others that will be hardy, harmonious with project design, and of good appearance shall be used. Drought-resistant varieties of plants shall be used wherever feasible. Turf shall not be permitted except for recreational areas. Drought-resistant varieties of plants shall be used in accordance with Title 8, Chapter 8.50 Landscaping Installation and Maintenance of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
e.  Landscaped areas shall be irrigated by an automatic system with separate stations for each hydrozone. The irrigation system shall be designed and equipped to incorporate water conservation techniques such as drip systems, moisture sensors and anti-drain valves. Sprinkler systems shall be designed to prevent water from falling onto impervious surfaces. The system shall comply with Title 8, Chapter 8.50, Landscaping Installation and Maintenance of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
f.  All areas within a site which has been approved by the city for development as a site plan or approved phase thereof, which are not needed for buildings, sidewalks, vehicle access or parking shall be landscaped. 
g.  All landscaped planter areas shall be completely bordered by a 6-inch P.C.C. curbing to prevent irrigation runoff and act as a wheel stop where necessary. Where used as a wheel stop the 6-inch curb may be counted toward the required length of the parking space. 
h.  All parking lots shall be landscaped with shade trees to achieve 50% coverage at maturity. 
i.  For all lots, not less than 15% of the lot area remaining after the area to be covered by building has been subtracted from the total lot area, shall be landscaped. 
j.  Where off-street parking areas abut local or collector streets, such areas shall be separated from an abutting street by a continuous landscaped planter which extends parallel to the street frontage of the parking area. Said planter shall be a minimum of 10 feet in width exclusive of perimeter curbs. Up to 1/2 of the perimeter landscape area may be counted toward fulfilling the requirements of subsection A.10.i. of this section. 
k.  Trees and landscaping shall be utilized wherever possible to shade buildings as a means of enhancing energy conservation and provide protection against strong winds. Deciduous trees and/or vines should be used where passive solar heat gain is desired in buildings during the winter months. 
l.  At least 10% of all trees installed shall be from a 24-inch box or larger and shall be placed to ameliorate the effect of large, windowless building walls and to emphasize focal points within the development. No other tree shall be less than 15-gallon size. At least 75% of all shrubs shall be of 5-gallon size, and no shrub shall be less than one-gallon size. Ground covers shall be planted no further apart than 6 inches on center. 
m.  All landscaped areas shall be continuously and properly maintained in good condition. 
11.  Lighting. The intent of this requirement is to properly illuminate the site without producing an adverse impact on neighboring property. Exterior lighting of the building and site shall be provided, maintained and utilized during the hours of darkness in accordance with the following requirements: 
a.  Exterior lighting shall be part of the architectural concept. Fixtures, standards, and all exposed accessories shall be compatible with building design. 
b.  Placement of lighting shall be in accordance with recognized crime prevention, and safety principles. 
12.  Outside Storage. Outside storage is permitted on the rear of a lot or parcel of land in the C zone when the storage area is paved and such storage is strictly incidental to the permitted use existing in a building on the front portion of the same lot or parcel of land and provided no storage is higher than the enclosure surrounding it nor nearer than 50 feet to the front property line. Any outdoor area used for storage shall be completely enclosed by a solid masonry wall and sight-obscuring gate (chain link with slats is not acceptable), not less than 5 feet nor more than 6 feet in height, except that the director may approve the substitution of a fence or decorative wall where in his opinion, such wall or fence will adequately comply with the provisions of this section. All such requests for substitution shall be subject to the provisions of Article VI of Chapter 17.32, Director's Review. 
13.  Screening. 
a.  All rooftop mechanical equipment, ducts, tanks, satellite antennae, etc., shall be enclosed or otherwise screened from view from all sides of the building. (This requirement does not include wind powered turbines used for ventilation.) 
b.  Where mechanical equipment, junction boxes, satellite antennae, meters, and similar utility equipment is ground mounted it shall be enclosed or, screened from view where necessary to preclude visibility from streets and adjacent properties. 
c.  Valves and other ground mounted equipment serving building sprinkler systems and irrigation backflow prevention devices shall be enclosed, screened or placed underground to preclude visibility from streets and adjacent properties. 
d.  Loading areas shall be screened from view only where necessary to preclude visibility from streets and adjacent properties. 
e.  Parking areas adjacent to streets shall be screened with landscaping in the required yards and with low decorative walls, berms or combinations thereof. Where walls are used they shall be placed so as not to obscure landscaped areas from the street. 
14.  Service for Utilities. All on-site utility services shall be underground. 
15.  Signs. 
a.  The colors, materials and lighting of every sign shall be restrained and harmonious with the building and site to which it principally relates. 
b.  The number of graphic elements on a sign shall be held to the minimum needed to convey the sign's major message and shall be composed in proportion to the area of the sign face. 
c.  Use of individual letters for all signing is preferred and encouraged over "cabinet" signs. Where cabinet signs are utilized, such cabinet must be integrated into the design of the building or structure. 
d.  The light source of externally illuminated signs shall not be visible. 
e.  No sign shall be placed in a manner which would obstruct a driver's or pedestrian's vision and thus create a hazard to public safety, and shall not be placed in or over any public right-of-way. 
f.  Street numbers of all buildings shall be prominently located and of sufficient size to be easily read from the street by public safety personnel (i.e., police, fire, ambulance). 
16.  Refuse/Recycling Storage. Commercial, industrial and institutional uses shall have on the same lot or parcel a refuse/recycling storage area at a ratio of 20 square feet of refuse/recycling storage area for each 1,000 square feet or portion thereof of net floor area of the facility, but not less than 6 feet in width nor less than 18 feet in length (exterior dimension). Such storage areas shall include separate containers for waste and for materials to be recycled. Each container shall be clearly marked or color coded for its intended use. Such storage areas shall be enclosed on 3 sides by a minimum 5-foot-high reinforced masonry or concrete wall with a sight-obscuring gate of noncombustible materials (chain link with slats is not acceptable) which is the same height as the enclosing walls. The floor of the enclosure shall be of concrete construction and the walls shall be protected by a concrete curb not less than 2 inches high by 6 inches wide or conventional concrete wheel stops to preclude damage by dumpsters. Such storage areas shall not be placed in a location which is openly exposed to a fronting street or a neighboring residential area. 

17.  Hazardous Materials. Applicants must obtain the approval of the Los Angeles County fire department prior to obtaining any city permits for any use which includes the use of hazardous materials or the storage of hazardous materials or wastes. 
18.  Radioactive Materials. The use of radioactive materials shall be limited to measuring, gauging or calibration equipment. 
19.  Noise. Uses which generate noise by the nature of their function and/or processes shall be required to demonstrate that the noise levels emitted from the use shall not exceed 65 dBA at any property line which abuts a residential zone, residential use, or other noise-sensitive use. A detailed noise attenuation study by a qualified acoustical engineer may be required by the director or his designated representative to determine appropriate mitigation and methods to incorporate same into project design. Site design methods which may be utilized to reduce noise include: 
a.  The use of building setbacks and dedication of noise easements to increase the distance between the noise source and receiver; 
b.  The location of uses and orientation of buildings which are compatible with higher noise levels adjacent to noise generators or in clusters to shield more noise-sensitive areas and uses; 
c.  The placement of noise-tolerant land uses, such as parking areas, between the noise source and receiver; 
d.  The placement of noise-tolerant structures, such as garages or carports, to shield noise sensitive areas; 
e.  Clustering of office or commercial structures to reduce interior open space noise levels. 
20.  Electric Vehicle Charging Stations (EVCS). New commercial development shall provide for electric vehicle charging stations in the manner prescribed as follows: 
a.  New residential uses shall provide EVCSs in accordance with Section 17.08.150T. 
b.  New commercial, industrial, and other uses with the building or land area, capacity, or numbers of employees listed herein shall provide the electrical service capacity necessary and all conduits and related equipment necessary to ultimately serve 2% of the total parking spaces with EVCSs in a manner approved by the building and safety official. Of these parking spaces, 1/2 shall initially be provided with the electric vehicle supply equipment necessary to function as on-line EVCSs upon completion of the project. The remainder shall be installed at such time as they are needed for use by customers, employees or other users. EVCSs shall be provided in disabled person parking spaces in accordance with state requirements. 
1)  Construction of a hospital of 500 or more beds, or expansion of a hospital of that size by 20% or more. 
2)  Construction of a post-secondary school (college), public or private, for 3,000 or more students, or expansion of an existing facility having a capacity of 3,000 or more students by an addition of at least 20%. 
3)  Hotels or motels with 500 or more rooms. 
4)  Industrial, manufacturing, or processing plants or industrial parks that employ more than 1,000 persons, occupy more than 40 acres of land, or contain more than 650,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
5)  Office buildings or office parks that employ more than 1,000 persons or contain more than 250,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
6)  Shopping centers or trade centers that employ 1,000 or more persons or contain 500,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
7)  Sports, entertainment, or recreation facilities that accommodate at least 4,000 persons per performance or that contain 1,500 or more fixed seats. 
8)  Transit projects (including but not limited to transit stations and park and ride lots). 
B.  When adjacent to residentially zoned property, the following requirements shall also be applied: 
1.  Artificial lighting used to illuminate the premises shall be directed away from adjacent residentially zoned properties. 
2.  Where multi-story buildings are to be utilized on lots abutting residentially zoned properties, such buildings shall be located or oriented in a manner which will minimize visual intrusion into neighboring residentially zoned property. (This may be accomplished by setting the building back from the abutting property line beyond the distance required for the yard, selective placement of windows, orienting the building in a manner which will not give occupants a direct view into the yards or windows of neighboring residents.) 
3.  No signs shall be placed in a manner which visually intrudes into adjoining residentially zoned property. 
4.  Trees shall be utilized as a means of improving the interface between commercial and residential uses where appropriate. 
5.  Buffering. When abutting residentially zoned property, a masonry wall of not less than 5 nor greater than 6 feet in height and with a 10 foot landscaped setback shall be provided at the property line in accordance with the provisions for walls specified in Section 17.28.030C to minimize conflicts between commercial and residential uses. Trees shall be utilized to screen areas visible above the wall. This requirement shall be modified, where necessary to preclude interference with line-of-sight of a driver within 10 feet of any street or alley, down to a maximum height of 42 inches. The design of the wall shall be considered as part of the site plan review. The site and any buildings thereon shall be designed to locate noise- and odor-generating equipment and activity in a manner which will have a minimal impact on abutting residentially zoned property. Such techniques may include, but are not limited to, no windows on the building wall(s) facing residentially zoned property, insulating structures housing equipment against noise, limitation of the hours of equipment operation, and other controls designed for specific problems. It shall be the burden of the applicant to prove that his project will not have a detrimental effect on neighboring residential property at the time of site plan review. 
C.  Air Quality. Uses located within 500 feet of any residential use or residential zone shall not emit smoke, dust or fumes of any kind in conjunction with any process. All uses shall comply with the air quality standards of the Air Quality Management District (AQMD) or the city of Lancaster, whichever is more restrictive. 
(Ord. 713 § 5 (part), 1995; Ord. 711 § 15 (part), 1995: prior zoning ord. § 221.080) 
(Ord. No. 907, § 5, 10-28-2008; Ord. No. 1016, §§ 4-7, 12-13-2016) 
Article III. - Reserved[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 945, § 3, adopted July 13, 2010, amended the Code by repealing former Art. III, §§ 17.12.240-17.12.460, in its entirety. Former Art. III pertained to the Central Business District (CBD) Zone, and derived from the prior zoning ord., §§ 220.010, 220.020-222.026, 222.030, 222.031, 222.040, 222.050, 222.060-222.068, 222.070-222.075 and 222.080; Ords. 711 and 713 of 1995; Ord. 753 of 1999; Ord. 827 of 2004; Ord. 896 of 2008; Ord. No. 907, adopted October 28, 2008; and Ord. No. 924, adopted August 25, 2009. 

17.12.240-17.12.460 - Reserved. 
Article IV. - Commercial Planned Development (CPD) Zone 

17.12.470 - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of the CPD zone is to provide the means necessary to implement the city general plan, specifically the "regional," "subregional" and "general commercial" categories as set forth in the text of the general plan and as delineated on the general plan map. This zone is also intended to be applied to lands so designated which are subject to, or the development of which involves special consideration such as proximity to residential neighbors which merit the attention of the planning commission and applications of special conditions to deal with such concerns. This zone is intended to be in accordance with applicable goals, objectives, policies and programs, and standards of development set forth by the general plan. This zone is intended to provide for the daily commercial needs of residents of the city and adjoining areas, visitors and business in an urban environment with full urban services. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 223.010) 
17.12.480 - Prohibition. 
    A person shall not use any premises in the CPD zone except as hereafter permitted in the title and subject to all regulations and conditions enumerated in this title. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 223.020) 
17.12.490 - Permitted uses. 
    Premises in the CPD zone may be used for: 
A.  Existing single-family residential uses which may continue to be used as a permitted use provided that such uses may not be expanded in any manner. 
B.  Any use which is permitted in the C zone, subject to the director's approval of a site plan* which demonstrates conformity with the provisions of the C zone and this title, and provided that all of the following conditions exist: 
1.  The area of the lot or parcel of land to be used is 2 acres or less. 
2.  The proposed use is found by the director* to be compatible with surrounding development. 
C.  Existing premises may be used for any use which is permitted in the C zone provided that the proposed use is found by the director* to be compatible with surrounding development. 
D.  Water reservoirs, dams, treatment plants, gauging stations, pumping stations, tanks, wells, and any use normal and appurtenant to the storage and distribution of water. 
* The director's determinations on these items may be appealed to the planning commission. 
(Ord. 711 §§ 28, 30 (part), 1995; prior zoning ord. § 223.021) 
17.12.500 - Accessory uses. 
    Shall be the same as allowed in the C zone (Section 17.12.050). 
(Prior zoning ord. § 223.022) 
17.12.510 - Temporary uses. 
    Shall be the same as allowed in the C zone (Section 17.12.060). 
(Prior zoning ord. § 223.023) 
17.12.520 - Uses subject to director's review and approval. 
    Shall be the same as allowed in the C zone (Section 17.12.070). 
(Prior zoning ord. § 223.024) 
17.12.530 - Uses subject to permit. 
    If a conditional use permit has first been obtained, as provided in Article I of Chapter 17.32, property in the CPD zone may be used for a planned commercial development in which the commission may approve any use permitted, or subject to permit, in the C zone provided that the commission finds such uses are in character with surrounding commercial uses. In the conditional use permit the commission may modify any of the prescribed standards of development pertaining thereto. Such uses shall be subject to all of the following provisions: 
A.  Access and Parking. Adequate provision shall be made for vehicular access, parking and loading so as to prevent undue traffic congestion on adjacent streets and highways, particularly on local streets. The requirements of Section 17.12.220 shall be considered in the review of any proposed project. 
B.  Reserved. 
C.  Design. The arrangement of buildings, architectural design, and types of commercial uses shall be such as to minimize adverse influences on adjacent properties. (The requirements of Sections 17.12.130 and 17.12.230 shall be considered in the review of any proposed projects.) 
D.  Development Features. The development plan shall include yards, walls, walks, landscaping, and such other features as may be needed to make the commercial development attractive, adequately buffered from adjacent more restrictive uses, and in keeping with the character of the surrounding area. 
E.  Development Schedule. The commission shall approve a progress schedule including all phases of development and indicating that the improvements described in the development plan will be made prior to occupancy of any buildings. The commission may modify without a hearing this condition pertaining to the development schedule based upon an affirmative showing, in writing, of hardship. 
F.  Need. The commission shall not grant a conditional use permit for a planned commercial development in the CPD zone unless it finds that the proposed commercial development is needed to serve the immediately adjacent area, and development has occurred, or is proposed, which will warrant such commercial development. 
G.  Signs. The commission in granting the conditional use permit may allow advertising signs permitted in Zone C (Sections 17.12.140- 17.12.210) which it finds will be in keeping with the concept of planned development. No outdoor advertising signs are permitted or allowed to be relocated into this zone. In addition, the commission may approve one sign for a shopping center, other commercial center, or auto mall, which identifies the major tenants thereof for each frontage on a street or highway which has a right-of-way of 100 feet or more. 
H.  Utilities. The applicant shall submit to the commission and it shall be made a condition of approval, satisfactory evidence that the applicant has made arrangements with the serving utilities to install underground all new facilities necessary to furnish service in the development. This requirement may be waived where it would cause undue hardship or constitute an unreasonable requirement. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 223.025) 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 8, 12-13-2016) 
Article V. - Hospital (H) Zone 

17.12.540 - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of the H zone is to provide the means necessary to implement the city general plan, specifically the "health care facilities" land use designation as set forth in the text of the general plan and delineated as "hospitals" on the general plan map. This zone is also intended to allow the development of those uses which are typically located near hospitals. This zone is intended to be in accordance with applicable goals, objectives, policies, programs and standards of development set forth by the plan. This zone is intended to provide for the daily medical needs of the residents of the city and adjoining areas and visitors in an urban environment with full urban services. 
    It shall also be the intent of this zone to apply the provisions of the zone including but not limited to the property development regulations required herein to all new building lots created after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title and including but not limited to the design requirements, to all new construction, including new additions, permitted after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. 
    It shall not be the intent of this title to render previously legally created building lots or legally constructed buildings which do not comply with the new property development regulations or other requirements of the title to be nonconforming where these lots or buildings complied with the ordinances in effect at the time of their creation or construction. However, proof of compliance with ordinances in effect at the time of creation or construction shall be the sole burden of the applicant or property owner. Such proof may include permits, minutes of council or commission action, case files or other documentation. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 224.010) 
17.12.550 - Prohibition. 
    A person shall not use any premises in the H zone except as hereafter specifically permitted in this title and subject to all regulations and conditions enumerated in this title. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 224.020) 
17.12.560 - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in the H zone: 
A.  Hospital, privately or publicly owned; 
B.  Long-term health care facility; 
C.  Medical clinic; 
D.  Medical laboratory; 
E.  Medical offices; 
F.  Pharmacy; 
G.  Water reservoirs, dams, treatment plants, gauging stations, pumping stations, tanks, wells, and any use normal and appurtenant to the storage and distribution of water. Exception: This use is not subject to site plan review (Section 17.12.630). 
(Ord. 711 §§ 20 (part), 30 (part), 1995; prior zoning ord. § 224.021) 
17.12.570 - Accessory uses. 
    The following uses are considered as accessory uses to the permitted uses in the H zone: 
A.  Accessory buildings customarily used in conjunction with permitted uses; 
B.  Awnings, fences, walls or windbreaks; 
C.  Parking lot guard house; 
D.  Solar energy systems, whether mounted on or attached to a building or mounted on the ground; 
E.  Electric Vehicle Charging Station. An electric vehicle charging station (EVCS) shall be permitted as an accessory use within any existing legal single-family or multiple-family residential garage or carport, or within any existing legal commercial parking space in a parking lot or in a parking garage, subject to all applicable city code requirements and the following: 
1.  Electric vehicle charging stations (EVCS) for public use shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The EVCSs shall be located in a manner which will be easily seen by the public for informational and security purposes and shall be illuminated during evening business hours; and 
b.  Be located in desirable and convenient parking locations which will serve as an incentive for the use of electric vehicles; and 
c.  The EVCS pedestals shall be protected as necessary to prevent damage by automobiles; and 
d.  The EVCS pedestals shall be designed to minimize potential damage by vandalism and to be safe for use in inclement weather; and 
e.  Complete instructions and appropriate warnings concerning the use of the EVCS shall be posted on a sign in a prominent location on each station for use by the operator; and 
f.  One standard nonilluminated sign, not to exceed 4 square feet in area and 10 feet in height, may be posted for the purpose of identifying the location of each cluster of EVCSs; and 
g.  The EVCS may be on a timer that limits the use of the station to the normal business hours of the use(s) which it serves to preclude unauthorized use after business hours. 
2.  Electric vehicle charging stations for private use shall: 
a.  Be located in a manner which will not allow public access to the charging station; and 
b.  Comply with subsections E.1.c., d. and e. of this section. 
F.  Mini Wireless Telecommunication Facilities. This category includes all mini wireless telecommunication facilities subject to the requirements of Section 17.40.640. 
(Ord. 753 § 1 (Exh. A § 2 (part)), 1999; Ord. 713 § 3 (part), 1995; prior zoning ord. § 224.022) 
17.12.580 - Temporary uses. 
    The following uses are considered as temporary uses in the H zone: 
A.  Building materials, storage of, used in the construction of a building or building project, during the construction and 30 days thereafter including the contractor's temporary office provided that any lot or parcel of land so used shall be part of the building project, or on property adjoining the construction site; 
B.  Commercial coaches used as temporary offices subject to the provisions of Article X of Chapter 17.40 and this zone. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 224.023) 
17.12.590 - Uses subject to director's review and approval. 
    If site plans or other pertinent information for the proposed use are first submitted to and approved by the director in accordance with Article VI of Chapter 17.32, premises in the H zone may be used for the following uses: 
A.  Access to property lawfully used for a purpose not permitted in the H zone provided no other practical access to such property is available and such access will not alter the character of the premises in respect to permitted uses in the H zone; 
B.  Parking. Joint usage or leased. (See Section 17.12.690B.) 
C.  Minor co-located and stealth wireless telecommunicatoin facilities subject to the requirements of Section 17.40.640. 
D.  Cargo containers utilized exclusively for the storage of emergency supplies to be used for the benefit of the public by a recognized governmental agency, such as the Los Angeles County Fire Department, in the event of a disaster or emergency situation. Placement of a cargo container for the storage of private supplies is not allowed. 
(Ord. 753 § 1 (Exh. A § 6 (part)), 1999; prior zoning ord. § 224.024) 
(Ord. No. 964, § 1, 5-24-2011) 
17.12.600 - Uses subject to permit. 
    The following uses may be permitted in the H zone provided a conditional use permit has first been obtained as provided in Article I of Chapter 17.32, and while such permit is in full force and effect in conformity with conditions of such permit for: 
A.  Ambulance service; 
B.  Buildings or structures more than 5 stories in height; 
C.  Heliport for medical purposes; 
D.  Medical/sick room supplies, sales or rental; 
E.  Mobilehome or other residence for use by caretaker and his immediate family in accordance with Article VIII of Chapter 17.40. 
(Ord. 711 § 30 (part), 1995; prior zoning ord. § 224.025) 
17.12.610 - Height regulations. 
    No building or structure for a permitted use in the H zone shall exceed a height of 5 stories. This section does not apply to uses subject to permit which shall be subject to Article I of Chapter 17.32. (See Article XII of Chapter 17.40 for general exceptions.) 
(Prior zoning ord. § 224.030) 
17.12.620 - Exception for solar systems. 
    Solar collectors may exceed the height limit when mounted on the roof of a legal, conforming building. The right to exceed the height limit shall be exercised only in the event that: there is no other practical means or location for achieving an efficient placement on the building or site in question: such collectors may exceed the height limit only to the extent necessary to achieve efficient placement: in no case shall such solar collectors (or related equipment) encroach more than 5 feet beyond the limit. Also the placement of a solar collector shall not shade or otherwise diminish the efficiency of existing solar collectors on neighboring property, or preclude such property from sufficient solar access to successfully operate a solar energy system sufficient to serve the needs of the business or occupants. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 224.031) 
17.12.630 - Site plan review required. 
    A site plan (with vicinity map) and building elevations, drawn to scale and reflecting the accurate dimensions of the buildings and property, shall be required of any person seeking to erect new buildings or structures, make additions to any existing buildings or structures, site temporary commercial coaches, or otherwise grade, improve or develop any lot or portion thereof for a permitted use prior to the issuance of any grading or building permit. The site plan shall be accompanied by an appropriate development application and both shall be filed with the planning department. The director or his designated representative shall review the site plan for conformance with the provisions of this title. The site plan shall demonstrate conformance with height regulations, property development regulations, sign regulations or a sign program required by the city for multiple-tenant projects, off-street parking requirements, the adopted City of Lancaster Design Guidelines, any other requirements established for the adopted zoning designation in which the property(ies) is (are) located, and any other applicable city ordinances, standards, guidelines or policies. In addition to the conditions and requirements imposed by the ordinance codified in this title and other city ordinances, standards, guidelines and policies, the director may place conditions on the approval of the site plan where the director finds that such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. At such time as the site plan complies with the requirements of the ordinance codified in this title and other city ordinances, standards, guidelines or policies, the site plan shall be approved by the director or his designated representative. The site plan approval shall be valid for two (2) years from the date of approval. A site plan shall be considered "used" when the slab of a major building in the project is poured and inspected, although circumstances in each case may vary and the final determination as to "use" of a site plan review shall be made by the director. Three (3) one-year extensions of the approval may be granted by the director provided such written request for an extension is received not less than sixty (60) days prior to expiration, and any significant environmental changes which have occurred since the original approval have been addressed. Any extension granted shall be conditioned to comply with the city's current design guidelines as adopted by the city council, unless the applicant can demonstrate to the director's satisfaction that such compliance will impose an undue hardship on the project. In the event the site plan or an extension thereof is denied, the applicant may appeal the decision in accordance with Section 17.36.030. All projects constructed in accordance with an approved site plan shall be permanently maintained as approved. Any desired subsequent changes shall be submitted for approval as an amendment to the site plan. Prior to occupancy the site shall be inspected for compliance with the site plan. All improvements shall be installed and functioning before occupancy will be allowed. 
    Where the director determines that the requirements of this section surpass the city's need for project review of a particular development proposal, the director may exercise discretion and apply the provisions of Article VI of Chapter 17.32, Director's Review, in its place. 
(Ord. 711 § 22 (part), 1995; prior zoning ord. § 224.040) 
(Ord. No. 924, § 1, 8-25-09; Ord. No. 956, § 3, 1-11-2011) 
17.12.640 - Property development regulations. 
A.  1. No new building or commercial coach shall be erected, constructed, moved onto, or established on an existing legal lot or parcel of land unless said building or commercial coach shall comply with all of the regulations set forth in city ordinances, standards, guidelines or policies and subsection B of this section or Article X of Chapter 17.40 which are pertinent to its placement of said lot or parcel. 
2.  No existing building or commercial coach located on an existing legal lot or parcel of land shall be converted, enlarged or moved unless said building or commercial coach, or addition thereto, shall comply with all of the regulations set forth in city ordinances, standards, guidelines or policies and subsection B of this section or Article X of Chapter 17.40 which are pertinent to its placement on said lot or parcel. 
3.  No new lot shall be created, or any building, or portion thereof, existing on such new lot be used unless said lot and said building location shall comply with all of the regulations set forth in city ordinances, standards, guidelines or policies and subsection B of this section which are pertinent to the area and dimensions for new lots and those regulations pertinent to the placement or location of buildings on said lot. 
B.  H Zone. 
1.  Lot Dimensions. The following minimum lot dimensions shall apply to all lots created after the adoption of this section. (Those lots which were legally created, prior to the adoption of this section, in compliance with ordinances in effect at the time of their creation need not comply unless involved in a new subdivision or change in lot configuration other than a lot line adjustment as provided in Title 16 of this code.) 
a.  Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet (see Sections 17.40.070 and 17.40.080 in the event public use or required street dedication would reduce the net area of an existing lot to less than 40,000 square feet); 
b.  Minimum lot width: 100 feet (see Section 17.40.090A in the event the width of an existing lot is reduced by public use); 
c.  Minimum lot depth: 100 feet (see Section 17.40.090B in the event the depth of an existing lot is reduced by public use). 
2.  Yard Requirements. 
a.  Additions or modifications to buildings or uses, either constructed or having received building permit approval, or having been legally established prior to June 15, 1983, may be allowed with yards of lesser dimension than required in this subsection where, in the opinion of the director, allowing less than full compliance with the yard requirements would impose no substantial detriment to abutting property or improvements thereon. The director shall then also consider if: 
1)  There are special circumstances or exceptional characteristics applicable to the property involved which are not generally applicable to other properties in the same vicinity with the same zoning, 
2)  An adjustment (if authorized) will constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations on other properties in the same vicinity with the same zoning, and 
3)  The strict application of the yard requirements would result in practical difficulties and unnecessary hardship which is inconsistent with the purpose of the yard requirements, in rendering a decision on whether to allow a reduction of the required yard. In no case shall the director's approval of the reduction of a required yard relieve the applicant/property owner from complying with minimum landscape requirements established by this title unless such relief is specifically approved by the director. (See Sections 17.40.093, 17.40.095 and 17.40.097 in the event yard requirements must be reduced for street widening or transit stops.) 
b.  Yards shall be provided as follows: 
1)  Front yard, street side yard and interior side yard: 20 feet plus 5 feet for each story over one. No parking shall take place within 20 feet of a property line within a required front or street side yard, such area shall be fully landscaped except where crossed by approved driveways. Parking on lawns or other landscaped areas is prohibited. 
a)  The front yard, street side yard and interior side yard of all uses shall be landscaped with living plant materials such as trees, shrubs and lawn prior to occupancy by any use, shall be served by a permanent automatic irrigation system and shall be maintained as required in this title. 
2)  Rear yard:* 50 feet. 
a)  Where the rear yard abuts a public street, said yard shall be landscaped in the same manner as required for the front yard for a distance of not less than 20 feet, measured from the street right-of-way line to a line parallel to the right-of-way on the lot or parcel of land. 
3.  Maximum lot coverage: 50% of the lot area. 
4.  Landscaping: No landscaping shall be placed in a manner which shades or would ultimately shade any existing solar energy system from the sun on a contiguous lot. 
* EXCEPTION: Solar energy systems are permitted in rear yards and are not counted against lot coverage. 
(Ord. 711 § 44 (part), 1995; Ord. 651 § 4 (part), 1993; prior zoning ord. § 224.050) 
17.12.650 - Signs. 
    A person shall not use, install or construct any sign in the H zone except as specifically permitted in this chapter and subject to all regulations and conditions set forth in the ordinance codified in this title and any other ordinance now existing or hereafter adopted by the city regulating the installation, use and/or construction of signs. If fully dimensioned sign plans, including the proposed sign location, are first submitted to and approved by the director or his designated representative, and required permits and inspection approval obtained, the signs set out in the following sections shall be permitted in the H zone. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 224.060) 
17.12.660 - Signs-General provisions. 
A.  The provisions of this section regulating signs shall not apply to the following signs except as otherwise indicated herein: 
1.  Official notices issued by any court, public body or public officer; 
2.  Notices posted by any public officer in performance of a public duty, or for any person in giving legal notice; 
3.  Traffic, directional, warning or informational signs required or authorized by the public authority having jurisdiction over such signs; 
4.  Official signs used for emergency purposes only; 
5.  Signs designating access to hospital emergency facilities; 
6.  Signs designating fire zones, loading and unloading zones, handicap parking, and safety devices including but not limited to utility shutoff valves; 
7.  Permanent memorial or historical signs, plaques or markers; 
8.  Public utility signs, provided such signs do not exceed 3 square feet in area. 
B.  Prohibited Signs. The following signs shall be prohibited in the H zone. 
1.  Signs which contain or utilize: 
a.  Any exposed incandescent lamp, 
b.  Any revolving beacon light, 
c.  Any continuous or sequential flashing operation, including signs displaying time of day, atmospheric temperature or having programmable electronic messages; 
2.  Awning or entrance canopy signs; 
3.  Roof signs (see definition in Section 17.04.240); 
4.  Revolving signs of any kind; 
5.  Signs advertising or displaying any unlawful act, business or purpose; 
6.  Devices dispensing bubbles and free-flowing particles of matter; 
7.  Any notice, placard, bill, card, poster, sticker, banner, sign, advertising or other device calculated to attract the attention of the public which any person posts, prints, sticks, stamps, tacks or otherwise affixes, or causes the same to be done to or upon any street, right-of-way, public sidewalk, crosswalk, curb, lamppost, hydrant, tree, telephone pole or lighting system, or upon any fixture of the police or fire alarm system of the city of Lancaster or county of Los Angeles; 
8.  Any strings of pennants, banners or streamers, clusters of flags, strings of twirlers or propellers, flares, balloons, and similar attention-getting devices, including noise-emitting devices, with the exception of the following: 
a.  National, state, local governmental, institutional or corporate flags properly displayed, 
b.  Holiday decorations in season used for an aggregate period of 60 days in any one calendar year; 
9.  Devices projecting, or otherwise reproducing the image of a sign or message on any surface or object; 
10.  Signs emitting or amplifying sounds for the purpose of attracting attention; 
11.  Portable signs; 
12.  Sidewalk signs; 
13.  Temporary signs, except as otherwise specifically permitted by this title; 
14.  Outdoor advertising signs; 
15.  Pole signs. 
C.  General Sign Regulations. The following regulations apply to all signs in the H zone: 
1.  In no case shall a lighted sign or lighting device thereof be so placed or directed so as to permit the beams and illumination therefrom to be directed or beamed upon a public street, highway, sidewalk or adjacent premises so as to cause glare or reflection that may constitute a traffic hazard or nuisance. 
2.  Signs may be single-, double- or multi-faced, provided that: 
a.  The distance between the faces of any double-faced sign, other than a "V"-shaped projecting sign, shall not exceed 36 inches; and 
b.  The separation between the intersecting faces of any multi-faced sign shall not exceed 12 inches. 
3.  Any sign located on vacant and unoccupied property, and which was erected for an occupant or business unrelated to the present occupant or business, or any sign which pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer exists shall be removed within 30 days after the purpose for, or use utilizing such sign has been removed from such property. 
4.  Any permitted sign may be a changeable copy sign. 
5.  All signs shall be designed in the simplest form and be free of any exposed bracing, angle iron, guy wires, cables or similar devices. 
6.  The exposed backs of all signs visible to the public shall be suitably covered, finished, and properly maintained. 
7.  All signs shall be maintained in good repair, including display surfaces which shall be kept neatly painted or posted. 
8.  Any sign which does not conform to the provisions of this title shall be made to conform or shall be removed as provided in subsection B.4. of Section 17.32.850 except as provided in Section 17.32.850B.4.c. 
9.  Except where otherwise specifically provided by this title, sign regulations established pursuant to this title shall not apply to signs within a building, arcade, court or other similarly enclosed area where such signs are not visible to the public without entering such facilities. 
10.  The height of all signs shall be measured from the highest point of the sign. 
D.  Computation of Sign Area. The surface area of any sign face shall be computed from the smallest rectangles, circles and/or triangles which will enclose all words, letters, figures, symbols, designs and pictures, together with all framing, background material, colored or illuminated areas, and attention attracting devices forming an integral part of the overall display, but excluding all support structures, except that: 
1.  Superficial ornamentation of a non-message- bearing character which does not exceed 5% of the surface area shall be exempted from computation; and 
2.  Wall signs painted on or affixed directly to a building wall, façade or roof, and having no discernible boundary, shall have the areas between letters, words intended to be read together, and any device intended to draw attention to the sign message included in any computation of surface area; and 
3.  Signs placed in such a manner, or bearing a text, as to require dependence upon each other in order to convey meaning shall be considered one sign and the intervening areas between signs included in any computation of surface area, and 
4.  Spherical, cylindrical or other 3-dimensional signs not having conventional sign faces shall be considered to have 2 faces and the area of each sign face shall be computed from the smallest 3-dimensional geometrical shape or shapes which will best approximate the actual surface area of said faces. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 224.061) 
17.12.670 - Permitted sign area formula. 
    The maximum sign area which shall be permitted in the H zone shall be as follows: 
A.  Hospitals, convalescent home: The total sign area of all signs shall not exceed 50 square feet plus 1/4 square foot per linear foot of street frontage over 100 feet up to a total sign area of 300 square feet. 
B.  Medical offices, medical laboratory, medical clinic, pharmacy, medical/sickroom supplies, ambulance service: the total signs area of all signs shall not exceed 2 square feet per linear foot up to a total sign area of 200 square feet. 
C.  Signs for uses subject to permits shall meet the requirements specified in the permit or if not so specified in the permit, as specified in subsection B of this section as appropriate. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 224.062) 
17.12.680 - Business signs. 
    Business signs may be permitted in the H zone subject to Sections 17.12.590, 17.12.670 and 17.12.700, and the following restrictions of this section. For more information concerning specific types of signs see Section 17.04.240, Definitions: 
A.  Wall Business Signs. 
1.  Area Permitted. 
a.  Maximum of 80% of the permitted total sign area under Section 17.12.670. 
b.  No wall signs shall cover more than 10% of the wall on which it is placed. 
2.  Number Permitted. Maximum of one sign per wall surface per tenant. 
3.  Height Permitted. 
a.  Maximum of 4 feet. 
b.  The sign shall not extend above a line 18 inches below the top of the wall. 
4.  Lighting. Wall business signs may be internally or externally lighted, but any continuous or sequential flashing operation is prohibited. 
B.  Monument Signs. 
1.  Area Permitted. Maximum of 70% of the permitted total sign area under Section 17.12.670. 
2.  Number Permitted. One sign per street frontage in excess of 50 feet. Tenants on the premises may share space on the sign. 
3.  Height Permitted. Maximum height is limited to 8 feet above grade. 
4.  Setback. Monument signs shall be set back 5 feet from the public right-of-way. 
5.  Other Requirements. 
a.  Sign copy shall be displayed within one sign structure. No other signage shall be attached to or placed on the monument sign. 
b.  All electrical service to the sign shall be underground and hidden from view. 
c.  Monument signs may be internally or externally lighted but any continuous or sequential flashing operation is prohibited. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 224.063) 
17.12.690 - Off-street parking. 
    The automobile parking facilities required by this section shall be provided and permanently maintained as such unless and until a substitute has been provided which is in full compliance with the provisions of this title. The following parking requirements shall be complied with in the H zone: 
A.  General Condition. The provisions of this section shall apply at the time that: 
1.  A building or structure is erected; or 
2.  An existing building or structure is altered, to increase the numbers of beds (i.e., convalescent home), bowling alleys, dwelling units, exercise area (i.e., fitness centers), guest rooms, seating capacity (fixed or not fixed), or service bays; or 
3.  An existing building or structure is enlarged. EXCEPTION: An existing building or structure which has insufficient lot area upon which to provide the required parking or landscaping may be enlarged by an area not to exceed 20% of the gross floor area including the original building or structure and all legal additions thereto for which required parking and associated landscaping have been provided. This exception shall apply only when there will be no reduction of existing parking or landscaping; or 
4.  The use of a building or structure is changed. EXCEPTION: Buildings or structures legally constructed in accordance with the parking requirements in effect at the time of building permit issuance will not require full compliance with the parking space requirements of this section provided that: 
a.  Said change in use creates no greater demand for parking spaces, as defined by this section, than the use which most recently preceded it. 
b.  All available space not used for parking shall be improved for purposes of parking and landscaping in accordance with this section and Section 17.12.700 (not to exceed the parking requirement for said use) prior to occupying said premises. 
B.  Ownership, Lease and Joint Usage. Space required by this section for automobile parking shall either: 
1.  Be owned by the owner of the premises because of the use of which the automobile parking space is required; or 
2.  Subject to director's review and approval, the owner of such premises shall have the right to use such space for automobile parking, solely to serve existing buildings or structures, by virtue of a recorded lease for a term of not less than 20 years, which lease requires that if canceled the party canceling the lease, not less than 60 days prior to the effective date of such cancellation, shall notify the director of community development of such cancellation. Such lease shall be approved by the city attorney as to form and content, and once executed shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder and copies thereof filed with the director; or 
3.  Subject to director's review and approval, the owner or owner-authorized lessee of any property, may authorize joint use of parking facilities solely to serve existing buildings or structures occupied by the following uses or activities, provided that all the requirements of this zone can be satisfied: 
a.  The parking facilities required for any non-residential use, which is primarily a daytime use may be fulfilled by the parking facilities of a use which is primarily a nighttime and/or Sunday use, and vice versa provided such parking facilities meet the requirements of subsection B.3.b. of this section. 
b.  All of the following conditions shall be met in order for the director to approve joint usage of parking: 
1)  The lots or parcels upon which the uses referred to in subsection B.3.a. of this section are proposed shall be adjoining as defined in this title; and 
2)  There shall be no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours of the uses for which joint usage of parking is proposed; and 
3)  That the joint usage of the off-street parking facilities shall be contingent upon the execution of an agreement, which requires that if canceled the party canceling such agreement, not less than 60 days prior to the effective date of such cancellation, shall notify the director of such cancellation. Such agreement shall meet the approval of the city attorney as to form and content. Once approved, the executed agreement shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder and copies thereof filed with the director. 
C.  Development of Parking Facilities. All land used for automobile storage or automobile parking shall be developed and used as follows: 
1.  Paving. Required parking areas, as well as the maneuvering areas and driveways used for access thereto shall be paved with: (NOTE: Road permits are required for any work done in the public right-of-way.) 
a.  Concrete surfacing to a minimum thickness of 31/2 inches with expansion joints as necessary; or 
b.  Asphalt surfacing, rolled to a smooth, hard surface having a minimum thickness of 2 inches after compaction, and laid over a base of crushed rock, gravel or other similar material compacted to a minimum thickness of 4 inches. 
c.  Other alternative material that will provide at least the equivalent in service, life and appearance of the materials and standards which would be employed for development pursuant to C.1.a. or b. of this section. 
d.  The director of public works at the request of the director shall review and report on the adequacy of paving where modification of base is proposed under subsection C.1.b. of this section or where alternative materials are proposed under subsection C.1.c. of this section. The director of public works may approve such modification or such alternative materials if, in his opinion, the evidence indicates compliance with subsection C.1.b. or c. as the case may be. 
2.  Size and Marking of Spaces. 
a.  No fewer than 75% of the parking spaces shall exhibit minimum dimensions of 9 feet in width by 20 feet in length. (See Section 17.12.700A.4.f.) 
b.  No greater than 25% of the parking spaces may exhibit minimum dimensions of 8 feet in width by 18 feet in length. Such spaces shall be labelled "compact car only" in a manner acceptable to the director. (See Section 17.12.700A.4.) 
c.  No parking shall occur in the first 10 feet of a required front or street side yard. 
d.  Where parking abuts an alley, the improved alley may be used as an aisle subject to approval of the parking lot design. 
e.  For parallel parking, minimum aisles are 12 feet and minimum parking space dimensions are 8 feet by 24 feet. 
  See the following diagrams for parking design options. 
3.  Circulation. Mark entrances and exits clearly. Vehicular circulation should be "one-way" in each aisle or "two-way" if the aisle width is a minimum of 20 feet. No aisle shall be less than 12 feet in width. 
  See Section 17.12.700, Design Requirements, for parking design requirements. 
D.  Fractions. When the application of this section requires a fractional part of an automobile parking space or parking place sufficient to accommodate a fractional number of automobiles, any such fraction shall be construed as a whole. This section does not apply to the specification of an area by square feet, or of an area equal to another area. 
E.  Parking Requirements by Use. 
1.  General Commercial Uses. Except as otherwise provided in this section every lot or parcel of land which is used for a use permitted in the H zone (except an electrical substation or similar public utility in which there are no offices or other places visited by the public) shall have on the same lot or parcel of land an area equal to the area so used, which area shall be developed and used for the parking of motor vehicles in conjunction with such other use. Such area also shall be of sufficient size so that it contains one automobile parking space plus adequate access thereto of each 250 square feet of gross floor area of any building or structure so used. 
2.  Hospital. Two and 1/2 automobile parking spaces per bed. 
3.  Long-Term Health Care Facility. Every long-term health care facility shall have on the same lot or parcel of land not less than one automobile parking space for each 3 beds in the home. If employee residence facilities are on the premises there shall be in addition to the automobile parking spaces required for the principal use, the number of automobile parking spaces required for apartments in Section 17.12.220E for such residence facilities. 
4.  Medical Clinic and Medical Offices. One automobile parking space for each 150 square feet of gross floor area. 
5.  Medical Laboratory and Pharmacy. One automobile parking space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area. 
6.  Handicapped Spaces. Handicapped spaces shall be provided in accordance with state requirements. 
(Ord. 711 §§ 17 (part), 18 (part), 19(B) (part), 20 (part), 1995; prior zoning ord. §§ 224.070- 224.075) 






17.12.700 - Design requirements. 
    The following design requirements shall be met for development in the H zone: 
A.  General requirements applicable to all development: 
1.  Access. 
a.  Driveways providing access to the site may be combined, relocated, or otherwise limited in order to minimize traffic conflicts. All driveways shall be constructed to comply with current city standards. All driveway locations are subject to the approval of the director of public works. 
b.  Entry drives into parking areas shall be of sufficient depth to provide for vehicle stacking appropriate to the size and intensity of the project served. 
2.  Buffering. A masonry wall of not less than 5 nor greater than 6 feet in height shall be provided at the property line where the activities of a commercial use are anticipated to be incompatible with existing commercial or industrial uses or to protect an area from adverse climatic conditions (wind, blowing sand, etc.). It shall be the burden of the applicant to prove to the satisfaction of the director or his designated representative that the project will not create or be subject to conditions necessitating a wall at the time of site plan review if a wall is not desired. 
3.  Building Design. 
a.  Roof treatment shall be the same on the periphery of the building, except where a different treatment is required by the city building code. 
b.  Building components such as windows, doors, eaves and parapets shall have good proportions and relationships to one another. 
c.  Utility doors, access panels, fire doors, loading docks, and other openings shall be treated as part of the architectural composition of buildings. 
d.  An exterior color scheme for all buildings shall be submitted with the building elevations for approval. 
e.  Solar access and prevailing winds should be considered in building design and orientation. 
4.  Landscaping. 
a.  Landscape designs shall be consistent throughout a project site. Unrelated and random choice or placement of plant materials shall be avoided; however, variety may be employed to intensify distinction between spaces or to strengthen a sense of place or movement or to promote energy conservation. 
b.  The type, scale, and proportion of landscape materials shall be appropriate to the site and/or structures to which they relate. 
c.  Plant material shall be selected for interest in its structure, texture, color and ultimate growth. Plants that are indigenous to the area and others that will be hardy, harmonious with project design, and of good appearance shall be used. Drought-resistant varieties of plants shall be used in accordance with city specifications for landscape development as established by Ordinance No. 629. 
d.  Landscaped areas shall be irrigated by an automatic system with separate stations for turf, ground cover/shrubs, and trees. 
e.  All areas which are not needed for buildings, sidewalks or parking shall be landscaped. 
f.  All landscaped planter areas shall be completely bordered by a 6-inch P.C.C. curbing to prevent irrigation runoff and act as a wheel stop where necessary. Where used as a wheel stop, the 6-inch curb may be counted toward the required length of the parking space. 
g.  All interior parking lots shall be landscaped with a minimum of one tree plus one tree for each 10 parking spaces along with the other plant materials. 
h.  For lots of 5,000 square feet or less in area, not less than 3% of the total area(s) used for vehicle ingress, egress, circulation and parking shall be landscaped. Only landscaped areas exclusive of curbs shall qualify toward meeting this requirement and no landscaped area with a dimension of less than 2 feet shall be credited toward meeting the landscape requirement. 
i.  For lots between 5,000 and 19,999 square feet in area, not less than 5% of the total area(s) used for vehicle ingress, egress, circulation and parking shall be landscaped. Only landscaped areas exclusive of curbs shall qualify toward meeting this requirement and no landscaped area with a dimension of less than 2 feet shall be credited toward meeting the landscape requirement. 
j.  For lots of 20,000 square feet or more, not less than 7% of the total area(s) used for vehicle ingress, egress, circulation and parking shall be landscaped. Only landscaped areas exclusive of curbs shall qualify toward meeting this requirement and no landscaped area with a dimension of less than 2 feet shall be credited toward meeting the landscape requirement. 
k.  Utilize trees and landscaping wherever possible to shade buildings as a means of enhancing energy conservation. 
l.  At least 25% of all trees installed shall be from a 24-inch box, and no tree shall be less than 15-gallon size. At least 50% of all shrubs shall be of 5-gallon size, and no shrub shall be less than one-gallon size. Ground covers shall be planted at no further apart than 6 inches on center. 
m.  All landscaped areas shall be continuously and properly maintained in good condition. 
5.  Lighting. The intent of this requirement is to properly illuminate the site without producing an adverse impact on neighboring property. Exterior lighting of the building and site shall be provided, maintained and utilized during the hours of darkness in accordance with the following requirements: 
a.  Exterior lighting shall be part of the architectural concept. Fixtures, standards, and all exposed accessories shall be compatible with building design. 
b.  Placement of lighting shall be in accordance with recognized crime prevention and safety principles. 
6.  Outside Storage. Outside storage is permitted on the rear of a lot or parcel of land in the H zone when such storage is strictly incidental to the permitted use existing in a building on the front portion of the same lot or parcel of land and provided no storage is higher than the enclosure surrounding it nor nearer than 50 feet to the front property line. Any outdoor area used for storage shall be completely enclosed by a solid masonry wall and solid gate, not less than 5 feet nor more than 6 feet in height, except that the director may approve the substitution of a fence or decorative wall where in his opinion, such wall or fence will adequately comply with the provisions of this section. All such requests for substitution shall be subject to the provisions of Article VI of Chapter 17.32, Director's Review. 
7.  Screening. 
a.  All rooftop mechanical equipment, ducts, tanks, satellite antennae, etc., shall be enclosed or otherwise screened from view from all sides of the building. (This requirement does not include wind powered turbines used for ventilation.) 
b.  Where mechanical equipment, junction boxes, satellite antennae, meters and similar utility equipment is ground mounted it shall be enclosed or screened from view where necessary to preclude visibility from public streets and highways and adjacent properties. 
c.  Loading areas shall be screened from view only where necessary to preclude visibility from public streets and highways and adjacent properties. 
d.  Parking areas adjacent to streets shall be screened with landscaping in the required yards and with low decorative walls, berms or combinations thereof. Where walls are used they shall be placed so as not to obscure landscaped areas from the street. 
8.  Service for Utilities. All on-site utility services shall be underground. 
9.  Signs. 
a.  The colors, materials and lighting of every sign shall be restrained and harmonious with the building and site to which it principally relates. 
b.  The number of graphic elements on a sign shall be held to the minimum needed to convey the sign's major message and shall be composed in proportion to the area of the sign face. 
c.  Use of individual letters for all signing is preferred and encouraged over "cabinet" signs. Where cabinet signs are utilized, such cabinet must be integrated into the design of the building or structure. 
d.  The light source of externally illuminated signs shall not be visible. 
e.  No sign shall be placed in a manner which would obstruct a driver or pedestrian's vision and thus create a hazard to public safety, and shall not be placed in or over any public right-of-way. 
f.  Street numbers of all buildings shall be prominently located and of sufficient size to be easily read from the street by public safety personnel (i.e., police, fire, ambulance). 
10.  Refuse/Recycling Storage. Commercial, industrial and institutional uses shall have on the same lot or parcel a refuse/recycling storage area at a ratio of 20 square feet of refuse/recycling storage area for each 1,000 square feet or portion thereof of net floor area of the facility but not less than 6 feet in width nor less than 18 feet in length (exterior dimension). Such storage areas shall include separate containers for waste and for materials to be recycled. Each container shall be clearly marked or color coded for its intended use. Such storage areas shall be enclosed on 3 sides by a minimum 5-foot-high reinforced masonry or concrete wall with a sign-obscuring gate of noncombustible materials which is the same height as the enclosing walls. The floor of the enclosure shall be of concrete construction and the walls shall be protected by a concrete curb not less than 2 inches high by 6 inches wide or conventional concrete wheel stops to preclude damage by dumpsters. Such storage areas shall not be placed in a location which is openly exposed to a fronting street or a neighboring residential area. 
11.  Electric Vehicle Charging Stations (EVCS). New commercial development shall provide for electric vehicle charging stations in the manner prescribed as follows: 
a.  New residential uses shall provide EVCSs in accordance with Section 17.08.150T. 
b.  New commercial, industrial and other uses with the building or land area, capacity, or numbers of employees listed herein shall provide the electrical service capacity necessary and all conduits and related equipment necessary to ultimately serve 2% of the total parking spaces with EVCSs in a manner approved by the building and safety official. Of these parking spaces, 1/2 shall initially be provided with the electric vehicle supply equipment necessary to function as on-line EVCSs upon completion of the project. The remainder shall be installed at such time as they are needed for use by customers, employees or other users. EVCSs shall be provided in disabled person parking spaces in accordance with state requirements. 
1)  Construction of a hospital of 500 or more beds, or expansion of a hospital of that size by 20% or more. 
2)  Construction of a post-secondary school (college), public or private, for 3,000 or more students, or expansion of an existing facility having a capacity of 3,000 or more students by an addition of at least 20%. 
3)  Hotels or motels with 500 or more rooms. 
4)  Industrial, manufacturing, or processing plants or industrial parks that employ more than 1,000 persons, occupy more than 40 acres of land, or contain more than 650,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
5)  Office buildings or office parks that employ more than 1,000 persons or contain more than 250,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
6)  Shopping centers or trade centers that employ 1,000 or more persons or contain 500,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
7)  Sports, entertainment, or recreation facilities that accommodate at least 4,000 persons per performance or that contain 1,500 or more fixed seats. 
8)  Transit projects (including but not limited to transit stations and park and ride lots). 
B.  When adjacent to residentially zoned property the following requirements shall also be applied: 
1.  Artificial lighting used to illuminate the premises shall be directed away from adjacent residentially zoned properties. 
2.  Where multistory buildings are to be utilized on lots abutting residentially zoned properties, such buildings shall be located or oriented in a manner which will minimize visual intrusion into neighboring residentially zoned property. (This may be accomplished by setting the building back from the abutting property line beyond the distance required for the yard, selective placement of windows, orienting the building in a manner which will not give occupants a direct view into the yards or windows of neighboring residents.) 
3.  No signs shall be placed in a manner which visually intrudes into adjoining residentially zoned property. 
4.  Trees shall be utilized as a means of improving the interface between commercial and residential uses where appropriate. 
5.  Buffering. When abutting residentially zoned property a masonry wall of not less than 5 nor greater than 6 feet in height shall be provided at the property line in accordance with the provisions for walls specified in Section 17.28.030C. to minimize conflicts between commercial and residential uses. This requirement shall be modified, where necessary to preclude interference with line-of-sight of a driver within 10 feet of any street, highway or alley, down to a maximum height of 42 inches. The design of the wall shall be considered as part of the site plan review. The site and any buildings thereon shall be designed to locate noise- and odor-generating equipment and activity in a manner which will have a minimal impact on abutting residentially zoned property. Such techniques may include, but are not limited to, no windows on the building wall(s) facing residentially zoned property, insulating structures housing equipment against noise, limitation of the hours of equipment operation, and other controls designed for specific problems. It shall be the burden of the applicant to prove that his project will not have a detrimental effect on neighboring residential property at the time of site plan review. 
(Ord. 713 § 5 (part), 1995; Ord. 711 §§ 29 (part), 34 (part), 1995; prior zoning ord. § 224.080) 
Article VI. - Office Professional (OP) Zone 

17.12.710 - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of the OP zone is to provide the means necessary to implement the city general plan, specifically the "office professional" category, as set forth in the text of the general plan and as delineated on the general plan map. This zone is intended to be in accordance with applicable goals, objectives, policies and actions set forth by the plan. This zone is intended to allow the development of office and professional uses with supporting retail and commercial services thereby providing for the business and employment needs of the city and adjoining areas in an urban environment with full urban services. 
    It shall also be the intent of this zone to apply the provisions of this zone including, but not limited to, the property development regulations required herein to all new building lots created after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. 
    It shall not be the intent of this title to render previously legally created building lots or legally constructed buildings which do not comply with the new property development regulations or other requirements of this title to be nonconforming where these lots or buildings complied with the ordinances in effect at the time of their creation or construction. However, proof of compliance with ordinances in effect at the time of creation or construction shall be the sole burden of the applicant or property owner. Such proof may include building permits, minutes of council or commission action, case files, or other documentation. 
(Ord. 651 § 11 (part), 1993: prior zoning ord. § 225.010) 
17.12.720 - Prohibition. 
    A person shall not use any premises in the OP zone except as hereafter permitted in this title and subject to all regulations and conditions enumerated in this title. 
(Ord. 651 § 11 (part), 1993: prior zoning ord. § 225.020) 
17.12.730 - Permitted uses. 
    The permitted uses of the OP zone are grouped in categories of similar uses rather than lists of single uses. Examples are given for purposes of clarifying the types of uses allowed by each category. In addition, certain exceptions have been applied to those types of uses where concerns may arise as to their impact on neighboring properties and the visual attractiveness of the city as a whole. The following categories of uses are permitted in the OP zone subject to any stated exceptions, development regulations, and approval of the site plan as follows: 
A.  Existing Residential Uses. Such uses may continue to be used as a permitted use provided that such uses may not be expanded by a cumulative total of more than 500 square feet of floor area. 
B.  Within an enclosed building, the following use categories are permitted in the OP zone: 
1.  Communication Facilities and Services, Public and Private. This category is limited to: duplicating, faxing services, lithographers, photocopying, photo engravers, telecommunication/telecommuting offices, and telegraph offices. 
  This category does not include radio and television transmission towers or wireless telecommunication facilities. (See Section 17.40.640). 
2.  Eating and Drinking Establishments. This category is limited to: cafes, delicatessens, ice cream shops, and restaurants that are developed in conjunction with and located in the same building as office professional uses. 
  This category does not include fast food operations, bona fide restaurants, bars, cocktail lounges, nightclubs, or other uses that meet the definition of an on-site alcohol establishment. Freestanding eating and drinking establishments of any kind shall be subject to a conditional use permit. 
3.  Financial Institutions and Services. This category includes but is not limited to banks, credit unions, finance companies, savings and loans, and similar uses. 
  This category does not include any use which does not loan money as part of its business. 
4.  Offices-Business, Government or Professional. This category includes but is not limited to general business offices; federal, state, county, city or special district offices, libraries and court facilities; accounting, dental offices or laboratories, engineering, insurance, legal, medical offices or laboratories, real estate, stock broker, utilities, and similar office uses. 
5.  Retail Sales Establishments. This category is limited to bookstores, stationery stores, computer stores, office supplies and pharmacies. (See Section 17.12.760.) 
6.  Schools-Business and Professional. This category includes but is not limited to art, barber, beauty, dance, music, real estate, and similar schools. 
  This category does not include any school specializing in gymnastics, manual training, martial arts, shop work, or in the repair and maintenance of machinery or mechanical equipment. 
7.  Services-Business or Personal. This category is limited to answering service, barber or beauty shops, blueprinting, day care for adults, day nursery for children, dry cleaning, and laundry. 
8.  Other Uses. This category includes those uses which do not fall into any other category, and are not temporary uses, uses subject to director's review and approval, or uses subject to permit in this zone, which in the opinion of the director are consistent with the purpose and intent of this zone and similar to other uses permitted herein. 
C.  Water reservoirs, dams, treatment plants, gauging stations, pumping stations, tanks, wells, and any use normal and appurtenant to the storage and distribution of water. Exception: This use is not subject to site plan review (Section 17.12.790). 
(Ord. 896 § 1 (Exh. A § 15), 2008; Ord. 753 § 1 (Exh. A § 3 (part)), 1999; Ord. 711 § 30 (part), 1995; Ord. 651 § 11 (part), 1993: prior zoning ord. § 225.021) 
17.12.740 - Accessory and temporary uses. 
A.  The following uses are considered as accessory uses to the permitted uses in the OP zone: 
1.  Accessory buildings and structures customarily used in conjunction therewith. 
Cargo containers shall not be used as accessory buildings or structures, and shall not be placed on private real property at any time except as permitted in conjunction with temporary uses allowed in Section 17.12.740.B. 
a.  This subsection does not apply to the following real property: 
1)  Real property owned, leased, rented, occupied or used by a public agency or entity; 
2)  Real property owned, leased, rented, occupied or used by a nonpublic or private school. For purposes of this subsection, "nonpublic school" means a private, nonsectarian school that enrolls individuals with exceptional needs pursuant to an individualized education program and is certified by the California Department of Education. For purposes of this subsection, "private school" means a full-time day school that provides instruction in the several branches of study required to be taught in the public schools of the state, by persons capable of teaching, and that files an annual private school affidavit as required by the California Department of Education. For purposes of this subsection, "private school" does not include a school that provides instruction in a building used for residential purposes. A nonpublic or private school is not exempt unless it is operating in conformity with all pertinent land use and technical code regulations. 
3)  Real property utilized for the placement of cargo containers that are used exclusively for the storage of emergency supplies to be used for the benefit of the public by a recognized governmental agency, such as the Los Angeles County Fire Department, in the event of a disaster or emergency situation. Placement of a cargo container for the storage of private supplies is not included in this exemption. Placement of cargo containers for this purpose shall be approved through a director's review. 
B.  The following uses are considered as temporary uses in the OP zone: 
1.  The placement and use of a temporary office in conjunction with a construction or development project undertaken pursuant to an active building permit. A temporary office shall be placed on the lot or parcel which is part of the project, or on property adjoining the construction or development site with the written consent of the property owner. The placement of a temporary office shall not occur until the building permit is obtained. The temporary office shall be removed within thirty (30) days after the permit is expired, revoked, or finalized. 
2.  Storage of building materials, machinery and equipment used in conjunction with a construction or development project undertaken pursuant to an active building permit. Storage shall be on the lot or parcel which is part of the project, or on property adjoining the construction or development site with the written consent of the property owner. Storage shall not occur until the building permit is obtained. Storage shall be removed within thirty (30) days after the permit is expired, revoked, or finalized. ;ml1; 3. ..... a. 
b.  The time period for which a cargo container may be used for temporary construction storage is limited to the time when the building permit is active. An active building permit means one that has not expired, been revoked, or been finalized. Cargo containers used for temporary construction storage shall be removed from the property within thirty (30) calendar days of the expiration, revocation or finalization of a building permit. 
c.  Cargo containers used for temporary construction storage shall not exceed eight feet in width, eight feet six inches in height, and forty (40) feet in length. 
d.  Cargo containers used for temporary construction storage shall conform to the following standards: 
1)  Cargo containers shall be set back a minimum of five feet from any property line and a minimum of ten (10) feet from any structure. 
2)  Cargo containers shall not be stacked on top of each other or on any other structure. 
3)  Cargo containers shall not encroach upon, block, obstruct, or reduce in any manner any required exits, windows or vent shafts of structures, or any parking spaces, driveways, private streets, or public rights of way. 
4)  Cargo containers shall not be used for human habitation or occupied by individuals for any reason. 
5)  Cargo containers shall not have any electrical, plumbing, heating or air conditioning installations or systems, and shall not be connected to a power source. 
6)  Refuse, garbage, trash and debris, as well as hazardous substances, as defined by state or federal law, shall not be placed or stored in, against, on, or under a cargo container at any time. ;ml1; 4. ..... a. 
b.  The number and location of cargo containers used for temporary commercial storage shall be subject to the review and prior written approval of the Building Official and Directors of Planning and Housing and Neighborhood Revitalization or their duly authorized representatives. A cargo container approved under this subsection shall not require a separate permit. Application for approval of cargo containers for temporary commercial storage shall be made on a city-approved form and shall indicate the number of the building permit obtained for the repair, remodeling, alteration or other work for which the temporary commercial storage is requested, the size of each cargo container, the proposed location of each container on the property, and the date on which each container shall be placed on the property. 
c.  The time period for which a cargo container may be used for temporary commercial storage is limited to the time when the building permit is active. An active building permit means one that has not expired, been revoked, or been finalized. Cargo containers used for temporary commercial storage shall be removed from the property within thirty (30) calendar days of the expiration, revocation or finalization of a building permit. 
d.  Cargo containers used for temporary commercial storage shall not exceed eight feet in width, eight feet six inches in height, and forty (40) feet in length. 
e.  Cargo containers used for temporary commercial storage shall conform to the standards set forth in Section 17.12.740.B.3.d. ;ml1; 5. ..... a. 
b.  Cargo containers used for emergency storage shall require a container permit. The number and location of cargo containers used for emergency commercial storage shall be subject to the review and prior written approval of the directors of planning and housing and neighborhood revitalization or their duly authorized representatives. Upon such approval, and payment of a container permit fee in an amount established by city council, a container permit shall be issued. 
c.  Cargo containers may be used for emergency commercial storage for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) calendar days. This use may be extended for an additional ten (10) calendar days upon the prior written approval of the directors of planning and housing and neighborhood revitalization. 
d.  Cargo containers used for emergency commercial storage shall not exceed eight feet in width, eight feet six inches in height, and forty (40) feet in length. 
e.  Cargo containers used for emergency commercial storage shall conform to the standards set forth in Section 17.12.740.B.3.d. ;ml1; 6. ..... a. 
b.  Cargo containers used for relocation storage shall require a container permit. The number and location of cargo containers used for relocation storage shall be subject to the review and prior written approval of the directors of planning and housing and neighborhood revitalization or their duly authorized representatives. Upon such approval, and payment of a container permit fee in an amount established by city council, a container permit shall be issued. 
c.  Cargo containers may be used for relocation storage for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) calendar days. This use may be extended for an additional ten (10) calendar days upon the prior written approval of the directors of planning and housing and neighborhood revitalization. 
d.  Cargo containers used for relocation storage shall not exceed eight feet in width, eight feet six inches in height, and forty (40) feet in length. 
e.  Cargo containers used for relocation storage shall conform to the standards set forth in Section 17.12.740.B.3.d., except as provided in f. of this subsection. 
f.  Cargo containers used for relocation storage may be placed in parking lots so long as no more than 10% of the provided parking spaces are used for this purpose. 
C.  Electric Vehicle Charging Station. An electric vehicle charging station (EVCS) shall be permitted as an accessory use within any existing legal single-family or multiple-family residential garage or carport, or within any existing legal commercial parking space in a parking lot or in a parking garage, subject to all applicable city code requirements and the following: 
1.  Electric vehicle charging stations (EVCS) for public use shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The EVCSs shall be located in a manner which will be easily seen by the public for informational and security purposes and shall be illuminated during evening business hours; and 
b.  Be located in desirable and convenient parking locations which will serve as an incentive for the use of electric vehicles; and 
c.  The EVCS pedestals shall be protected as necessary to prevent damage by automobiles; and 
d.  The EVCS pedestals shall be designed to minimize potential damage by vandalism and to be safe for use in inclement weather; and 
e.  Complete instructions and appropriate warnings concerning the use of the EVCS shall be posted on a sign in a prominent location on each station for use by the operator; and 
f.  One standard nonilluminated sign, not to exceed 4 square feet in area and 10 feet in height, may be posted for the purpose of identifying the location of each cluster of EVCSs; and 
g.  The EVCS may be on a timer that limits the use of the station to the normal business hours of the use(s) which it serves to preclude unauthorized use after business hours. 
2.  Electric vehicle charging stations for private use shall: 
a.  Be located in a manner which will not allow public access to the charging station; and 
b.  Comply with subsections C.1.c., d. and e. of this section. 
D.  Mini Wireless Telecommunication Facilities. This category includes all mini wireless telecommunication facilities subject to the requirements of Section 17.40.640. 
E.  Cargo containers that are present on private real property, for any use or purpose, on the effective date of this section shall be removed within six months from the effective date, unless the property owner obtains the requisite approvals and permits in conjunction with temporary uses allowed in this section and otherwise complies with all regulations pertaining to cargo containers. 
    This subsection does not apply to real property owned, leased, rented, occupied or used by a public agency or entity, or by a nonpublic or private school, as defined in Section 17.12.740.A. of this code. 
(Ord. 753 § 1 (Exh. A § 2 (part)), 1999; Ord. 713 § 3 (part), 1995; Ord. 651 § 11 (part), 1993: prior zoning ord. § 225.023) 
(Ord. No. 921, §§ 8-10, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 964, § 1, 5-24-2011) 
17.12.750 - Uses subject to director's review and approval. 
    If site plans and/or other pertinent information required by the director for the proposed use are first submitted to and approved by the director in accordance with Article VI of Chapter 17.32, premises in the OP zone may be used for the following uses: 
A.  Access to property lawfully used for a purpose not permitted in the OP zone provided no other practical access to such property is available and such access will not alter the character of the premises in respect to permitted uses in the OP zone; 
B.  Christmas trees and wreaths, the sale of, between November 1st and December 25th, both dates inclusive, to the extent permitted by other statutory and ordinance provisions. Any structures, facilities and materials used for the sale of trees and wreaths shall be removed from the premises by December 31st of the same calendar year, and the property restored to a clean condition; 
C.  Parking. Joint usage. (See Section 17.12.880.) 
D.  Minor co-located and stealth wireless telecommunication facilities subject to the requirements of Section 17.60.640); 
E.  Temporary alcohol sales, subject to the requirements of Section 17.42.140. 
(Ord. 896 § 1 (Exh. A § 16), 2008; Ord. 753 § 1 (Exh. A § 6 (part)), 1999; Ord. 651 § 11 (part), 1993: prior zoning ord. § 225.024) 
17.12.760 - Uses subject to conditional use permits. 
    The following uses and categories of uses may be permitted in the OP zone provided a conditional use permit has first been obtained as provided in Article I of Chapter 17.32, and while such permit is in full force and effect in conformity with conditions of such permit for: 
A.  Freestanding eating and drinking establishments of any kind (excluding fast food operations), and bona fide restaurants and other similar uses that meet the definition of an onsite alcoholic beverage establishment, as defined by and subject to the requirements of Chapter 17.42, whether freestanding or combined with another use. Nightclubs are specifically prohibited; 
B.  Long-term health care facility or senior citizen housing only where such uses share a site with health-related offices and special services, including but not limited to adult or senior day care, chiropractic, dental, hospice care, medical (including nursing), pharmacy and therapy; 
C.  Multiple-family residential (apartments, condominiums) in conjunction with a permitted use in which not less than 50% of such residential units shall be above the ground floor. (Subject to the provisions of the HDR-2 zone except where specifically modified by the conditional use permit.); 
D.  Public Services and Utilities. This category includes only the following uses: 
1.  Electric transmission substations including microwave facilities used in conjunction therewith, 
2.  Gas distribution facilities, 
3.  Publicly owned uses which are necessary to the maintenance of the public health, safety and welfare, 
4.  Telephone facilities; 
E.  Structures over 50 feet in height; 
F.  Transient Residential. This category includes only hotels and motels. 
(Ord. 896 § 1 (Exh. A § 17), 2008; Ord. 651 § 11 (part), 1993: prior zoning ord. § 225.025) 
17.12.770 - Interpretation. 
    Where a conflict in interpretation occurs regarding application of Sections 17.12.730, 17.12.740, 17.12.750 or 17.12.760 to any specific case the director shall determine the interpretation. 
(Ord. 651 § 11 (part), 1993: prior zoning ord. § 225.026) 
17.12.780 - Adjustments. 
    The director may reduce the required minimum lot width, minimum lot depth, yard requirements, and parking requirements by an amount not to exceed 10%, and may increase the maximum height regulations and maximum sign area by an amount not to exceed 10% of the amount specified by the OP zone, where the director finds that the applicant has demonstrated that: 
A.  There are special circumstances or exceptional physical characteristics applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings involved which are not generally applicable to other properties in the same vicinity with the same zoning; and 
B.  An adjustment (if authorized) will not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations on other properties in the same vicinity with the same zoning; and 
C.  The strict application of the requirements sought to be reduced or increased would result in practical difficulties and unnecessary hardship which is inconsistent with the purpose of the requirements. 
D.  In the case of parking requirements only, a program exists whereby employees utilize, or will utilize, public transit, carpools, vanpools, bicycles, motorcycles, or walk to work, and that sufficient parking has been provided for the modes of travel utilized. 
E.  That approval of the application will result in the need for less grading and disturbance of soils and natural vegetation, where applicable. 
F.  That approval of the application will result in the retention/preservation of native vegetation; particularly Joshua trees, California Juniper, or Creosote shrubs, where applicable. 
G.  That approval of the application will not diminish the visual appearance of the property or neighborhood. 
H.  That approval of the application will not increase the overall average of the FAR to more than the maximum specified for the zone on all OP zoned properties within 500 feet of the site. 
  Any reduction or increase greater than those specified herein shall be subject to the granting of a variance. 
(Ord. 651 § 11 (part), 1993: prior zoning ord. § 225.027) 
17.12.790 - Site plan review required-Fee. 
A.  A site plan (with vicinity map) and building elevations, drawn to scale and reflecting the accurate dimensions of the buildings and property, shall be required of any person seeking to erect new buildings or structures, make additions to any existing buildings or structures, site temporary commercial coaches, or otherwise grade, improve or develop any lot or portion thereof for a permitted use prior to the issuance of any grading or building permit. The site plan shall be accompanied by an appropriate development application and both shall be filed with the planning department. The director or his designated representative shall review the site plan for conformance with the provisions of this title. The site plan shall demonstrate conformance with height regulations, property development regulations, sign regulations or a sign program required by the city for multiple-tenant projects, off-street parking requirements, the adopted City of Lancaster Design Guidelines, any other requirements established for the adopted zoning designation in which the property(ies) is (are) located, and any other applicable city ordinances, standards, guidelines or policies. In addition to the conditions and requirements imposed by the ordinance codified in this title and other city ordinances, standards, guidelines and policies, the director may place conditions on the approval of the site plan where the director finds that such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. At such time as the site plan complies with the requirements of the ordinance codified in this title and other city ordinances, standards, guidelines or policies, the site plan shall be approved by the director or his designated representative. The site plan approval shall be valid for two (2) years from the date of approval. A site plan shall be considered "used" when the slab of a major building in the project is poured and inspected, although circumstances in each case may vary and the final determination as to "use" of a site plan review shall be made by the director. Three (3) one-year extensions of the approval may be granted by the director provided such written request for an extension is received not less than sixty (60) days prior to expiration, and any significant environmental changes which have occurred since the original approval have been addressed. Any extension granted shall be conditioned to comply with the city's current design guidelines as adopted by the city council, unless the applicant can demonstrate to the director's satisfaction that such compliance will impose an undue hardship on the project. In the event the site plan or an extension thereof is denied, the applicant may appeal the decision in accordance with Section 17.36.030. All projects constructed in accordance with an approved site plan shall be permanently maintained as approved. Any desired subsequent changes shall be submitted for approval as an amendment to the site plan. Prior to occupancy the site shall be inspected for compliance with the site plan. All improvements shall be installed and functioning before occupancy will be allowed. 
Where the director determines that the requirements of this section surpass the city's need for project review of a particular development proposal, the director may exercise discretion and apply the provisions of Article VI of Chapter 17.32, Director's Review, in its place. 
B.  When the appropriate development application is filed per subsection A of this section, it shall be accompanied by the filing fee established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 711 § 22 (part), 1995; prior zoning ord. §§ 225.040, 225.041) 
(Ord. No. 924, § 1, 8-25-09; Ord. No. 956, § 3, 1-11-2011) 
17.12.800 - Property development regulations. 
A.  General. 
1.  No new building shall be erected, constructed, moved onto, or established on an existing legal lot or parcel of land unless said building or temporary commercial coach shall comply with all of the regulations set forth in city ordinances, standards, guidelines or policies and subsection B of this section, or Article X of Chapter 17.40 which are pertinent to its placement on said lot or parcel. 
2.  No existing building or temporary commercial coach located on an existing legal lot or parcel of land shall be converted, enlarged, or moved unless said building, or addition thereto, shall comply with all of the regulations set forth in city ordinances, standards, guidelines or policies and subsection B of this section, or Article X of Chapter 17.40 which are pertinent to its placement on said lot or parcel. 
3.  No new lot shall be created or any building, or portion thereof, existing on such new lot be used, unless said lot and said building location shall comply with all of the regulations set forth in city ordinances, standards, guidelines or policies and subsection B of this section, which are pertinent to the area and dimensions for new lots and those regulations pertinent to the placement or location of buildings on said lot. 
B.  OP Zone. Wherever property is designated as an OP zone on the zoning map the following regulations shall apply: 
1.  Lot Dimensions. The following minimum lot dimensions shall apply to all lots created after the adoption of this section. (Those lots which were legally created, prior to the adoption of this section, in compliance with ordinances in effect at the time of their creation need not comply unless involved in a new subdivision or change in lot configuration other than a lot line adjustment as provided in Title 16 of this code.) 
Minimum Minimum Minimum Zone Lot Area Lot Width* Lot Depth OP 10,000 sq. ft. 80 ft. 100 ft.  
* Also denotes minimum street frontage. 
  See Section 17.40.070, 17.40.080, 17.40.090 A or 17.40.090B in the event public use or required street dedication would reduce the net lot area, lot width, or lot depth of an existing lot to less than the required minimum. 
2.  Setbacks, building placement, and building design shall be provided as follows. Guidance in the application of these requirements is provided by adopted city design guidelines and various diagrams contained within this code: 
a.  Street Frontages. 
1)  Street Frontage-Build-To Line. A "build-to" line for street frontages is established as follows. This "build-to" line shall apply to all street frontages adjacent to a property where pedestrian or vehicular access is available from that frontage: 
a)  Arterial Street: Zero (0) to twelve (12) feet. 
b)  All Other Streets: Zero (0) to six (6) feet. 
2)  Building Placement. Except as provided in Section 17.12.800.B.2.a.3), building placement on a property shall comply with the following requirements. 
a)  New buildings, or additions to existing buildings, shall be designed and located so that a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the street frontage(s) has buildings located at the established "build-to" line for the parcel. 
b)  Vehicular driveways and parking areas shall not be located between the façade of a building located at the "build-to" line and the back of the public sidewalk. 
c)  In areas of the site where buildings are not located at the established "build-to" line, a minimum landscaped area of ten (10) feet in width shall be provided from the back of the sidewalk to any parking area. Such width may be reduced by the approving authority where a parkway design is used to separate the sidewalk from the street curb. Landscaping installation and maintenance shall be in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 8.50. 

Example of Building Placement at Build-To Line for 50% of Street Frontage 
Diagram Courtesy of Sargent Town Planning 
3)  Exceptions to Building Placement Requirements. Exceptions to the requirement for building placement established in subsection may be granted by the approval authority in the following circumstances: 
a)  In the case of a commercial center, an exception may be granted where a major tenant requires a specific dimension for a "view corridor" from the adjacent street 
b)  On a corner lot situation, an exception may be granted to reduce the minimum fifty (50) percent requirement on one of the frontages where another frontage exceeds the minimum requirement and the overall intent of the build to line requirement is met. 
c)  Where people-oriented activity areas, such as outdoor dining locations, are provided at the build-to line and designed in such a way as to meet the intent of the "build-to" line, an exception may be granted. 
d)  Where a drive-through lane is provided between the building and the "build-to line", an exception may be granted if the building provides, as required in Section 17.12.800.B.2.b, sufficient design features facing the street frontage(s). 

Example of Placement of Outdoor Activity Areas Along Street Frontage at Build-To Line 
Diagram Courtesy of Sargent Town Planning 
b.  Building Design Requirements. All buildings located entirely or partially at the "build-to" line shall meet the requirements as stated below. Determination of the appropriate building design elements shall be guided by Section 17.12.230 and the adopted city design guidelines. 
1)  Building Façades facing Street Frontage(s). 
a)  Buildings shall generally be oriented so that the rear of the building does not directly face the adjacent street frontage(s). The approving authority may approve an exception to this where sufficient design elements, including but not limited to building fenestration, building materials, pedestrian access points into and through the building, and other techniques are provided to meet the design intent of the code. 
b)  Design of building façades facing a street shall provide the appearance of a storefront. Design elements may include arcades, patios, awnings, and overhangs as appropriate to enhance appearance and use of the space. 
2)  Public Entrances. 
a)  Except as provided under subsection ii below, all buildings located entirely or partially at the "build-to" line shall have a public entrance directly facing the street frontage, and provide direct pedestrian access to the entrance from the adjacent street frontage. 
b)  A public entrance may be located on the side of a building not directly facing a street frontage provided that the entrance is clearly visible to people from the adjacent street, direct public access is provided, and the building façade directly facing the street has sufficient fenestration and other design elements and treatment to create a visible connection with that street frontage. 

Building Entrance and Treatment for Side-On Design 
Diagram Courtesy of Sargent Town Planning 
c.  Interior side yard and rear yard: Ten (10) feet. Where the OP zone abuts property in an RR zone, the required yard may be increased at the discretion of the approving authority in order to mitigate any potentially adverse effect on neighboring residents. 
3.  Height. The height of buildings and structures shall comply with the following: 
a.  No building or structure in the OP zone shall exceed a height of 50 feet. This section does not apply to conditional use permit uses which shall be subject to Article I of Chapter 17.32. (See Article XII of Chapter 17.40 for general exceptions.) 
b.  No building in the OP zone which is within 100 feet of any RR, SRR or R zone shall exceed a height of 2 stories or 35 feet, whichever is less. 
c.  No building may be constructed which would shade any existing active solar energy system on adjoining property without the consent of the affected property owner. (See subsection one in the definition of solar energy system in Section 17.04.240.) 
d.  Exceptions for Solar Systems. Solar collectors may exceed the height limit when mounted on the roof of a legal, conforming building. The right to exceed the height limit shall be exercised only in the event that: there is no other practical means or location for achieving an efficient placement on the building or site in question; such collectors may exceed the height limit only to the extent necessary to achieve efficient placement; in no case shall such solar collectors (or related equipment) encroach more than 5 feet beyond the limit. Also the placement of a solar collector shall not shade or otherwise diminish the efficiency of existing solar collectors on neighboring property, or preclude such property from sufficient solar access to successfully operate a solar energy system sufficient to serve the needs of the business or occupants. 
4.  Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): 0.75. (See definition in Section 17.04.240.) 
5.  Landscaping. Plant materials used in landscaping shall include drought-tolerant species and the landscaping shall be designed to minimize water usage and prevent runoff. No landscaping shall be placed in a manner which shades or would ultimately shade any existing solar energy system from the sun on a contiguous lot. All landscaped areas shall conform to Title 8, Chapter 8.50, Landscaping Installation and Maintenance of the Lancaster Municipal Code. All landscaping shall be completed prior to occupancy by any use and shall be maintained as defined in this title. 
6.  Outside Storage and Display. All outside storage and display is prohibited with the exception of the following: 
a.  Parking lots; 
b.  Signs, existing outdoor advertising. 
(Ord. 711 § 43 (part), 1995; prior zoning ord. § 225.050) 
(Ord. No. 907, § 5, 10-28-2008; Ord. No. 1028, § 2, 7-11-2017 ) 
17.12.810 - Signs. 
    A person shall not use, install or construct any sign in the OP zone except as specifically permitted in this chapter and subject to all regulations and conditions, including without limitation submittal of a sign plan, set forth in the ordinance codified in this title and any other ordinance now existing or hereafter adopted by the city regulating the installation, use and/or construction of signs. A comprehensive sign plan for multiple-tenant projects and/or individual sign plan for single-tenant projects, must be submitted to and approved by the director or his designated representative. Sign plans must be fully dimensioned, including the proposed sign location(s), elevations, colors and materials. A person who has first obtained approval of the sign plan and all required permits and inspection approval shall be permitted to use, install or construct signs as specified in the OP zone. 
(Ord. 651 § 11 (part), 1993: prior zoning ord. § 225.060) 
17.12.820 - Signs-General provisions. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter regulating signs shall not apply to the following signs except as otherwise indicated herein: 
1.  Official notices issued by any court, public body or public officer; 
2.  Notices posted by any public officer in performance of a public duty, or for any person in giving legal notice; 
3.  Traffic, directional, warning or informational signs required or authorized by the public authority having jurisdiction over such signs; 
4.  Official signs used for emergency purposes only; 
5.  Permanent memorial or historical signs, plaques or markers; 
6.  Public utility signs, provided such signs do not exceed 3 square feet in area. 
B.  Prohibited Signs. The following signs shall be prohibited in the OP zone: 
1.  Signs which contain or utilize: 
a.  Any exposed incandescent lamp, 
b.  Any revolving beacon light, 
c.  Any continuous or sequential flashing operation, except signs displaying time of day, atmospheric temperature or having programmable electronic public service messages only, 
d.  Any system for display of time of day, atmospheric temperature or programmable electronic public service messages in which: 
1)  The messages are not public service in nature, or 
2)  The proposed display has any illumination which is in continuous motion or which appears to be in continuous motion, or 
3)  The message is changed at a rate faster than one message every 4 seconds, or 
4)  The interval between messages is less than one second, or 
5)  The display is located less than 100 feet on the same side of the street or highway or 200 feet across the street from residentially zoned property; 
2.  Roof signs (see definition in Section 17.04.240); 
3.  Revolving signs of any kind; 
4.  Signs advertising or displaying any unlawful act, business or purpose; 
5.  Devices dispensing bubbles and free-flowing particles of matter; 
6.  Any notice, placard, bill, card, poster, sticker, banner, sign, advertising or other device calculated to attract the attention of the public which any person posts, prints, sticks, stamps, tacks or otherwise affixes, or causes the same to be done to or upon any street, right-of-way, public sidewalk, crosswalk, curb, lamppost, hydrant, tree, telephone pole or lighting system, or upon any fixture of the police or fire alarm system of the city of Lancaster or county of Los Angeles; 
7.  Any strings of pennants, banners or streamers, clusters of flags, strings of twirlers or propellers, flares, balloons, and similar attention-getting devices, including noise-emitting devices, with the exception of the following: 
a.  National, state, local governmental, institutional or corporate flags properly displayed, 
b.  Holiday decorations in season used for an aggregate period of not more than 90 days in any one calendar year; 
8.  Devices projecting, or otherwise reproducing the image of a sign or message on any surface or object; 
9.  Signs emitting or amplifying sounds for the purpose of attracting attention; 
10.  Portable signs; 
11.  Sidewalk signs; 
12.  Temporary signs, except as otherwise specifically permitted by this title; 
13.  New outdoor advertising signs. No new outdoor advertising signs are permitted or allowed to be relocated into the OP zone; 
14.  Pole signs; 
15.  Any sign which is placed in a manner which would obstruct a driver's or pedestrian's vision and thus create a hazard, or potential hazard, to the public health, safety or welfare. 
C.  General Sign Regulations. The following regulations shall apply to all signs in the OP zone. 
1.  In no case shall a lighted sign or lighting device thereof be so placed or directed so as to permit the beams and illumination therefrom to be directed or beamed upon a public street, highway, sidewalk or adjacent premises so as to cause glare or reflection that may constitute a traffic hazard or nuisance. 
2.  Existing outdoor advertising signs are subject to Section 17.40.210. 
3.  Signs, except outdoor advertising signs, may be single- or double-faced, provided that: 
a.  The distance between the faces of any double-faced sign, other than a "V"-shaped projecting sign, shall not exceed 36 inches; and 
b.  The separation between the intersecting faces of any multi-faced sign shall not exceed 12 inches. 
4.  Any sign located on vacant and unoccupied property, and which was erected for an occupant or business unrelated to the present occupant or business, or any sign which pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer exists shall be removed within 30 days after the purpose for, or use utilizing such sign has been removed from such property. 
5.  Any permitted sign may be a changeable copy sign. 
6.  All signs shall be designed in the simplest form and be free of any exposed bracing, angle iron, guy wires, cables or similar devices. 
7.  The exposed backs of all signs visible to the public shall be suitably covered, finished and properly maintained. 
8.  All signs shall be maintained in good repair, including display surfaces which shall be kept neatly painted or posted. 
9.  Any sign which does not conform to the provisions of this title shall be made to conform or shall be removed as provided in subsection B.4. of Section 17.32.850 except as provided in Section 17.32.850B.4.c. 
10.  Except where otherwise specifically provided by this title, sign regulations established pursuant to Section 17.12.810 et seq. shall not apply to signs within a building, arcade, court or other similarly enclosed area where such signs are not visible to the public without entering such facilities. 
11.  The height of all signs shall be measured from the highest point of the sign. 
D.  Computation of Sign Area. The surface area of any sign face shall be computed from the smallest rectangles, circles and/or triangles which will enclose all words, letters, figures, symbols, designs and pictures, together with all framing, background material, colored or illuminated areas, and attention-attracting devices forming an integral part of the overall display, but excluding all support structures, except that: 
1.  Wall signs which are painted on or affixed directly to a building wall or façade, and which have no discernible boundary, shall have the areas between letters or words intended to be read together, and any device intended to draw attention to the sign message included in any computation of surface area; and 
2.  Signs which are placed in a manner, or bearing copy, which require dependence upon each other in order to convey the meaning shall be considered one sign and the intervening areas between signs included in any computation of surface area; and 
3.  Spherical, cylindrical, or other 3-dimensional signs not having conventional sign faces shall be considered to have 2 faces and the area of each sign face shall be computed from the smallest 3-dimensional geometrical shape or shapes which will best approximate the actual surface area of said faces. 
(Ord. 651 § 11 (part), 1993: prior zoning ord. § 225.061) 
17.12.830 - Business signs. 
    Business signs may be permitted in the OP zone subject to Sections 17.12.790, 17.12.890 and the restrictions of this section. For more information concerning specific types of signs see Section 17.04.240, Definitions. 
A.  Wall and Freestanding Business Signs. Monument signs are the only freestanding signs allowed in the OP zone. 
1.  Area and Number Permitted. 
a.  A maximum of one square foot of wall or freestanding sign area for each one linear foot of continuous lot frontage up to a maximum of 150 square feet of total sign area. 
b.  No more than one freestanding sign per street frontage shall be permitted. Such signs shall be separated by a distance of not less than 200 feet. 
c.  No more than one wall sign per tenant, except on corner sites where not more than 2 wall signs per tenant is permitted. 
d.  The minimum sign area per tenant shall be 20 square feet. 
2.  Height Permitted. 
a.  Wall business signs shall not extend above: 
1)  Eighteen inches below the top of the wall of a single-story building; or 
2)  The lowest point of a sloping roof of a single-story building. 
b.  Freestanding business signs shall not exceed a maximum height of 10 feet measured vertically from ground level at the base of the sign, or 3 feet below the roof line, whichever is least. 
3.  Projection Permitted. Wall business signs shall not project more than 18 inches from the building wall to which they are attached. Freestanding signs may not project over the public right-of-way. 
4.  Lighting. Wall and freestanding business signs may be internally or externally lighted, but any continuous or sequential flashing operation is prohibited. 
B.  Window Signs. Each business establishment may be permitted display window signs subject to the following restrictions: 
1.  Area permitted: maximum of 20% of the window area. 
2.  Lighting. Window signs may be internally or externally lighted, but any continuous or sequential flashing operation is prohibited. 
C.  Incidental Business Signs. Each business establishment may be permitted incidental business signs provided: 
1.  That such signs are wall signs or window signs; and 
2.  That such signs do not exceed 3 square feet in sign area or 6 square feet in total sign area; and 
3.  That the sum of the sign areas of all such signs does not exceed 10 square feet. 
4.  Incidental business signs may be internally or externally lighted but any continuous or sequential flashing operation is prohibited. 
(Ord. 711 § 25 (part), 1995; prior zoning ord. § 225.063) 
17.12.840 - Building identification signs. 
    Building identification signs may be permitted subject to the following restrictions: 
A.  Area Permitted. In the OP zone one wall sign may be permitted provided: 
1.  Such sign does not exceed 6 square feet in sign area where located less than 30 feet above ground level measured at the base of the building below said sign; or 
2.  Such sign does not exceed 2% of the exterior wall area of the building wall on which it is mounted, excluding penthouse walls, where located more than 30 feet above ground level measured at the base of the building below said sign. 
3.  The area of the building identification sign shall be subtracted from the area allowed for wall signs. 
B.  Height Permitted. Such signs shall not extend above a line 18 inches below the highest point of a parapet wall or the lowest point of a sloping roof. 
C.  Lighting. Building identification signs may be internally or externally lighted but any continuous or sequential flashing operation is prohibited. 
(Ord. 651 § 11 (part), 1993: prior zoning ord. § 225.064) 
17.12.850 - Temporary signs. 
    Temporary signs may be permitted in the OP zone subject to the following restrictions: 
A.  Area Permitted. Temporary signs which are posted or erected for 90 days or less shall not exceed 16 square feet in sign area or 32 square feet in total sign area as defined in Section 17.04.240. Temporary signs which have obtained a permit pursuant to subsection G of this section and which are posted or erected for more than 90 days shall not exceed 32 square feet in sign area or 64 square feet in total sign area. 
B.  Height Permitted. 
1.  Freestanding temporary signs shall not exceed 6 feet in height. 
2.  Temporary signs which are posted, attached or affixed to buildings of more than one story shall not be higher than the finished floor line of the second floor of such building. 
3.  Temporary signs which are posted, attached or affixed to a single-story building shall not extend above: 
a.  Eighteen inches below the top of the wall of the building; 
b.  The lowest point of a sloping roof of the building. 
C.  Projection Permitted. Where temporary signs are attached to a wall such signs shall not project more than 18 inches from the building wall to which they are attached. 
D.  Lighting. Temporary signs shall not be lighted. 
E.  Placement. Temporary signs shall not be placed on public property (see Section 17.12.820B.6.), or in any manner that would endanger the public (see Section 17.12.850B.15.). 
F.  Duration. No temporary sign shall be posted for more than 90 days without obtaining a sign permit pursuant to subsection G of this section. No sign permit for a temporary sign shall be valid for more than one year. Upon written request for an extension the director may grant an extension for up to one additional year upon finding that the sign is otherwise in compliance with the requirements of Section 17.12.810 et seq. and that the extension is necessary to accomplish the purposes for which the sign has been posted. No additional extensions may be granted. All temporary signs shall be removed within 14 calendar days after occurrence of the event, if any, which is the subject of the temporary sign. The date of the posting shall be permanently and legibly marked on the lower right-hand corner of the sign face. 
G.  Permit Required. Any person who proposes to post or erect a temporary sign for more than 90 days shall file an application for a sign permit with the Department of Community Development. The applicant shall also file a statement of responsibility as required in subsection I of this section. 
H.  Standards for Approval. 
1.  Within 7 working days the director or his designated representative shall act upon the application for a temporary sign permit. 
2.  The action on the application shall be based on character, location and design, including design elements such as material, letter style, colors, sign type or shape, and the provisions of Section 17.12.810 et seq. 
3.  If the action is to disapprove the notice of disapproval shall specify the reasons therefor. 
I.  Statement of Responsibility. Each person desiring to post or erect a temporary sign(s), regardless of duration, shall submit to the Department of Community Development a statement of responsibility in a form approved by the director with a description sufficient to identify the temporary sign(s), the locations of the sign(s) to be posted, and certifying a named individual who is responsible for removing each temporary sign. In the event the responsible individual fails to remove the temporary sign(s) as required by subsection F of this section, the temporary sign(s) shall be deemed abandoned and may be removed by the city, the cost of which removal shall be payable by the responsible individual. 
J.  Removal of Unauthorized, Unmaintained or Dangerous Signs. 
1.  Temporary signs posted for which a statement of responsibility has not been submitted and, if required, a permit has not been obtained, are subject to immediate removal by the city without compensation. The city may, at its option, also pursue legal action under Section 17.04.220. 
2.  Temporary signs which are deemed by the city to constitute a threat to the public health and safety are subject to immediate removal by the city without compensation. (Some examples might include such signs which are not secured against the wind or were placed in a manner which would interfere with the vision of drivers or pedestrians.) The city's cost of removal shall be payable by the responsible individual. 
3.  Temporary signs for which a statement of responsibility has been submitted and, if required, a permit has been obtained, and which do not pose a threat to public health and safety but are otherwise posted in violation of Section 17.12.810 et seq. shall be subject to removal in accordance with the following procedures. The city shall provide written notice to the responsible individual for each temporary sign established pursuant to subsection I of this section, that the sign is in violation of Section 17.12.810 et seq., shall specify the nature of the violation and shall direct the responsible individual therefor to remove or alter such temporary sign. If the responsible individual fails to comply with the notice within 3 working days after such notice is mailed, the sign(s) shall be deemed abandoned, and may be removed by the city, the cost of which shall be payable by the responsible individual to the city. 
(Ord. 651 § 11 (part), 1993: prior zoning ord. § 225.065) 
17.12.860 - Directional and/or information signs. 
    Freestanding or wall-mounted directional and/or information signs may be permitted in the OP zone subject to the following restrictions: 
A.  Area Permitted. Directional and/or informational signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in sign area or 24 square feet in total sign area. 
B.  Height Permitted. 
1.  Wall-mounted directional and/or information signs shall not extend above a line 18 inches below the highest point of a parapet wall or the lowest point of a sloping roof. 
2.  Freestanding directional and/or informational signs shall not exceed 10 feet measured from the base of the sign. 
C.  Location of Signs. All such signs shall be located on site. 
D.  Lighting. Directional and/or information signs may be internally or externally lighted but any continuous or sequential flashing operation is prohibited. 
(Ord. 651 § 11 (part), 1993: prior zoning ord. § 225.067) 
17.12.870 - Special purpose signs. 
    The following special purpose signs may be permitted as provided herein: 
A.  Bulletin or Special Event Signs. One freestanding or wall-mounted bulletin or special event sign may be erected and maintained on each lot or parcel of land in the OP zone developed for a publicly owned, charitable, religious or educational institution subject to the following restrictions: 
1.  Area Permitted. Such sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in sign area or 100 square feet in total sign area. 
2.  Height Permitted. 
a.  A wall-mounted sign shall not extend above a line 18 inches below the highest point of a parapet wall or the lowest point of a sloping roof. 
b.  A freestanding sign shall not exceed a maximum height of 12 feet measured vertically from the base of the sign. 
3.  Location of Sign. A freestanding sign shall not be located nearer than 10 feet to a front lot line or 25 feet to any other lot line. 
4.  Lighting. Bulletin or special event signs may be internally or externally lighted, but any continuous or sequential flashing operation is prohibited. 
5.  Design. Such sign shall be architecturally related to the structure to which it is appurtenant. 
B.  Time, Temperature, and Public Service Message Signs. Signs using any system for the display of time of day, atmospheric temperature, or programmable electronic messages may be permitted subject to the prohibitions in Section 17.12.820B and the following restrictions: 
1.  Type of Signs. All time, temperature, and public service message signs shall be monument signs. 
2.  Area Permitted. One sign not to exceed 24 square feet in total sign area may be permitted for each street frontage up to a maximum of 2 for each business. 
3.  Height Permitted. No such sign shall exceed a height of: 
a.  For monument or post signs - 12 feet; 
b.  For wall signs - not less than 18 inches below the top of the wall of a single-story building. 
4.  Location of Sign. Such signs shall be placed not closer than 500 feet to any business already using this type of sign. 
5.  Other. Such signs must not violate the restrictions imposed by Section 17.12.820 B.1.d. 
(Ord. 651 § 11 (part), 1993: prior zoning ord. § 225.068) 
17.12.880 - Off-street parking. 
    The automobile parking facilities required by this section shall be provided and permanently maintained as such unless and until a substitute has been provided which is in full compliance with the provisions of this title. The following parking requirements shall be complied with in the OP zone: 
A.  General Conditions. The provisions of this section shall apply at the time that: 
1.  A building or structure is erected; or 
2.  An existing building or structure is altered to increase the exercise area (i.e., dance schools or fitness centers) or seating capacity (fixed or not fixed); or 
3.  An existing building or structure is enlarged. EXCEPTION: An existing building or structure which has insufficient lot area upon which to provide the required parking or landscaping may be enlarged by an area not to exceed 20% of the gross floor area including the original building or structure and all legal additions thereto for which required parking and associated landscaping have been provided. This exception applies only when there will be no reduction of existing parking or landscaping on the site; or 
4.  The use of a building or structure is changed. EXCEPTION: Buildings or structures legally constructed in accordance with the parking requirements in effect at the time of building permit issuance will not require full compliance with the parking space requirements of this section provided that: 
a.  Said change in use creates no greater demand for parking spaces (as defined by this section) than the use which most recently preceded it; and 
b.  All available space not used for parking shall be improved for purposes of parking and landscaping in accordance with this section and Section 17.12.890 (not to exceed the parking requirement for said use) prior to the new use occupying said premises. 
B.  Ownership and Joint Usage. Space required by this section for automobile parking shall either: 
1.  Be owned as a part of the premises where the use for which the automobile parking space is required is located; or 
2.  Subject to director's review and approval the owner or owner-authorized lessee of any property, may authorize joint use of parking facilities solely to serve existing buildings or structures occupied by the following uses or activities, provided that all the requirements of this zone can be complied with: 
a.  The parking facilities required for any nonresidential use, which is primarily a daytime use may be fulfilled by the parking facilities of a use which is primarily a nighttime and/or Sunday use, and vice versa, provided such parking facilities meet the requirements of subsection B.2.b. of this section. 
b.  All of the following conditions shall be met in order for the director to approve joint usage of parking: 
1)  The lots or parcels upon which the uses referred to in subsection B.2.a. of this section are proposed shall be adjoining as defined in this title; and 
2)  There shall be no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours of the uses for which joint usage of parking is proposed; and 
3)  That the joint usage of the off-street parking facilities shall be contingent upon the execution of an agreement, which requires that if canceled the party canceling such agreement, not less than 60 days prior to the effective date of such cancellation, shall notify the director of such cancellation. Such agreement shall meet the approval of the city attorney as to form and content. Once approved, the executed agreement shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder and copies thereof filed with the director. 
  See Section 17.12.890 for parking design requirements. 
C.  Fractions. When the application of this section requires a fractional part of an automobile parking space or parking place sufficient to accommodate a fractional number of automobiles, any such fraction shall be construed as a whole. 
D.  Parking Requirements by Use. 
1.  Eating, and Drinking Establishments. Every structure used for eating or drinking shall provide on the same lot or parcel one automobile parking space for each 100 square feet of gross floor area. 
2.  Financial Institutions and Services. Every bank, savings and loan institution, or similar use shall have on the same lot or parcel of land, one automobile parking space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area. 
3.  General Commercial Uses. Except as otherwise provided in this section every lot or parcel of land which is used for a retail commercial use existing or permitted in the OP zone, shall have on the same lot or parcel of land one automobile parking space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area of any building or structure so used. 
4.  Offices. 
a.  Government, Public Facilities and Professional Office. One automobile parking space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area. 
b.  Medical and Dental. Every medical or dental office, clinic, or similar building shall have on the same lot or parcel of land, one automobile parking space for each 150 square feet of gross floor area. 
5.  Uses Not Specified. Where parking requirements for any use are not specified, parking shall be provided in an amount which the director finds adequate to prevent traffic congestion and excessive on-street parking. Whenever practical, such determination shall be based upon the requirements for the most comparable use specified in this section or other document as approved by the director. 
6.  Disabled Person Spaces. Disabled person spaces shall be provided in accordance with federal or state requirements as appropriate. 
7.  Bicycle and Motorcycle Spaces. Spaces for bicycles/motorcycles, with the means necessary to secure them against theft, shall be provided as follows: 
a.  Bicycles. Minimum of one space per 10 employees; 
b.  Motorcycles. Minimum of one space per 20 employees. 
8.  Carpool and Vanpool Spaces. Spaces for carpool and vanpool vehicles shall be provided as necessary to accommodate any such vehicle in a number necessary to serve the pool program at the establishment. These spaces may be counted toward the parking requirements for the use. 
(Ord. 651 § 11 (part), 1993: prior zoning ord. §§ 225.070-225.072, 225.074, 225.075) 
17.12.890 - Design and performance standards. 
    The following design and performance standards shall be met for development in the OP zone: 
A.  General requirements applicable to all development: 
1.  Access. 
a.  Driveways providing access to the site may be combined, relocated, or otherwise limited in order to minimize traffic conflicts and improve public safety. All driveways shall be constructed to comply with current city standards. All driveway locations are subject to the approval of the director of public works. 
b.  Entry drives into parking areas shall be of sufficient depth to provide for vehicle stacking appropriate to the size, location and intensity of the project served. 
c.  Access to drive-through facilities shall have a sufficient depth to provide vehicle stacking for not less than 7 automobiles at a depth of 24 feet per automobile per drive-through facility. (One bank teller station equals one such facility.) Such stacking space shall be designed in a manner which will not restrict access to or from parking spaces, aisles or driveways. 
d.  Internal roadways shall be constructed at the minimum widths necessary for safe circulation in order to minimize solar reflection and radiation. 
e.  Public transit opportunities for turnouts, shelters and pedestrian access shall be considered for all sites abutting expressways or arterial streets. 
f.  Access and bicycle parking facilities shall be considered for all sites abutting or adjacent to a planned bicycle and/or trail facility. 
2.  Paving. Required parking areas, as well as the maneuvering areas and driveways used for access thereto shall be paved with: (NOTE: Permits are required for any work done in the public right-of-way.) 
a.  Concrete surfacing to a minimum thickness of 31/2 inches with expansion joints as necessary; or 
b.  Asphalt surfacing, rolled to a smooth, hard surface having a minimum thickness of 2 inches after compaction, and laid over a base of crushed rock, gravel or other similar material compacted to a minimum thickness of 4 inches. This requirement may be modified as necessary to meet the soil conditions of the site as determined by a jobsite soil analysis by a qualified engineer. 
c.  For commercial truck parking and drive aisles, asphalt surfacing rolled to a smooth hard surface having a minimum thickness of 3 inches after compaction and, at a minimum, designed to accommodate a traffic index (TI) of 6.5 as calculated in accordance with the latest edition of the CalTrans Highway Design Manual. Large commercial projects may need a greater TI based upon their use. 
d.  Other alternative material that will provide at least the equivalent in dust free service, life and appearance of the materials and standards which would be employed for development pursuant to subsection A.2.a. or b. of this section. 
e.  The director of public works at the request of the director shall review and report on the adequacy of paving where modification of base is proposed under subsection A.2.b. of this section, or where alternative materials are proposed under subsection A.2.d. of this section. The director of public works may approve such modification or such alternative materials if, in his opinion, the evidence indicates compliance with subsection A.2.b. or d. of this section, as the case may be. 
3.  Size and Marking of Spaces. 
a.  No less than 65% of the parking spaces shall exhibit minimum dimensions of 9 feet in width by 20 feet in length, with required disabled person spaces at the dimensions as provided by law. (See subsection A.8.f. of this section.) 
b.  No more than 35% of the parking spaces may exhibit minimum dimensions of 8 feet in width by 17 feet in length. Such spaces shall be labelled "compact car only" in a manner acceptable to the director. (See subsection A.8.f. of this section.) 
c.  No parking shall occur in the first 10 feet of a required front or street side yard. 
d.  Where parking abuts an alley, the improved alley may be used as an aisle subject to approval of the parking lot design. 
e.  For parallel parking, minimum aisles are 12 feet and minimum parking space dimensions are 8 feet by 24 feet. 
  See the following diagrams for parking design options. 
4.  Circulation. Mark entrances and exits clearly. Vehicular circulation should be "one-way" in each aisle or "two-way" if the aisle width is a minimum of 20 feet. No aisle shall be less than 12 feet in width. 
5.  Loading Spaces. Such spaces shall be required as specified by the director. 
6.  Buffering. A masonry wall of not less than 6 feet in height shall be provided at the property line where the activities of a commercial use are anticipated to be incompatible with existing uses or to protect an area from adverse climatic conditions (wind, blowing sand, etc.). It shall be the burden of the applicant to prove to the satisfaction of the director or his designated representative that the project will not create or be subject to conditions necessitating a wall at the time of site plan review if a wall is not desired. 
7.  Building Design. 
a.  Building placement shall complement the design of adjoining sites to facilitate the convenient and logical functioning of neighboring uses. Where more than one building is to be developed on the site, the buildings shall be laid out in clusters or as necessary to create outdoor patios, courts and walkways in a landscaped setting. 
b.  Roof treatment shall be the same on the periphery of the building, except where a different treatment is required by the city building code. Where screening of rooftop equipment is necessary such screening shall be designed to complement the architecture of the building. 
c.  Building components such as windows, doors, eaves and parapets shall have good proportions and relationships to one another and shall utilize canopies and/or overhangs to shade windows during summer months. Buildings should be designed to utilize natural light for internal illumination through the use of courts, skylights, and other design options. 
d.  Utility doors, access panels, fire doors, loading docks, and other openings shall be treated as part of the architectural composition of buildings. 
e.  An exterior color scheme for all buildings or additions thereto shall be submitted with the building elevations for approval. The color scheme for existing neighboring buildings shall be indicated and considered. 
f.  Maximum feasible solar access and the direction of prevailing winds shall be considered in building design and orientation. 
g.  Additions to existing buildings shall conform to the design of the existing building. New building size, materials and color shall be consistent with the scale and design of the building to which it is attached. 
8.  Landscaping. 
a.  Landscape designs shall be directed toward the concept of an office park and shall be consistent throughout a project site. A combination of landscape materials should be arranged in a harmonious manner as an integral part of project design to enhance building design, public view, and interior spaces and provide buffers and transitions as needed. Unrelated and random choice or placement of plant materials shall be avoided; however, variety may be employed to intensify distinction between spaces or to strengthen a sense of place or movement, or to promote energy and water conservation and mitigate erosion. 
b.  The type, scale and proportion of landscape materials shall be appropriate to the site and/or structures to which they relate. 
c.  Plant material shall be selected for interest in its structure, texture, color, ultimate growth and water efficiency. Plants that are native or climate adaptive to the high desert area of Lancaster and/or others that will be hardy, harmonious with project design, and of good appearance, shall be used. Turf shall not be permitted except for recreational areas. Drought-resistant varieties of plants shall be used in accordance with Title 8, Chapter 8.50, Landscaping Installation and Maintenance of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
d.  Landscaped areas shall be irrigated by an automatic system with separate stations for each hydrozone. The irrigation system shall be designed and equipped to incorporate water conservation techniques such as drip systems, moisture sensors and anti-drain valves. Sprinkler systems shall be designed to prevent water from falling onto impervious surfaces. The system shall comply with Title 8, Chapter 8.50, Landscaping Installation and Maintenance of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
e.  All areas within a site which has been approved by the city for development as a site plan or approved phase thereof, which are not needed for buildings, sidewalks, vehicle access or parking, shall be landscaped. 
f.  All landscaped planter areas shall be completely bordered by a 6-inch P.C.C. curbing to prevent irrigation runoff and act as a wheel stop where necessary. Where used as a wheel stop, the 6-inch curb may be counted toward the required length of the parking space. 






g.  All interior areas of parking lots shall be landscaped with a minimum of one shade tree plus one shade tree for each 10 parking spaces plus one tree for each 2,000 square feet of paved area within the parking lot. 
h.  For lots of 5,000 square feet or less in area, not less than 5% of the total area(s) used for vehicle ingress, egress, circulation and parking shall be landscaped. Only landscaped areas exclusive of curbs shall qualify toward meeting this requirement and no landscaped area with a dimension of less than 3 feet shall be credited toward meeting the landscape requirement. 
i.  For lots of more than 5,000 square feet in area, not less than 7% of the total area(s) used for vehicle ingress, egress, circulation and parking shall be landscaped. Only landscaped areas exclusive of curbs shall qualify toward meeting this requirement and no landscaped area with a dimension of less than 3 feet shall be credited toward meeting the landscape requirement. 
j.  Where off-street parking areas abut local or collector public streets, such areas shall be separated from an abutting street by a continuous landscaped planter which extends parallel to the street frontage of the parking area. Said planter shall be a minimum of 10 feet in width exclusive of perimeter curbs. Up to 1/2 of the area of this required landscaped planter may be counted toward fulfilling the requirements of subsection A.8.h. or i. (See Section 17.12.800B.2., 5. regarding landscaping in yards.) 
k.  Trees and landscaping shall be utilized wherever possible to shade buildings as a means of enhancing energy conservation and provide protection against strong winds. Deciduous trees and/or vines should be used where passive solar heat gain is desired in buildings during the winter months. 
l.  No tree shall be less than 15-gallon size and at least 25% of the trees shall be 24-inch box size. At least 50% of all shrubs shall be of 5-gallon size, and no shrub shall be less than one-gallon size. Ground covers shall be planted no further apart than 6 inches on center. 
m.  All landscaped areas shall be continuously and properly maintained in good condition. (See definition in Section 17.04.240.) 
9.  Lighting. The intent of this requirement is to properly illuminate the site without producing an adverse impact on neighboring property. Exterior lighting of the building and site shall be provided, maintained and utilized during the hours of darkness in accordance with the following requirements: 
a.  Exterior lighting shall be part of the architectural concept. Fixtures, standards, and all exposed accessories shall be compatible with building design. 
b.  Placement of lighting shall be in accordance with recognized crime prevention and safety principles. 
10.  Outside Uses, Storage or Display. All outside uses, storage and display are prohibited in the OP zone. (See subsection A.14. of this section regarding refuse/recycling storage enclosures.) 
11.  Screening. 
a.  All rooftop mechanical equipment, ducts, tanks, satellite antennae, etc., shall be enclosed or otherwise screened from view from all sides of the building. (This requirement does not include wind powered turbines used for ventilation.) 
b.  Where mechanical equipment, junction boxes, backflow prevention devices, satellite antennae, meters and similar equipment is ground mounted it shall be enclosed or screened from view where necessary to preclude visibility from freeways, expressways and arterial streets and adjacent properties. 
c.  Loading areas shall be screened from view only where necessary to preclude visibility from public streets and highways and adjacent properties. 
d.  Parking areas adjacent to streets shall be screened with landscaping in the required yards and with low decorative walls, berms or combinations thereof. Where walls are used they shall be placed so as not to obscure landscaped areas from the street. 
12.  Service for Utilities. All on-site utility services shall be underground. 
13.  Signs. 
a.  The colors, materials and lighting of every sign shall be restrained and harmonious with the building and site to which it principally relates. 
b.  The number of graphic elements on a sign shall be held to the minimum needed to convey the sign's major message and shall be composed in proportion to the area of the sign face. 
c.  Use of individual letters for all signing is preferred and encouraged over "cabinet" signs. Where cabinet signs are utilized, such cabinet must be integrated into the design of the building or structure. 
d.  The light source of externally illuminated signs shall not be visible. 
e.  Street numbers of all buildings shall be prominently located and of sufficient size to be easily read from the street by public safety personnel (i.e., police, fire, ambulance). 
14.  Refuse/Recycling Storage Enclosures. All commercial and other nonresidential uses shall have on the same lot or parcel a refuse/recycling storage area at a ratio of 20 square feet of refuse/recycling storage area for each 1,000 square feet or portion thereof of net floor area of the facility. The enclosure shall be a minimum size of 6 feet in width by 18 feet in length (exterior dimension). Such storage areas shall be enclosed on 3 sides by a minimum 5-foot-high reinforced masonry or concrete wall with a sight-obscuring gate (chain link with slats is not acceptable) of noncombustible materials which is substantially the same height as the enclosing walls. The floor of the enclosure shall be of concrete construction. Such storage areas shall not be placed in a location which is openly exposed to a fronting street or a neighboring residential area. (See Refuse/Recycling Storage Enclosure Diagram in Section 17.12.230.) 
15.  Hazardous Materials. Applicants must obtain the approval of the Los Angeles County fire department prior to obtaining any city permits for any use which includes the use of hazardous materials or the storage of hazardous materials or wastes. 
16.  Radioactive Materials. The use of radioactive materials shall be limited to measuring, gauging or calibration equipment. 
17.  Noise. Uses which generate noise by the nature of their function and/or processes shall be required to demonstrate that the noise levels emitted from the use shall not exceed 65 dBA at any property line which abuts a commercial or residential zone or use. A detailed noise attenuation study by a qualified acoustical engineer may be required by the director or his designated representative to determine appropriate mitigation and methods to incorporate same into project design. Site design methods which may be utilized to reduce noise include: 
a.  The use of building setbacks and dedication of noise easements to increase the distance between the noise source and receiver; 
b.  The location of uses and orientation of buildings which are compatible with higher noise levels adjacent to noise generators or in clusters to shield more noise-sensitive areas and uses; 
c.  The placement of noise-tolerant land uses, such as parking areas, between the noise source and receiver; 
d.  The placement of noise-tolerant structures to shield noise-sensitive areas; 
e.  Clustering of office or commercial structures to reduce interior open space noise levels. 
18.  Electric Vehicle Charging Stations (EVCS). New commercial development shall provide for electric vehicle charging stations in the manner prescribed as follows: 
a.  New residential uses shall provide EVCSs in accordance with Section 17.08.150T. 
b.  New commercial, industrial and other uses with the building or land area, capacity, or numbers of employees listed herein shall provide the electrical service capacity necessary and all conduits and related equipment necessary to ultimately serve 2% of the total parking spaces with EVCSs in a manner approved by the building and safety official. Of these parking spaces, 1/2 shall initially be provided with the electric vehicle supply equipment necessary to function as on-line EVCSs upon completion of the project. The remainder shall be installed at such time as they are needed for use by customers, employees or other users. EVCSs shall be provided in disabled person parking spaces in accordance with state requirements. 
1)  Construction of a hospital of 500 or more beds, or expansion of a hospital of that size by 20% or more. 
2)  Construction of a post-secondary school (college), public or private, for 3,000 or more students, or expansion of an existing facility having a capacity of 3,000 or more students by an addition of at least 20%. 
3)  Hotels or motels with 500 or more rooms. 
4)  Industrial, manufacturing, or processing plants or industrial parks that employ more than 1,000 persons, occupy more than 40 acres of land, or contain more than 650,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
5)  Office buildings or office parks that employ more than 1,000 persons or contain more than 250,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
6)  Shopping centers or trade centers that employ 1,000 or more persons or contain 500,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
7)  Sports, entertainment, or recreation facilities that accommodate at least 4,000 persons per performance or that contain 1,500 or more fixed seats. 
8)  Transit projects (including but not limited to transit stations and park and ride lots). 
B.  When adjacent to a residential zone or use the following requirements shall also be applied: 
1.  Artificial lighting used to illuminate the premises shall be directed away from adjacent residential zone or use. 
2.  Where multistory buildings are to be utilized on lots abutting residentially zoned or used properties, such buildings shall be located or oriented in a manner which will minimize visual intrusion into neighboring property which is residentially zoned or used. (This may be accomplished by setting the building back from the abutting property line beyond the distance required for the yard, selective placement of windows, orienting the building in a manner which will not give occupants a direct view into the yards or windows of neighboring residents.) 
3.  No signs shall be placed in a manner which visually intrudes into adjoining property which is residentially zoned or used. 
4.  Trees shall be utilized as a means of improving the interface between commercial and residential uses where appropriate. 
5.  Buffering. When abutting property which is residentially zoned or used a masonry wall of not less than 6 feet in height shall be provided at the property line in accordance with the provisions for walls specified in Section 17.28.030C to minimize conflicts between commercial and/or residential uses. A 10-foot landscaped setback shall be placed next to the wall. This requirement shall be modified, where necessary to preclude interference with line-of-sight of a driver within 10 feet of any street, highway or alley, down to a maximum height of 42 inches. The design of the wall shall be considered as part of the site plan review. The site and any buildings thereon shall be designed to locate noise- and odor-generating equipment and activity in a manner which will have a minimal impact on abutting property which is residentially zoned or used. Such techniques may include, but are not limited to, no windows on the building wall(s) facing residentially zoned property, insulating structures housing equipment against noise, limitation of the hours of equipment operation, and other controls designed for specific problems. It shall be the burden of the applicant to prove that his project will not have a detrimental effect on neighboring residential property at the time of site plan review. 
C.  Air Quality. Uses located within 500 feet of any residential use or zone shall not emit smoke, dust, fumes or odors of any kind in conjunction with any process. All uses shall comply with the air quality standards of the Air Quality Management District (AQMD) or the city of Lancaster, whichever is more restrictive. 
(Ord. 713 § 5 (part), 1995; Ord. 711 §§ 18 (part), 19(C) (part), 1995; Ord. 651 § 11 (part), 1993: prior zoning ord. § 225.080) 
(Ord. No. 907, § 5, 10-28-08) 
Article VII. - Reserved[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 945, § 4, adopted July 13, 2010, amended the Code by repealing former Art. VII, §§ 17.12.900-17.12.1030, in its entirety. Former Art. VII pertained to the Regional Commercial (RC) Zone, and derived from the prior zoning ord., §§ 226.010, 226.020-226.022, 226.024, 226.026, 226.027, 226.040, 226.041, 226.050, 226.060, 226.061, 226.063, 226.070, 226.071, 226.074, 226.075, 226.080; Ord. 647 of 1993; Ords. 711 and 713 of 1995; Ord. 753 of 1999; Ord. 896 of 2008; Ord. No. 907, adopted October 28, 2008; Ord. No. 921, adopted June 9, 2009; and Ord. No. 924, adopted August 25, 2009. 

17.12.900-17.12.1030 - Reserved. 
Chapter 17.16 - INDUSTRIAL ZONES 
Article I. - In General 

17.16.010 - In general. 
    As used in this title, "industrial zones" means the LI, MI, HI and BP zones. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 240.000) 
17.16.020 - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of the I zones is to provide the means necessary to implement the city of Lancaster general plan, specifically: 
A.  The LI zone implements the "light industry" category; 
B.  The MI zone implements the "medium industry" category; and 
C.  The HI zone implements the "heavy industry" category; as set forth in the text of the general plan and as delineated on the general plan map. These zones are intended to be in accordance with applicable goals, objectives, policies and actions set forth by the plan. These zones are intended to allow the development of industrial uses thereby providing for the industrial and employment needs of the city and adjoining areas and business in an urban environment with full urban services. 
    It shall also be the intent of this zone to apply the provisions of this zone including but not limited to the property development regulations required herein to all new building lots created after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. 
    It shall not be the intent of this title to render previously legally created building lots or legally constructed buildings which do not comply with the new property development regulations or other requirements of this title to be nonconforming where these lots or buildings complied with the ordinances in effect at the time of their creation or construction. However, proof of compliance with ordinances in effect at the time of creation or construction shall be the sole burden of the applicant or property owner. Such proof may include building permits, minutes of council or commission action, case files, or other documentation. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 241 .010) 
17.16.030 - Prohibition. 
    A person shall not use any premises in the LI, MI or HI zones except as hereafter permitted in this title and subject to all regulations and conditions enumerated in this title. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 241.020) 
17.16.040 - Permitted uses-I zones. 
    The permitted uses of the I zones are grouped into categories of similar uses rather than exhaustive lists of single uses. Extensive examples are given for purposes of clarifying the types of uses allowed by each category. The following categories of uses are permitted in all of the I zones except where specific references limiting certain uses to the LI, MI or HI zones are made. All uses are subject to any stated exceptions, development requirements, and approval of a site plan as follows: 
A.  Existing Residential Uses. Such uses may continue to be used as a permitted use provided that such uses may not be expanded by a cumulative total of more than 500 square feet of floor area. 
B.  Commercial Uses. 
1.  Existing Nonconforming Commercial Uses. Such uses may continue to be used as a permitted use provided that such uses may not be expanded beyond their ability to meet current parking requirements, and design and performance standards related to the expansion, on their existing site. 
2.  Existing Conforming and New Commercial Uses. Such uses shall include but not be limited to animal hospital (veterinarian), answering service, banks, barber and beauty shops, dry cleaning, equipment rental, insurance, medical and dental offices, mobilehome sales, office supplies, real estate, restaurants, and similar uses, which are primarily intended to provide goods and services to the businesses and employees which are located or expected to locate within the zone. Uses which meet the definition of an alcohol sales establishment as contained in Section 17.42.020 shall be required to obtain a conditional use permit, except as otherwise noted under Section 17.16.060. 
C.  Aircraft-Related Uses. This category includes but is not limited to the manufacture, storage, maintenance, repair or overhaul of aircraft or missile components, parts, accessories, equipment and power plants and is permitted only in the HI zone. 
D.  Automobile, Boat, Equipment, Motorcycle, Truck, Tractor, Sales, Service, Repair, Accessories and Parts. This category includes but is not limited to motor vehicle dealerships including recreational vehicles, auto parts stores: tires, batteries and accessory stores; body and frame shops, auto upholstery shops, brake shops, car wash, muffler shops, radiator shops, repair shops, service stations, and similar uses. All repair activities within the LI zone shall be conducted within an enclosed building. Auto service and repair uses, body and frame shops, heavy equipment repair and tire sales on lots within 300 feet of residentially zoned property shall be required to mitigate any conditions which are detrimental, or potentially detrimental, to the reasonable use of the residentially zoned property to the satisfaction of the director. 
  This category does not include automobile impound yards (See Section 17.16.060), automobile wrecking yards, or salvage operations, (See subsection E of this section.) 
E.  Automobile Dismantling Yards, Scrap Metal Processing Yards, and Similar Metal Salvage Operations. This category includes but is not limited to automobile impound yards, automobile wrecking, metal salvage operations, and junk and salvage operations. All uses in this category shall be permitted only in the HI zone. Any such use in this category on lots within 300 feet of residentially zoned property shall be conducted within an enclosed building and required to mitigate any conditions which are detrimental, or potentially detrimental, to the reasonable use of the residentially zoned property to the satisfaction of the director. (See subsection A.10. or 15. of Section 17.16.220, as applicable.) 
  This category does not include recycling facilities as defined in this title or the smelting of metals. (See Section 17.16.070.) 
F.  Building Trades and Related Uses. This category includes, but is not limited to appliance sales, blueprint services, building supplies, cabinet making, carpenter shop, contractor equipment yard, electricians and electrical supply, engineers and surveyors, fence contractors, glass stores, janitorial service and supply, landscape materials (including nurseries), lumber yards, pool contractors, plumbing sales, spa sales, truss manufacturing, wood stove sales and similar uses. Batch plants and concrete transit mix uses shall be permitted only in the HI zone provided that batch plants and concrete transit mix uses within 300 feet of residentially zoned property shall be required to mitigate any conditions which are detrimental, or potentially detrimental, to the reasonable use of the residentially zoned property to the satisfaction of the director. (See Section 17.16.220A.10.) 
G.  Communication Facilities and Services, Public and Private. This category includes but is not limited to communications equipment, duplicating, lithographers, microwave stations, photocopying, photo engravers, printers or publishers, radio and television broadcast studios, telegraph offices, telephone repeater stations, tourist information centers, and similar uses. 
  This category does not include radio and television transmission towers or wireless telecommunication facilities. (See Section 17.40.640). 
H.  Food Manufacturing, Processing, Wholesale Sales and Storage. This category includes but is not limited to bottling plants, breweries, coffee roasting, dairy products, dextrine manufacturing, fruit and produce, malt products, meat processing, oleomargarine, sodium glutamate, soft drinks, vitamin tablets, wineries, and similar uses. All such uses within the LI zone shall be conducted within an enclosed building. 
  This category does not include dairies, lard manufacturing, pickles, sausage, sauerkraut, slaughter houses, distillation of vinegar, or the canning of other fish or meats and similar uses. (See Section 17.16.070.) 
I.  Manufacturing-General. This category includes but is not limited to assembly plants, automotive, beds and bedding manufacturing, billboards, bone products, building materials, brushes, ceramics, clay and cement products, doors, drugs, dry goods, electric and electronic products, felt, fiberglass, fur products, furniture, glass, hair products, heating equipment, jewelry, leather products, machine shops, mobilehomes and factory-built housing, paper products, plastic products, recreational vehicles, springs, starch, stone products, textiles, tobacco products, tools, uses which manufacture products from recycled materials, welding, wood products, wool and woolen products, wrought iron and similar manufacturing uses. All such uses within the LI zone shall be conducted within an enclosed building. Any such use in this category on lots within 300 feet of residentially zoned property shall be required to mitigate any conditions which are detrimental, or potentially detrimental, to the reasonable use of the residentially zoned property to the satisfaction of the director. (See Section 17.16.220A.10.) 
  This category does not include cement manufacturing, explosives, foundries, paper manufacturing, manufacturing of plastics, or tanning of animal hides. (See Section 17.16.070.) 
J.  Public Safety Facilities and Services. This category includes but is not limited to ambulance service, fire stations, highway patrol stations, municipal maintenance yards, police stations, and similar uses. 
K.  Public Services and Utilities. This category includes but is not limited to the following uses: 
1.  Electric transmission substations including microwave facilities used in conjunction therewith; 
2.  Gas Distribution Depots. This use is permitted in the MI and HI zones only; 
3.  Publicly owned uses necessary to the maintenance of the public health, convenience or general welfare, including federal, state, county, city, or special district offices, libraries and court facilities; 
4.  Public utility service yards; 
5.  Water reservoirs, dams, treatment plants, gauging stations, pumping stations, tanks, wells, and any use normal and appurtenant to the storage and distribution of water. Exception: This use is not subject to site plan review (Section 17.16.120). 
L.  Recycling Facilities. This category includes but is not limited to reverse vending machines, small and large collection facilities and light processing facilities. Heavy processing facilities shall be permitted in the HI zone only. All uses in this category are subject to the criteria and standards of Section 17.40.300. (See definitions in Section 17.04.240.) This category also includes uses which reuse recyclable materials. 
M.  Rental Establishments. This category includes, but is not limited to, automobile, clothing, equipment (including heavy equipment in the MI and HI zones), furniture, hospital equipment, recreational vehicles, and similar rentals. 
N.  Repair Services. This category includes but is not limited to appliance repair, gunsmiths; heating, refrigeration, and air conditioning repair; jewelry repair, locksmiths, shoe repair, watch repair, and similar repair services. 
O.  Research and Development. This category includes but is not limited to laboratories and facilities for scientific research, development and testing including administrative offices. 
  This category does not include the development and testing of hazardous materials, biological or chemical warfare agents, or explosives. (See Section 17.16.070.) 
P.  Schools-Specialized Training. This category includes but is not limited to manual training, shop work, or the repair and maintenance of machinery or mechanical equipment. 
  This category does not include business and professional schools as identified (in Section 17.12.040) in the C zone. 
Q.  Sexually Oriented Businesses. This category includes but is not limited to adult bookstores, adult motels, adult motion picture theaters, adult theaters, adult cabarets, escort agencies, massage parlors, semi-nude model studios, and similar uses subject to the requirements of Ordinance No. 619 and is permitted only in the HI zone. (See Article IV of Chapter 17.16.) 
  R. Warehousing, Wholesaling and Storage. This category includes but is not limited to cold storage distributors, ministorage warehouse, moving van and storage, truck terminals, and warehouses. (See Section 17.16.220A.10.) 
  S. Water reservoirs, dams, treatment plants, gauging stations, pumping stations, tanks, wells, and any use normal and appurtenant to the storage and distribution of water. Exception: This use is not subject to site plan review. (Section 17.16.120.) 
  T. Other Uses. This category includes those uses which do not fall into any other category, and are not temporary uses, uses subject to director's review, or uses subject to permit in this zone, which in the opinion of the director are consistent with the purpose and intent of this zone and similar to other uses permitted herein. 
(Ord. 896 § 1 (Exh. A § 22), 2008; Ord. 793 § 1 (Exh. A), 2001; Ord. 753 § 1 (Exh. A § 3 (part)), 1999; Ord. 711 §§ 30 (part), 32, 1995; prior zoning ord. § 241.021) 
17.16.050 - Accessory and temporary uses. 
A.  The following uses are considered as accessory uses to the permitted uses in the I zones: 
1.  Accessory buildings and structures customarily used in conjunction therewith. 
a.  Cargo containers may be used as accessory buildings and structures in the I zones, subject to the following: 
1)  Containers shall meet the applicable front yard, side yard, and rear yard requirements contained in Section 17.16.130.B.2. 
2)  Containers shall only be used for incidental uses that are permissible in the zone. 
3)  Containers shall not be stacked on top of each other or on any other structure. 
4)  Containers shall not encroach upon, block, obstruct, or reduce in any manner any required exits, windows or vent shafts of structures, or any required parking spaces, driveways, private streets, or public rights of way. 
5)  Containers shall not be used for human habitation or occupied by individuals for any reason. 
6)  Containers shall not have any electrical, plumbing, heating or air conditioning installations or systems, and shall not be connected to a power source. 
7)  Refuse, garbage, trash and debris, as well as hazardous substances, as defined by state or federal law, shall not be placed or stored in, against, on, or under a cargo container at any time. 
8)  Containers shall require a container permit. The number and location of cargo containers used as accessory buildings or structures in the I zones shall be subject to the review and prior written approval of the directors of planning and housing and neighborhood revitalization, or their duly authorized representatives. Upon such approval, compliance with all conditions of approval, and payment of a container permit fee in an amount established by city council, a container permit shall be issued. 
B.  The following uses are considered as temporary uses in the I zones: 
1.  The placement and use of a temporary office in conjunction with a construction or development project undertaken pursuant to an active building permit. A temporary office shall be placed on the lot or parcel which is part of the project, or on property adjoining the construction or development site with the written consent of the property owner. The placement of a temporary office shall not occur until the building permit is obtained. The temporary office shall be removed within thirty (30) days after the permit is expired, revoked, or finalized. 
2.  Commercial coaches used as temporary offices subject to the provisions of Article X of Chapter 17.40 and this zone. ;ml1; 3. ..... a. 
b.  Cargo containers may be used for the temporary construction storage described in (a) of this subsection. A cargo container approved pursuant to this subsection shall not require a separate permit. The number and location of cargo containers used for temporary construction storage shall be subject to the review and prior written approval of the building official and directors of planning and housing and neighborhood revitalization or their duly authorized representatives. Application for approval of cargo containers for temporary construction storage shall be made on a city-approved form and shall indicate the number of the building permit obtained for the construction or development project for which the temporary construction storage is requested, the size of each cargo container, the proposed location of each container on the property, and the date on which each container shall be placed on the property. 
c.  The time period for which a cargo container may be used for temporary construction storage is limited to the time when the building permit is active. An active building permit means one that has not expired, been revoked, or been finalized. Cargo containers used for temporary construction storage shall be removed from the property within thirty (30) calendar days of the expiration, revocation or finalization of a building permit. 
d.  Cargo containers used for temporary construction storage shall not exceed eight feet in width, eight feet six inches in height, and forty (40) feet in length. 
e.  Cargo containers used for temporary construction storage shall conform to the following standards: 
1)  Cargo containers shall be set back a minimum of five feet from any property line and a minimum of ten (10) feet from any structure. 
2)  Cargo containers shall not be stacked on top of each other or on any other structure. 
3)  Cargo containers shall not encroach upon, block, obstruct, or reduce in any manner any required exits, windows or vent shafts of structures, or any parking spaces, driveways, private streets, or public rights of way. 
4)  Cargo containers shall not be used for human habitation or occupied by individuals for any reason. 
5)  Cargo containers shall not have any electrical, plumbing, heating or air conditioning installations or systems, and shall not be connected to a power source. 
6)  Refuse, garbage, trash and debris, as well as hazardous substances, as defined by state or federal law, shall not be placed or stored in, against, on, or under a cargo container at any time. ;ml1; 4. ..... a. 
b.  The number and location of cargo containers used for temporary industrial storage shall be subject to the review and prior written approval of the building official and directors of planning and housing and neighborhood revitalization or their duly authorized representatives. A cargo container approved under this subsection shall not require a separate permit. Application for approval of cargo containers for temporary industrial storage shall be made on a city-approved form and shall indicate the number of the building permit obtained for the repair, remodeling, alteration or other work for which the temporary industrial storage is requested, the size of each cargo container, the proposed location of each container on the property, and the date on which each container shall be placed on the property. 
c.  The time period for which a cargo container may be used for temporary industrial storage is limited to the time when the building permit is active. An active building permit means one that has not expired, been revoked, or been finalized. Cargo containers used for temporary industrial storage shall be removed from the property within thirty (30) calendar days of the expiration, revocation or finalization of a building permit. 
d.  Cargo containers used for temporary industrial storage shall not exceed eight feet in width, eight feet six inches in height, and forty (40) feet in length. 
e.  Cargo containers used for temporary industrial storage shall conform to the standards set forth in Section 17.16.050.B.3.e. ;ml1; 5. ..... a. 
b.  Cargo containers used for emergency industrial storage shall require a container permit. The number and location of cargo containers used for emergency industrial storage shall be subject to the review and prior written approval of the directors of planning and housing and neighborhood revitalization or their duly authorized representatives. Upon such approval, and payment of a container permit fee in an amount established by city council, a container permit shall be issued. 
c.  Cargo containers may be used for emergency industrial storage for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) calendar days. This use may be extended for an additional ten (10) calendar days upon the prior written approval of the directors of planning and housing and neighborhood revitalization. 
d.  Cargo containers used for emergency industrial storage shall not exceed eight feet in width, eight feet six inches in height, and forty (40) feet in length. 
e.  Cargo containers used for emergency industrial storage shall conform to the standards set forth in Section 17.16.050.B.3.e. ;ml1; 6. ..... a. 
b.  Cargo containers used for relocation storage shall require a container permit. The number and location of cargo containers used for relocation storage shall be subject to the review and prior written approval of the directors of planning and housing and neighborhood revitalization or their duly authorized representatives. Upon such approval, and payment of a container permit fee in an amount established by city council, a container permit shall be issued. 
c.  Cargo containers may be used for relocation storage for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) calendar days. This use may be extended for an additional ten (10) calendar days upon the prior written approval of the directors of planning and housing and neighborhood revitalization. 
d.  Cargo containers used for relocation storage shall not exceed eight feet in width, eight feet six inches in height, and forty (40) feet in length. 
e.  Cargo containers used for relocation storage shall conform to the standards set forth in Section 17.16.050.B.3.e., except as provided in f. of this subsection. 
f.  Cargo containers used for relocation storage may be placed in parking lots so long as they do not reduce the number of required parking spaces. 
C.  Electric Vehicle Charging Station. An electric vehicle charging station (EVCS) shall be permitted as an accessory use within any existing legal single-family or multiple-family residential garage or carport, or within any existing legal commercial parking space in a parking lot or in a parking garage, subject to all applicable city code requirements and the following: 
1.  Electric vehicle charging stations (EVCS) for public use shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The EVCSs shall be located in a manner which will be easily seen by the public for informational and security purposes and shall be illuminated during evening business hours; and 
b.  Be located in desirable and convenient parking locations which will serve as an incentive for the use of electric vehicles; and 
c.  The EVCS pedestals shall be protected as necessary to prevent damage by automobiles; and 
d.  The EVCS pedestals shall be designed to minimize potential damage by vandalism and to be safe for use in inclement weather; and 
e.  Complete instructions and appropriate warnings concerning the use of the EVCS shall be posted on a sign in a prominent location on each station for use by the operator; and 
f.  One standard nonilluminated sign, not to exceed 4 square feet in area and 10 feet in height, may be posted for the purpose of identifying the location of each cluster of EVCSs; and 
g.  The EVCS may be on a timer that limits the use of the station to the normal business hours of the use(s) which it serves to preclude unauthorized use after business hours. 
2.  Electric vehicle charging stations for private use shall: 
a.  Be located in a manner which will not allow public access to the charging station; and 
b.  Comply with subsections C.1.c., d. and e. of this section. 
D.  Mini Wireless Telecommunication Facilities. This category includes all mini wireless telecommunication facilities subject to the requirements of Section 17.40.640. 
E.  Cargo containers that are present on private real property, for any use or purpose, on the effective date of this section shall be removed within six months from the effective date, unless the property owner obtains the requisite approvals and permits in conjunction with accessory or temporary uses allowed in Section 17.16.050.B. and otherwise complies with all regulations pertaining to cargo containers. 
This subsection does not apply to the following real property: 
1.  Real property owned, leased, rented, occupied or used by a public agency or entity; 
2.  Real property owned, leased, rented, occupied or used by a nonpublic or private school. For purposes of this subsection, "nonpublic school" means a private, nonsectarian school that enrolls individuals with exceptional needs pursuant to an individualized education program and is certified by the California Department of Education. For purposes of this subsection, "private school" means a full-time day school that provides instruction in the several branches of study required to be taught in the public schools of the state, by persons capable of teaching, and that files an annual private school affidavit as required by the California Department of Education. For purposes of this subsection, "private school" does not include a school that provides instruction in a building used for residential purposes. A nonpublic or private school is not exempt unless it is operating in conformity with all pertinent land use and technical code regulations. 
(Ord. 753 § 1 (Exh. A § 2 (part), 1999; Ord. 713 § 3 (part), 1995; prior zoning ord. § 241.023) 
(Ord. No. 921, §§ 18-20, 6-9-09) 
17.16.060 - Uses subject to director's review and approval. 
    If site plans and/or other pertinent information required by the director for the proposed use are first submitted to and approved by the director in accordance with Article VI of Chapter 17.32, premises in the I zones may be used for the following uses: 
A.  Uses subject to director's review in all I zones: 
1.  Auctions and swap meets, 
2.  Boarding kennels, 
3.  Carnivals, subject to the provisions of Chapter 9.46, 
4.  Christmas trees and wreaths, the sale of, between November 1st and December 25th, both dates inclusive, to the extent permitted by other statutory and ordinance provisions. Any structures, facilities and materials used for the sale of trees and wreaths shall be removed from the premises by December 31st of the same calendar year, and the property restored to a clean condition, 
5.  Crops, field, tree, bush, berry and row, including nursery stock, flowers and vines, provided that no sludge or biosolid material shall be applied to any land as a soil amendment. Roadside stands, retail sale of crops grown on the premises, and signs advertising products produced on the premises, 
6.  Day nursery, children, 
7.  Dwelling units, as follows: 
a.  One dwelling unit within a building on the same lot or parcel of land which is legally being used so as to require the continuous supervision of a caretaker and his immediate family, or 
b.  Dwelling units within a building or premises used for agricultural purposes, which dwelling units are occupied only by persons employed on the same premises, and their immediate families, or 
c.  Where subsection A.7.a. of this section permits the use of a dwelling unit for a caretaker, a mobilehome containing one dwelling unit may be used in lieu of such dwelling unit for a period not to exceed 6 consecutive months in any 12 month period. Or, if intended for a residence for up to the maximum limit of 5 years, the mobilehome shall comply with the provisions of Section 17.08.370C for foundation systems, 
8.  Parking. Joint usage or leased (see Section 17.16.210B), 
9.  Wild Animals. Wild animals may be temporarily used, kept or maintained for a period not to exceed: 
a.  Ten days in conjunction with the lawful operation of a circus or animal exhibition, or 
b.  Sixty days where used in motion picture and television production, except that the director may, where he finds that such extension is consistent with the intent of this section and neither detrimental to the public welfare or to the property of other persons located in the vicinity thereof, extend such time period for not to exceed 30 additional days, and 
c.  Provided said animals are used, kept, or maintained pursuant to and in compliance with, all regulations of the city of Lancaster and the Los Angeles County department of animal control, 
10.  Minor co-located and stealth wireless telecommunication facilities subject to the requirements of Section 17.60.640, 
11.  Wine-tasting establishment, including dining and sales associated with such operation, operated under a Type 02 liquor license issued by State ABC. In approving such use, the director may impose conditions of operation as provided in Chapter 17.42, except that distance separation requirements shall not be mandatory, 
12.  Temporary alcohol sales, subject to the requirements of Section 17.42.140, 
13.  Solar electrical generating plants only, in the HI zone. (Note: All other electrical generating plants require a conditional use permit in the HI zone; see Section 17.16.070C.1); 
14.  Small wind energy systems (co-located), subject to the requirements of section 17.40.690; 
15.  Emergency shelters, only in the LI zone. 
B.  Uses subject to director's review only in the MI zone: 
1.  Automobile impound yards; 
C.  Uses subject to director's review only in the HI zone: 
1.  Crushing of used asphalt or concrete, rock, or other materials for use as an aggregate. 
2.  Major wireless telecommunication facilities located more than 1,000 feet from residentially zoned property, subject to the requirements of Section 17.40.640. Facilities located within 1,000 feet of residentially zoned property shall be subject to a conditional use permit (see Section 17.16.070.A.4). 
(Ord. 898 § 2, 2008; Ord. 896 § 1 (Exh. A § 23), 2008; Ord. 758 § 1 (Exh. A § 4 (part)), 1999; Ord. 753 § 1 (Exh. A §§ 7, 8), 1999; prior zoning ord. § 241.024) 
(Ord. No. 941, § 1, 2-9-2010; Ord. No. 989, § 6, 4-9-2013; Ord. No. 999, § 6, 8-26-2014) 
17.16.070 - Uses subject to conditional use permits. 
    The uses subject to permit in the I zones are grouped into categories of similar uses rather than exhaustive lists of single uses. Extensive examples are given for purposes of clarifying the types of uses in each category. The following categories of uses may be permitted in the I zones provided a conditional use permit has first been obtained as provided in Article I of Chapter 17.16, and while such permit is in full force and effect in conformity with conditions of such permit for: 
A.  Uses subject to permits in all I zones: 
1.  Alcohol sales establishments as defined in and subject to the requirements of Section 17.42.020, including: 
a.  Incidental off-site alcohol sales establishment, 
b.  Incidental on-site alcohol sales establishment, 
c.  Primary off-site alcohol sales establishment, 
d.  Primary on-site alcohol sales establishment, 
e.  Bona fide restaurant, 
f.  Liquor store, 
g.  Mini-mart with alcohol sales, 
h.  Nightclub with alcohol sales, 
2.  Radio and television transmission towers, 
3.  Research and Development. This category includes but is not limited to laboratories and facilities for scientific research, development and testing including administrative offices involving the use of hazardous materials. Agricultural and biological research involving sludge or biosolid material shall be conducted only within an enclosed building or suitable containment vessel. 
This category does not include the development and testing of biological or chemical warfare agents or explosives; 
4.  Major Wireless Telecommunication Facilities. This category includes all major wireless telecommunication facilities in the LI zone and major wireless telecommunication facilities in the HI zone within 1,000 feet of residentially zoned property subject to the requirements of Section 17.40.640. Co-located and stealth communication facilities are subject only to director's review and shall not require a conditional use permit; 
5.  Mini-marts and Nightclub without alcohol. 
B.  Uses subject to permits only in the MI zone: 
1.  Recycling Facilities. This category includes only heavy processing facilities, 
2.  Storage. This category includes only rock and gravel storage in excess of 2,000 tons; 
C.  Uses subject to permits in the MI and HI zones: 
1.  Electrical generating plants, all types except solar (see Section 17.16.060A.13), 
2.  Storage. This category is limited to the following: 
a.  Gas, above ground storage in excess of 500,000 cubic feet, 
b.  Storage of oil, gasoline or petroleum products in any quantity exceeding 100,000 gallons, 
3.  Waste Disposal. This category is limited to waste disposal facilities as defined in Section 17.04.240; 
D.  Uses subject to permits only in the HI zone: 
1.  Agricultural Related Uses. This category includes but is not limited to cattle sales yards, dairies, hog ranches and livestock feed yards; provided that, no sludge or biosolid material shall be applied to any land as a soil amendment, 
2.  Chemical Manufacturing. This category includes but is not limited to the manufacture of: ammonia, asphalt, caustic soda, celluloid, cellulose, chlorine gas, coal tar products, creosote, fertilizers, glue, guncotton, gypsum, hydrocyanic acid products, lime, phenol, plastics, potash, pyroxylin products, size, soda ash, synthetic ammonia, and similar uses. All uses in this category will be subjected to close scrutiny in terms of the relative safety of such uses and their potential effects on the community with emphasis on their impact on odor and air quality in general; specifically their handling of hazardous materials and waste. 
This category does not include the manufacturing of food, 
3.  Food Manufacturing, Processing, Sale and Storage. This category is limited to the following food products: canning of fish or meat, fat rendering, gelatin, lard, meat packing, pickles, sausage, sauerkraut, slaughterhouses, tallow and vinegar, 
4.  Hazardous Waste Facility. This category is subject to the provisions of Article VII of Chapter 17.40, 
5.  Manufacturing-General. This category is limited to the following: explosives, smelting and casting of metals, paper manufacturing, plastic manufacturing or tanning of animal hides, 
6.  Pest control; 
E.  Uses subject permits to the LI and HI zones: College or university campuses. 
(Ord. 898 § 3, 2008; Ord. 896 § 1 (Exh. A §§ 24, 25), 2008; Ord. 761 § 1, 1999; Ord. 758 § 1 (Exh. A §§ 5, 6), 1999; Ord. 753 § 1 (Exh. A § 9), 1999; prior zoning ord. § 241.025) 
(Ord. No. 1007, § 5, 10-13-2015) 
17.16.080 - Interpretation. 
    Where a conflict in interpretation occurs regarding application of Section 17.16.030, 17.16.040, 17.16.050, 17.16.060 or 17.16.070 to any specific case, the director shall determine the interpretation. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 241.026) 
17.16.090 - Adjustments. 
    The director may reduce the required minimum lot width, minimum lot depth, yard requirements and parking requirements by an amount not to exceed 10%; may increase the maximum height regulations and maximum sign area by an amount not to exceed 10% of the amount specified by the I zones; and may increase the floor area ratio (FAR) up to an amount not to exceed 0.8; where the director finds that the applicant has demonstrated that: 
A.  There are special circumstances or exceptional physical characteristics applicable to the property including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings involved which are not generally applicable to other properties in the same vicinity with the same zoning; and 
B.  An adjustment (if authorized) will not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations on other properties in the same vicinity with the same zoning; and 
C.  The strict application of the requirements sought to be reduced or increased would result in practical difficulties and unnecessary hardship which is inconsistent with the purpose of the requirements. 
D.  In the case of parking requirements only, a program exists whereby employees utilize, or will utilize, public transit, carpools, vanpools, bicycles, motorcycles, or walk to work, and that sufficient parking has been provided for the modes of travel utilized. 
E.  Approval of the application will result in the need for less grading and disturbance of soils and natural vegetation. 
F.  Approval of the application will result in the retention/preservation of native vegetation; particularly Joshua trees, California Juniper or Creosote shrubs. 
G.  Approval of the application will not diminish the visual appearance of the property or neighborhood. 
H.  Approval of the application will not increase the overall average of the FAR to more than the maximum specified for the zone on all I zoned properties within 500 feet of the site. 
Any reduction or increase greater than those specified in this section shall be subject to the granting of a variance. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 241.027) 
17.16.100 - Height regulations. 
    The height of buildings or structures shall be as follows: 
A.  No building or structure shall exceed: 
1.  In the LI zone: height of 50 feet; 
2.  In the MI zone: a height of 60 feet; 
3.  In the HI zone: a height of 70 feet. 
This section does not apply to conditional use permit uses which shall be subject to Article I of Chapter 17.32. (See Article XII of Chapter 17.40 for general exceptions.) 
B.  No commercially or industrially used building in the I zones which is within 100 feet of any RR, SRR or R zone shall exceed a height of 2 stories or 35 feet, whichever is less. 
C.  No building may be constructed which would shade any existing active solar energy system on adjoining property without the consent of the affected property owner. (See subsection 1 in the definition of solar energy system in Section 17.04.240.) 
(Prior zoning ord. § 241.030) 
17.16.110 - Exception for solar systems. 
    Solar collectors may exceed the height limit when mounted on the roof of a legal, conforming building. The right to exceed the height limit shall be exercised only in the event that: there is no other practical means or location for achieving an efficient placement on the building or site in question; such collectors may exceed the height limit only to the extent necessary to achieve efficient placement; in no case shall such solar collectors (or related equipment) encroach more than 5 feet beyond the limit. Also the placement of a solar collector shall not shade or otherwise diminish the efficiency of existing solar collectors on neighboring property, or preclude such property from sufficient solar access to successfully operate a solar energy system sufficient to serve the needs of the business or occupants. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 241.031) 
17.16.120 - Site plan review required-Fee. 
A.  A site plan (with vicinity map) and building elevations, drawn to scale and reflecting the accurate dimensions of the buildings and property, shall be required of any person seeking to erect new buildings or structures, make additions to any existing buildings or structures, site temporary commercial coaches, or otherwise grade, improve or develop any lot or portion thereof for a permitted use prior to the issuance of any grading or building permit. The site plan shall be accompanied by an appropriate development application and both shall be filed with the planning department. The director or his designated representative shall review the site plan for conformance with the provisions of this title. The site plan shall demonstrate conformance with height regulations, property development regulations, sign regulations or a sign program required by the city for multiple-tenant projects, off-street parking requirements, the adopted City of Lancaster Design Guidelines, any other requirements established for the adopted zoning designation in which the property(ies) is (are) located, and any other applicable city ordinances, standards, guidelines or policies. In addition to the conditions and requirements imposed by the ordinance codified in this title and other city ordinances, standards, guidelines and policies, the director may place conditions on the approval of the site plan where the director finds that such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. At such time as the site plan complies with the requirements of the ordinance codified in this title and other city ordinances, standards, guidelines or policies, the site plan shall be approved by the director or his designated representative. The site plan approval shall be valid for two (2) years from the date of approval. A site plan shall be considered "used" when the slab of a major building in the project is poured and inspected, although circumstances in each case may vary and the final determination as to "use" of a site plan review shall be made by the director. Three (3) one-year extensions of the approval may be granted by the director provided such written request for an extension is received not less than sixty (60) days prior to expiration, and any significant environmental changes which have occurred since the original approval have been addressed. Any extension granted shall be conditioned to comply with the city's current design guidelines as adopted by the city council, unless the applicant can demonstrate to the director's satisfaction that such compliance will impose an undue hardship on the project. In the event the site plan or an extension thereof is denied, the applicant may appeal the decision in accordance with Section 17.36.030. All projects constructed in accordance with an approved site plan shall be permanently maintained as approved. Any desired subsequent changes shall be submitted for approval as an amendment to the site plan. Prior to occupancy the site shall be inspected for compliance with the site plan. All improvements shall be installed and functioning before occupancy will be allowed. 
Where the director determines that the requirements of this section surpass the city's need for project review of a particular development proposal, the director may exercise discretion and apply the provisions of Article VI of Chapter 17.32, Director's Review, in its place. 
B.  When the appropriate development application is filed per subsection A of this section it shall be accompanied by the filing fee established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 711 § 22 (part), 1995; prior zoning ord. §§ 241.040, 241.041) 
(Ord. No. 924, § 1, 8-25-09; Ord. No. 956, § 3, 1-11-2011) 
17.16.130 - Property development regulations. 
A.  General. 
1.  No new building or commercial coach shall be erected, constructed, moved onto, or established on an existing legal lot or parcel of land unless said building or commercial coach shall comply with all of the regulations set forth in city ordinances, standards, guidelines or policies and subsection B of this section, or Article X of Chapter 17.40 which are pertinent to its placement on said lot or parcel. 
2.  No existing building or commercial coach located on an existing legal lot or parcel of land shall be converted, enlarged or moved unless said building, or addition thereto, shall comply with all of the regulations set forth in city ordinances, standards, guidelines or policies and subsection B of this section, or Article X of Chapter 17.40 which are pertinent to its placement on said lot or parcel. 
3.  No new lot shall be created or any building, or portion thereof, existing on such new lot be used, unless said lot and said building location shall comply with all of the regulations set forth in city ordinances, standards, guidelines or policies and subsection B of this section, which are pertinent to the area and dimensions for new lots and those regulations pertinent to the placement or location of buildings on said lot. 
B.  I Zones. Wherever property is designated as an I zone on the zoning map the following regulations, specific or general, shall apply: 
1.  Lot Dimensions. The following minimum lot dimensions shall apply to all lots created after the adoption of this section. (Those lots which were legally created, prior to the adoption of this section, in compliance with ordinances in effect at the time of their creation need not comply unless involved in a new subdivision or change in lot configuration other than a lot line adjustment as provided in Title 16 of this code.) 
Zone Minimum 
Lot Area Minimum 
Lot 
Width* Minimum 
Lot 
Depth LI 10,000 sq. ft. 180 ft. 100 ft. MI 20,000 sq. ft. 100 ft. 150 ft. HI 20,000 sq. ft. 100 ft. 150 ft.  
*  Also denotes minimum street frontage. 

  See Section 17.40.070, 17.40.080, 17.40.090 A or 17.40.090B in the event public use or required street dedication would reduce the net lot area, lot width, or lot depth of an existing lot to less than the required minimum. 
2.  Yard Requirements. Yards shall be provided as follows: 
  See Sections 17.40.093, 17.40.095 and 17.40.097 in the event yard requirements must be reduced for street widening or transit stops. 
a.  Front yard-LI, MI and HI zones: 
1)  Adjoining a freeway, expressway, or arterial street: 20 feet where the building is 35 feet or less in height. The front yard for buildings which are more than 35 feet in height shall be established on a case-by-case basis by the director to mitigate any adverse or potentially adverse impact on neighboring properties, but in no case be less than 25 feet. 
2)  All other properties: 
a)  LI zone: 15 feet; 
b)  MI and HI zone: 10 feet. 
b.  Street side yard-LI, MI and HI zones: 
1)  Adjoining a freeway, expressway or arterial street: same as subsection B.2.a.1) of this section; 
2)  All other properties: equal to the front or street side yard, as appropriate, required in the abutting zone, or 10 feet whichever is greater. 
c.  Interior side yard: 
1)  LI zone: 10 feet; 
2)  MI and HI zone: none. 
d.  Rear yard: 
1)  LI zone: 10 feet; 
2)  MI and HI zone: 10 feet when adjoining freeway, expressway, or arterial streets. Other properties none. 
e.  Front and street side yards of properties developed after the adoption of this section shall be landscaped for a minimum depth of 10 feet measured from the back of the sidewalk. Rear yards shall be landscaped only where adjoining a freeway, expressway or arterial street. This requirement may be increased by the director where he finds it to be necessary to make the proposed development compatible with existing development in the vicinity of the site. Landscaping and irrigation plans shall be submitted to the director for his approval. Such plans must be approved prior to the issuance of any building permit for the site. Such landscaping and irrigation systems shall have been installed in accordance with the approved plans and verified prior to final inspection approval. The director's determinations on these items may be appealed in accordance with Section 17.36.030. Yards required by this zone are also subject to the general provisions and exceptions contained in Section 17.28.030 which shall apply as specified. 
3.  Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) (see definition in Section 17.04.240): 
a.  LI zone: 0.5; 
b.  MI zone: 0.6; 
c.  HI zone: 0.5. 
4.  Landscaping. Plant materials used in landscaping shall include drought-tolerant species and the landscaping shall be designed to minimize water usage and discourage runoff. No landscaping shall be placed in a manner which shades or would ultimately shade any existing solar energy system from the sun on a contiguous lot. 
5.  Outside Display. All display shall be located wholly within an enclosed building with the exception of the following: 
a.  Amusement rides and devices; 
b.  Automobile sales, limited to automobiles, recreational vehicles, tractors and trucks under 2 tons held for sale and rental only; 
c.  Automobile service stations, limited to automobile accessories and facilities necessary to the dispensing of petroleum products only; 
d.  Boat sales, limited to boats held for sale or rental only; 
e.  Carnivals-Commercial; 
f.  Christmas trees and wreaths, sale of; 
g.  Crops, field, tree, bush and row, including nursery stock, flowers and vines; 
h.  Electric distribution substations; 
i.  Equipment rental and sales including heavy equipment; 
j.  Gas metering and control stations, public utility; 
k.  Mobilehome sales, limited to mobilehomes held for sale or rental only; 
l.  Parking lots; 
m.  Signs, existing outdoor advertising; 
n.  Trailer sales, box and utility, limited to trailers held for sale only. 
C.  Exceptions to Yard Requirements - Previously Established Uses. Additions or modifications to buildings or uses, either constructed or having received building permit approval, or having been legally established prior to September 2, 1992 may be allowed with respect to yards of lesser dimension than required in this subsection where, in the opinion of the director of community development, allowing less than full compliance with the yard requirements would impose no substantial detriment to abutting property or improvements thereon. In rendering a decision on whether to allow a reduction of the required yard, the director of community development shall determine whether (see Sections 17.40.093, 17.40.095, and 17.40.097 in the event yard requirements must be reduced for street widening or transit stops): 
1.  There are special circumstances or exceptional characteristics applicable to the property involved which are not generally applicable to other properties in the same vicinity with the same zoning; 
2.  An adjustment (if authorized) will not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations on other properties in the same vicinity with the same zoning; and 
3.  The strict application of the yard requirements would result in practical difficulties and unnecessary hardship which is inconsistent with the purpose of the yard requirements. 
  In no case shall the director's approval of the reduction of a required yard relieve the applicant/property owner from complying with minimum landscape requirements established by this title, unless such relief is specifically approved by the director of community development. 
D.  Exceptions to Yard Requirements - Specified LI Zoned Areas, 
1.  Defined Areas: This exception shall only be applicable to properties that are zoned LI and are located within the area bounded by Avenue I, Division Street, Avenue J, and Sierra Highway, or within the area bounded by Avenue L, 12th Street West, Avenue M and SR-14 (hereafter referred to as defined area (A) and (B) respectively). 
2.  Purpose and Intent, 
a.  Defined Area A. Same language as current ordinance. 
b.  Defined Area B. Defined area B is bounded SR-14, 12th Street West, Avenue L and Avenue M and consists of numerous vacant lots and developed properties which exhibit narrow lot depths resulting from right-of-way acquisition at the time of freeway construction. The provisions of the zoning ordinance require minimum 10 foot building set backs for both the rear and interior side yards for properties located in the LI zone. Because of the narrow lot configurations, these requirements often create practical difficulties in developing property within Defined Area B. The result is that the properties within Defined Area B cannot be effectively developed. Therefore, the intent of this section is to allow the Director of Community Development to modify the LI Zone rear and interior yard requirements within this area under specified circumstances, while still adhering to all other requirements of the LI Zone. 
3.  Allowable Exceptions to Yard Requirements - Director's Determination. The director of community development may reduce or eliminate the yard requirements upon making the findings as noted below. The requirement for front and street side yards shall not be reduced to less than 10 feet of landscaped width except where such requirement would unreasonably interfere with the expansion of an existing building that does not have a setback of at least 10 feet, or where the requirement would preclude the provision of required parking. The director may grant exceptions where he determines that the following circumstances exist: 
a.  Compliance with the normal yard requirements will result in practical difficulties and unnecessary hardships inconsistent with the purpose of the yard requirements because of the size or configuration of the parcel(s) or the location of existing on-site buildings; and 
b.  It is not practical for the project proponent to acquire additional property that would allow the yard requirements to be met; and 
c.  Granting of the exception will not result in an adverse effect on other properties in the vicinity. 
(Ord. 807 (Exh. A), 2002; Ord. 760 § 1 (Exh. A), 1999; Ord. 711 § 43 (part), 1995; Ord. 651 § 4 (part), 1993; prior zoning ord. § 241.050) 
17.16.140 - Signs. 
    A person shall not use, install or construct any sign in the I zones except as specifically permitted in this section and subject to all regulations and conditions, including without limitation submittal of a sign plan, set forth in this title and any other ordinance now existing or hereafter adopted by the city regulating the installation, use and/or construction of signs. A comprehensive sign plan for multiple-tenant projects or an individual sign plan for single-tenant projects, must be submitted to and approved by the director or his designated representative. Sign plans must be fully dimensioned, including the proposed sign location(s), elevations, colors and materials. A person who has first obtained approval of the sign plan and all required permits and inspection approval shall be permitted to use, install or construct signs as specified in the I zones. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 241.060) 
17.16.150 - Signs-General provisions. 
A.  The provisions of this section regulating signs shall not apply to the following signs except as otherwise indicated herein: 
1.  Official notices issued by any court, public body or public officer; 
2.  Notices posted by any public officer in performance of a public duty, or for any person in giving legal notice; 
3.  Traffic, directional, warning or informational signs required or authorized by the public authority having jurisdiction over such signs; 
4.  Official signs used for emergency purposes only; 
5.  Permanent memorial or historical signs, plaques or markers; 
6.  Public utility signs, provided such signs do not exceed 3 square feet in area. 
B.  Prohibited Signs. The following signs shall be prohibited in the I zones: 
1.  Signs which contain or utilize: 
a.  Any exposed incandescent lamp, 
b.  Any revolving beacon light, 
c.  Any continuous or sequential flashing operation, except signs displaying time of day, atmospheric temperature or having programmable electronic public service messages only, 
d.  Any system for display of time of day, atmospheric temperature or programmable electronic public service messages in which: 
1)  The messages are not public service in nature, or 
2)  The proposed display has any illumination which is in continuous motion or which appears to be in continuous motion, or 
3)  The message is changed at a rate faster than one message every 4 seconds, or 
4)  The interval between messages is less than one second, or 
5)  The display is located less than 100 feet on the same side of the street or highway or 200 feet across the street from residentially zoned property; 
2.  Roof signs (see definition in Section 17.04.240); 
3.  Revolving signs of any kind; 
4.  Signs advertising or displaying any unlawful act, business or purpose; 
5.  Devices dispensing bubbles and free-flowing particles of matter; 
6.  Any notice, placard, bill, card, poster, sticker, banner, sign, advertising or other device calculated to attract the attention of the public which any person posts, prints, sticks, stamps, tacks or otherwise affixes, or causes the same to be done to or upon any street, right-of-way, public sidewalk, crosswalk, curb, lamppost, hydrant, tree, telephone pole or lighting system, or upon any fixture of the police or fire alarm system of the city of Lancaster or county of Los Angeles; 
7.  Any strings of pennants, banners or streamers, clusters of flags, strings of twirlers or propellers, flares, balloons, and similar attention-getting devices, including noise-emitting devices, with the exception of the following: 
a.  Automobile sales uses only may utilize pennants, banners or streamers subject to the following conditions: 
1)  All such displays must be positioned horizontally and parallel to the ground and shall maintain a minimum height of 14 feet and a maximum height of 18 feet from grade level. 
2)  All lines supporting such devices shall be secured in a taut manner and shall exhibit no more than 5 inches sag or droop at midline. No more than 3 such lines may be placed above one another and such lines shall be located along street frontages only. 
3)  All pennants, banners, or streamers shall be maintained in good condition. Such devices which have become torn, tattered, faded or otherwise fallen into disrepair shall be removed or replaced, 
b.  National, state, local governmental, institutional or corporate flags properly displayed, 
c.  Holiday decorations in season used for an aggregate period of not more than 90 days in any one calendar year; 
8.  Devices projecting, or otherwise reproducing the image of a sign or message on any surface or object; 
9.  Signs emitting or amplifying sounds for the purpose of attracting attention; 
10.  Portable signs; 
11.  Sidewalk signs; 
12.  New outdoor advertising signs in the MI and HI zones. No new outdoor advertising signs are permitted in the LI zone but existing outdoor advertising signs may be relocated into the LI zone subject to the provisions of Section 17.40.210O. 
13.  Pole signs; 
14.  Any sign which is placed in a manner which would obstruct a driver's or pedestrian's vision and thus create a hazard, or potential hazard, to the public health, safety or welfare. 
C.  General Sign Regulations. The following regulations shall apply to all signs in the I zones: 
1.  In no case shall a lighted sign or lighting device thereof be so placed or directed so as to permit the beams and illumination therefrom to be directed or beamed upon a public street, highway, sidewalk or adjacent premises so as to cause glare or reflection that may constitute a traffic hazard or nuisance. 
2.  Existing outdoor advertising signs are subject to Section 17.40.210. 
3.  Subdivision signs are subject to Section 17.40.220. 
4.  Signs, except outdoor advertising signs, may be single-, double- or multifaced, provided that: 
a.  The distance between the faces of any double-faced sign, other than a "V"-shaped projecting sign, shall not exceed 36 inches; and 
b.  The separation between the intersecting faces of any multifaced sign shall not exceed 12 inches. 
5.  Any sign located on vacant and unoccupied property, and which was erected for an occupant or business unrelated to the present occupant or business, or any sign which pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer exists shall be removed within 30 days after the purpose for, or use utilizing such sign has been removed from such property. 
6.  Any permitted sign may be a changeable copy sign. 
7.  All signs shall be designed in the simplest form and be free of any exposed bracing, angle iron, guy wires, cables or similar devices. 
8.  The exposed backs of all signs visible to the public shall be suitably covered, finished and properly maintained. 
9.  All signs shall be maintained in good repair, including display surfaces which shall be kept neatly painted or posted. 
10.  Any sign which does not conform to the provisions of this title shall be made to conform or shall be removed as provided in subsection B.4. of Section 17.32.850 except as provided in Section 17.32.850B.4.c. 
11.  Except where otherwise specifically provided by this title, sign regulations established pursuant to this title shall not apply to signs within a building, arcade, court or other similarly enclosed area where such signs are not visible to the public without entering such facilities. 
12.  The height of all signs shall be measured from the highest point of the sign. 
D.  Computation of Sign Area. The surface area of any sign face shall be computed from the smallest rectangles, circles and/or triangles which will enclose all words, letters, figures, symbols, designs and pictures, together with all framing, background material, colored or illuminated areas, and attention-attracting devices forming an integral part of the overall display, but excluding all support structures, except that: 
1.  Superficial ornamentation of a non-message-bearing character which does not exceed 5% of the surface area shall be exempted from computation; and 
2.  Wall signs painted on or affixed directly to a building wall, façade or roof, and having no discernible boundary, shall have the areas between letters, words intended to be read together, and any device intended to draw attention to the sign message included in any computation of surface area; and 
3.  Signs placed in such a manner, or bearing a text, as to require dependence upon each other in order to convey meaning shall be considered one sign and the intervening areas between signs included in any computation of surface area; and 
4.  Spherical, cylindrical or other 3-dimensional signs not having conventional sign faces shall be considered to have 2 faces and the area of each sign face shall be computed from the smallest 3-dimensional geometrical shape or shapes which will best approximate the actual surface area of said faces. 
(Ord. 711 § 23, 1995; prior zoning ord. § 241.061) 
17.16.160 - Business signs. 
    Business signs may be permitted in the I zones subject to Sections 17.16.060, 17.16.220, and the restrictions of this section. For more information concerning specific types of signs see Section 17.04.240, Definitions. 
A.  Wall and Freestanding Business Signs. Monument and post signs are the only freestanding business signs permitted in the I zones. 
1.  Area and Number Permitted. 
a.  A maximum of one square foot of wall or freestanding sign area for each one linear foot of continuous lot frontage up to a maximum of 150 square feet of total sign area. 
b.  No more than one freestanding sign per property shall be permitted. 
c.  No more than one sign per tenant, except on corner sites where not more than 2 signs per tenant is permitted. 
d.  Each tenant shall be entitled to a minimum sign area of 20 square feet up to the maximum square footage allowed for the site. 
2.  Height Permitted. 
a.  Wall business signs shall not extend above: 
1)  Eighteen inches below the top of the wall of a single-story building; or 
2)  The lowest point of a sloping roof of a single-story building. 
b.  Freestanding business signs shall not exceed a maximum height of 12 feet measured vertically from ground level at the base of the sign, or 3 feet below the roof line, whichever is least. 
3.  Projection Permitted. Wall business signs shall not project more than 18 inches from the building wall to which they are attached. Freestanding signs may not project over the public right-of-way. 
4.  Lighting. Wall and freestanding business signs may be internally or externally lighted, but any continuous or sequential flashing operation is prohibited. 
B.  Window Signs. Each business establishment may be permitted display window signs subject to the following restrictions: 
1.  Area permitted: Maximum of 25% of the window area. 
2.  Lighting. Window signs may be internally or externally lighted, but any continuous or sequential flashing operation is prohibited. 
C.  Incidental Business Signs. Each business establishment may be permitted incidental business signs provided: 
1.  That such signs are wall signs or window signs or are attached to an existing freestanding sign structure; and 
2.  That such signs do not exceed 3 square feet in sign area or 6 square feet in total sign area; and 
3.  That the sum of the sign areas of all such signs does not exceed 10 square feet 
4.  Incidental business signs may be internally or externally lighted but any continuous or sequential flashing operation is prohibited. 
(Ord. 711 § 25 (part), 1995; prior zoning ord. § 241.063) 
17.16.170 - Building identification signs. 
    Building identification signs may be permitted subject to the following restrictions: 
A.  Area Permitted. One wall-mounted sign may be permitted provided: 
1.  Such sign does not exceed 6 square feet in sign area where located less than 30 feet above ground level measured at the base of the building below said sign; or 
2.  Such sign does not exceed 2% of the exterior wall area of the building wall on which it is mounted, excluding penthouse walls, where located more than 30 feet above ground level measured at the base of the building below said sign. 
3.  The area of the building identification sign shall be subtracted from the area submitted for wall signs. 
B.  Height Permitted. Such signs shall not extend above a line 18 inches below the highest point of a parapet wall or the lowest point of a sloping roof. 
C.  Lighting. Building identification signs may be internally or externally lighted but any continuous or sequential flashing operation is prohibited. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 241.064) 
17.16.180 - Temporary signs. 
    Temporary signs may be permitted in the I zones subject to the following restrictions: 
A.  Area Permitted. Temporary signs which are posted or erected for 90 days or less shall not exceed 16 square feet in sign area or 32 square feet in total sign area as defined in Section 17.04.240. Temporary signs which have obtained a permit pursuant to subsection G of this section and which are posted or erected for more than 90 days shall not exceed 32 square feet in sign area or 64 square feet in total sign area. 
B.  Height Permitted. 
1.  Freestanding temporary signs shall not exceed 6 feet in height. 
2.  Temporary signs which are posted, attached or affixed to buildings of more than one story shall not be higher than the finished floor line of the second floor of such building. 
3.  Temporary signs which are posted, attached or affixed to a single-story building shall not extend above: 
a.  Eighteen inches below the top of the wall of the building; 
b.  The lowest point of a sloping roof of the building. 
C.  Projection Permitted. Where temporary signs are attached to a wall such signs shall not project more than 18 inches from the building wall to which they are attached. 
D.  Lighting. Temporary signs shall not be lighted. 
E.  Placement. Temporary signs shall not be placed on public property (see Section 17.16.150B.6.), or in any manner that would endanger the public (see Section 17.16.150B.14.). 
F.  Duration. No temporary sign shall be posted for more than 90 days without obtaining a sign permit pursuant to subsection G of this section. No sign permit for a temporary sign shall be valid for more than one year. Upon written request for an extension, the director may grant an extension for up to one additional year upon finding that the sign is otherwise in compliance with the requirements of Section 17.16.140 et seq. and that the extension is necessary to accomplish the purposes for which the sign has been posted. No additional extensions may be granted. All temporary signs shall be removed within 14 calendar days after occurrence of the event, if any, which is the subject of the temporary sign. The date of the posting shall be permanently and legibly marked on the lower righthand corner of the sign face. 
G.  Permit Required. Any person who proposes to post or erect a temporary sign for more than 90 days shall file an application for a sign permit with the Department of Community Development. The applicant shall also file a statement of responsibility as required in subsection I of this section. 
H.  Standards for Approval. 
1.  Within 7 working days the director or his designated representative shall act upon the application for a temporary sign permit. 
2.  The action on the application shall be based on character, location and design, including design elements such as material, letter style, colors, sign type or shape, and the provisions of Section 17.16.140 et seq. 
3.  If the action is to disapprove, the notice of disapproval shall specify the reasons therefor. 
I.  Statement of Responsibility. Each person desiring to post or erect a temporary sign(s), regardless of duration, shall submit to the Department of Community Development a statement of responsibility in a form approved by the director with a description sufficient to identify the temporary sign(s), the locations of the sign(s) to be posted, and certifying a named individual who is responsible for removing each temporary sign. In the event the responsible individual fails to remove the temporary sign(s) as required by subsection F of this section, the temporary sign(s) shall be deemed abandoned and may be removed by the city, the cost of which removal shall be payable by the responsible individual. 
J.  Removal of Unauthorized, Unmaintained or Dangerous Signs. 
1.  Temporary signs posted for which a statement of responsibility has not been submitted and, if required, a permit has not been obtained, are subject to immediate removal by the city without compensation. The city may, at its option, also pursue legal action under Section 17.04.220. 
2.  Temporary signs which are deemed by the city to constitute a threat to the public health and safety are subject to immediate removal by the city without compensation. (Some examples might include such signs which are not secured against the wind or were placed in a manner which would interfere with the vision of drivers or pedestrians.) The city's cost of removal shall be payable by the responsible individual. 
3.  Temporary signs for which a statement of responsibility has been submitted and, if required, a permit has been obtained, and which do not pose a threat to public health and safety but are otherwise posted in violation of Section 17.16.140 et seq. shall be subject to removal in accordance with the following procedures. The city shall provide written notice to the responsible individual for each temporary sign established pursuant to subsection I of this section, that the sign is in violation of Section 17.16.140 et seq., shall specify the nature of the violation and shall direct the responsible individual therefor to remove or alter such temporary sign. If the responsible individual fails to comply with the notice within 3 working days after such notice is mailed, the sign(s) shall be deemed abandoned, and may be removed by the city, the cost of which shall be payable by the responsible individual to the city. 
(Ord. 651 § 6, 1993; prior zoning ord. § 241.065) 
17.16.190 - Directional and/or information signs. 
    Freestanding or wall-mounted directional and/or information signs may be permitted in the I zones subject to the following restrictions: 
A.  Area Permitted. Directional and/or informational signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in sign area or 24 square feet in total sign area. 
B.  Height Permitted. 
1.  Wall-mounted directional and/or information signs shall not extend above a line 18 inches below the highest point of a parapet wall or the lowest point of a sloping roof. 
2.  Freestanding directional and/or informational signs shall not exceed 10 feet measured from the base of the sign. 
C.  Location of Signs. All such signs shall be located on site. 
D.  Lighting. Directional and/or information signs may be internally or externally lighted but any continuous or sequential flashing operation is prohibited. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 241.067) 
17.16.200 - Special purpose signs. 
    The following special purpose signs may be permitted as provided herein: 
A.  Civic Organization Signs. If a site plan is first submitted to and approved by the director, as provided in Article VI of Chapter 17.32, freestanding civic organizations signs may be permitted at or near the entrance to the city subject to the following restrictions: 
1.  Area Permitted. Such signs shall not exceed 50 square feet in sign area or 100 square feet in total sign area. 
2.  Height Permitted. Such signs shall not exceed a maximum height of 12 feet measured vertically from the base of the sign. 
3.  Lighting. Civic organization signs shall be unlighted. 
4.  Design. Such signs shall be architecturally related to the area in which they are located. 
B.  Bulletin or Special Event Signs. One freestanding or wall-mounted bulletin or special event sign may be erected and maintained on each lot or parcel of land developed for a publicly owned, charitable, religious or educational institution subject to the following restrictions: 
1.  Area Permitted. Such sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in sign area or 100 square feet in total sign area. 
2.  Height Permitted. 
a.  A wall-mounted sign shall not extend above a line 18 inches below the highest point of a parapet wall or the lowest point of a sloping roof. 
b.  A freestanding sign shall not exceed a maximum height of 12 feet measured vertically from the base of the sign. 
3.  Location of sign. A freestanding sign shall not be located nearer than 25 feet to any lot line. 
4.  Lighting. Bulletin or special event signs may be internally or externally lighted, but any continuous or sequential flashing operation is prohibited. 
5.  Design. Such sign shall be architecturally related to the structure to which it is appurtenant. 
C.  Fuel Pricing Signs. Fuel pricing signs are permitted for each business offering gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel for sale subject to the following restrictions: 
1.  Types of Signs. Such signs shall be monument signs. 
2.  Area Permitted. 
a.  One sign, not to exceed 30 square feet in sign area or 60 square feet in total sign area, shall be permitted for each street or highway frontage. 
b.  If said business is located on a corner, one sign, not to exceed 50 square feet in sign area or 100 square feet in total sign area, shall be permitted at the corner in lieu of separate signs on each of the intersecting frontages. 
c.  The area per sign face of a combined freestanding business and fuel pricing sign shall not exceed the sum of the permitted areas per sign face of the 2 merging signs. Nor shall the business portion of said sign exceed the area per sign face that would be permitted a business sign were it erected separately. 
3.  Height Permitted. 
a.  No separate freestanding sign shall exceed 12 feet in height at a corner or 5 feet in height elsewhere. Such height shall be measured vertically from the base of the sign. 
b.  No combined business and fuel pricing sign or no business sign to which fuel pricing panels are mounted shall exceed the maximum permitted height of a freestanding business sign as established in Section 17.16.160. 
4.  Location of Sign. No separate freestanding sign shall be located nearer to an existing freestanding sign or to a lot line, other than one adjoining a street or highway, than 25 feet. 
5.  Lighting. Fuel pricing signs may be internally or externally lighted, but any continuous or sequential flashing operation is prohibited. 
D.  Outdoor Menu Signs for Restaurants with Drive Through or Car Service. Outdoor menu signs may be permitted for each business offering food to drive through or car service customers subject to the following restrictions: 
1.  Types of Signs. Such signs shall be separate freestanding signs designed to serve the needs of motorist customers and shall be permanently affixed to the ground. 
2.  Area Permitted. Two signs, not to exceed 30 square feet each in total sign area may be permitted for each business. 
3.  Height Permitted. No outdoor menu sign shall exceed a height of 6 feet. 
4.  Location of Sign. No outdoor menu sign shall be located in any required yard. 
5.  Lighting. Outdoor menu signs may be internally or externally lighted but any continuous or sequential flashing operation is prohibited. 
E.  Time, Temperature, and Public Service Message Signs. Signs using any system for the display of time of day, atmospheric temperature, or programmable electronic messages may be permitted subject to the prohibitions in Section 17.16.150B and the following restrictions: 
1.  Type of Signs. All time, temperature, and public service message signs shall be wall, post or monument signs. 
2.  Area Permitted. One sign not to exceed 24 square feet in total sign area may be permitted for each street frontage up to a maximum of 2 for each business. 
3.  Height Permitted. No such sign shall exceed a height of: 
a.  For monument or post signs - 12 feet; 
b.  For wall signs - not less than 18 inches below the top of the wall of a single-story building. 
4.  Location of Sign. Such signs shall be placed not closer than 500 feet to any business already using this type of sign. 
5.  Other. Such signs must not violate the restrictions imposed by Section 17.16.150 B.1.d. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 241.068) 
17.16.210 - Off-street parking. 
    The automobile parking facilities required by this section shall be provided and permanently maintained as such unless and until a substitute has been provided which is in full compliance with the provisions of this title. The following parking requirements shall be complied with in the I zones: 
A.  General Conditions. The provisions of this section shall apply at the time that: 
1.  A building or structure is erected; or 
2.  An existing building or structure is altered to increase the number of bowling alleys, exercise area (i.e., fitness centers), seating capacity (fixed or not fixed) or service bays; or 
3.  An existing building or structure is enlarged. EXCEPTION: An existing building or structure which has insufficient lot area upon which to provide the required parking or landscaping may be enlarged by an area not to exceed 20% of the gross floor area including the original building or structure and all legal additions thereto for which required parking and associated landscaping have been provided. This exception applies only when there will be no reduction of existing parking or landscaping on the site; or 
4.  The use of a building or structure is changed. EXCEPTION: Buildings or structures legally constructed in accordance with the parking requirements in effect at the time of building permit issuance will not require full compliance with the parking space requirements of this section provided that: 
a.  Said change in use creates no greater demand for parking spaces (as defined by this section) than the use which most recently preceded it, and 
b.  All available space not used for parking shall be improved for purposes of parking and landscaping in accordance with this section and Section 17.16.220 (not to exceed the parking requirement for said use) prior to the new use occupying said premises. 
B.  Ownership, Lease and Joint Usage. Space required by this section for automobile parking shall either: 
1.  Be owned by the owner of the premises because of the use of which the automobile parking space is required; or 
2.  Subject to director's review and approval the owner of such premises shall have the right to use such space for automobile parking, solely to serve existing buildings or structures, by virtue of a recorded lease for a term of not less than 20 years, which lease requires that if canceled the party canceling such lease, not less than 60 days prior to the effective date of such cancellation, shall notify the Director of Community Development of such cancellation. Such lease shall be approved by the city attorney as to form and content, and once executed shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder and copies thereof filed with the director; or 
3.  Subject to director's review and approval the owner or owner-authorized lessee of any property, may authorize joint use of parking facilities solely to serve existing buildings or structures occupied by the following uses or activities, provided that all the requirements of this zone can be complied with: 
a.  The parking facilities required for any non-residential use, which is primarily a daytime use may be fulfilled by the parking facilities of a use which is primarily a nighttime and/or Sunday use, and vice versa, provided such parking facilities meet the requirements of subsection B.3.b. of this section. 
b.  All of the following conditions shall be met in order for the director to approve joint usage of parking: 
1)  The lots or parcels upon which the uses referred to in subsection B.3.a. of this section are proposed shall be adjoining as defined in this title, and 
2)  There shall be no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours of the uses for which joint usage of parking is proposed, and 
3)  That the joint usage of the off-street parking facilities shall be contingent upon the execution of an agreement, which requires that if canceled the party canceling such agreement, not less than 60 days prior to the effective date of such cancellation, shall notify the director of such cancellation. Such agreement shall meet the approval of the city attorney as to form and content. Once approved, the executed agreement shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder and copies thereof filed with the director. 
4.  The owner of such premises shall enter into an agreement with the redevelopment agency for the provision of all, or part, of the required parking off-site in a separate facility, including public parking lots. Such agreement may include provisions for payment of an in lieu parking fee as specified by the Redevelopment Agency. Nothing herein shall require the Agency to approve such an agreement. 
  See Section 17.16.220 for parking design requirements. 
C.  Fractions. When the application of this section requires a fractional part of an automobile parking space or parking place sufficient to accommodate a fractional number of automobiles, any such fraction shall be construed as a whole. This section does not apply to the specification of an area by square feet, or of an area equal to another area. 
D.  Parking Requirements by Use. 
1.  Automotive Repair Shop. Every automobile repair shop shall provide, on the same lot or parcel, 4 parking spaces for each service bay. 
2.  Eating and Drinking Establishments. Every structure used for eating and drinking shall provide on the same lot or parcel one automobile parking space for each 100 gross square feet of floor area. 
3.  Financial Institutions and Services. Every bank, savings and loan institution, or similar use shall have on the same lot or parcel of land, one automobile parking space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area. 
4.  General Commercial Uses. Except as otherwise provided in this section every lot or parcel of land which is used for a retail commercial use existing or permitted in the LI zone (except an electrical substation or similar public utility in which there are no offices or other places visited by the public) shall have on the same lot or parcel of land one automobile parking space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area of any building or structure so used. 
5.  Health Spas, Figure Salons. Every health spa, figure salon, or similar use shall provide, on the same lot or parcel, one parking space for each 45 square feet of exercise floor area plus one parking space for each 200 square feet of remaining gross floor area. 
6.  General Industrial Uses. Every industrial use, other than warehouse or wholesale uses, shall provide one automobile parking space for each 400 square feet of the building so used. This may include up to 30% of the floor area as incidental office. Such parking space shall be on the same lot or parcel of land with adequate ingress and egress from the use to a public street or within a distance of 400 feet from any entrance to such use. One truck parking space of sufficient size shall be provided for each truck used in the operation of the establishment. (See subsections D.9., 10. of this section for warehouse and wholesale establishments.) 
7.  Offices. 
a.  Government and Public Facilities. One automobile parking space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area. 
b.  Medical and Dental. Every medical or dental office, clinic, or similar building shall have on the same lot or parcel of land, one automobile parking space for each 150 square feet of gross floor area. 
c.  Other Professional Office. Every professional office building (other than in subsection D.7.b. of this section) shall have on the same lot or parcel of land one automobile parking space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area. 
8.  Open Retail. Every open retail use, including but not limited to nurseries, automobile sales lots, mobilehome, boat or recreational vehicle sales lots, shall have on the same lot or parcel of land a minimum of 5 automobile parking spaces or one parking space for each 5,000 square feet of lot area used primarily for sale or display purposes, whichever is greater. (Parking for any buildings on the premises shall be calculated independently of this requirement.) 
9.  Warehouse. Every warehouse shall provide a minimum of 5 parking spaces for warehouses with a gross floor area up to 25,000 square feet: and for warehouses with a gross floor area in excess of 25,000 square feet, a minimum of 5 parking spaces plus one additional space for each 5,000 square feet or fraction thereof over and above 25,000 square feet. 
10.  Wholesale Establishments. Three parking spaces for up to 1,500 square feet of gross floor area plus one space for each additional 1,500 square feet of gross floor area. 
11.  Uses Not Specified. Where parking requirements for any use are not specified, parking shall be provided in an amount which the director finds adequate to prevent traffic congestion and excessive on-street parking. Whenever practical, such determination shall be based upon the requirements for the most comparable use specified in this section or other documents as approved by the director. 
12.  Disabled Person Spaces. Shall be provided in accordance with federal or state requirements as appropriate. 
13.  Bicycle and Motorcycle Spaces. Spaces for bicycles, with the means necessary to secure them against theft, shall be provided as follows: 
a.  Bicycles. Minimum of one space per 10 employees. 
b.  Motorcycles. Minimum of one space per 20 employees. 
14.  Carpool and Vanpool Spaces. Spaces for carpool and vanpool vehicles shall be provided as necessary to accommodate any such vehicle in a number necessary to serve the pool program at the establishment. These spaces may be counted toward the parking requirements for the use. 
(Ord. 711 §§ 24 (part), 26 (part), 1995; prior zoning ord. §§ 241.070-241.072, 241.074, 241.075) 
17.16.220 - Design and performance standards. 
    The following design and performance standards shall be met for development in the I zones: 
A.  General requirements applicable to all development: 
1.  Access. 
a.  Driveways providing access to the site may be combined, relocated, or otherwise limited in order to minimize traffic conflicts and improve public safety. All driveways shall be constructed to comply with current city standards. All driveway locations are subject to the approval of the director of public works. 
b.  Entry drives into parking areas shall be of sufficient depth to provide for vehicle stacking appropriate to the size, location and intensity of the project served. 
c.  Access to drive-through facilities shall have a sufficient depth to provide vehicle stacking for not less than 7 automobiles at a depth of 24 feet per automobile per drive-through facility. (One bank teller station equals one such facility.) Such stacking space shall be designed in a manner which will not restrict access to or from parking spaces, aisles or driveways. 
d.  Public transit opportunities for turnouts, shelters and pedestrian access shall be considered for all sites abutting expressways or arterial streets. 
e.  Access and bicycle parking facilities shall be considered for all sites abutting or adjacent to a planned bicycle and/or trail facility. 
2.  Paving. Required parking areas, as well as the maneuvering areas and driveways used for access thereto shall be paved with: (NOTE: Permits are required for any work done in the public right-of-way.) 
a.  Concrete surfacing to a minimum thickness of 31/2 inches with expansion joints as necessary; or 
b.  Asphalt surfacing, rolled to a smooth, hard surface having a minimum thickness of 2 inches after compaction, and laid over a base of crushed rock, gravel or other similar material compacted to a minimum thickness of 4 inches. 
c.  For commercial and industrial truck parking and drive aisles, asphalt surfacing rolled to a smooth hard surface having a minimum thickness of 3 inches after compaction and, at a minimum, designed to accommodate a traffic index (TI) of 6.5 as calculated in accordance with the latest edition of the CalTrans Highway Design Manual. Large industrial projects may need a greater TI based upon their use. 
d.  Other alternative material that will provide at least the equivalent in dust-free service, life and appearance of the materials and standards which would be employed for development pursuant to subsection A.2.a. or b. of this subsection. 
e.  The Director of Public Works at the request of the director shall review and report on the adequacy of paving where modification of base is proposed under subsection A.2.b. of this section, or where alternative materials are proposed under subsection A.2.d. of this section. The Director of Public Works may approve such modification or such alternative materials if, in his opinion, the evidence indicates compliance with subsection A.2.b. or A.2.d. of this section, as the case may be. 
3.  Size and Marking of Spaces. 
a.  No less than 65% of the parking spaces shall exhibit minimum dimensions of 9 feet in width by 20 feet in length, with required disabled person spaces at the dimensions as provided by law. (See subsection A.8.f. of this section.) 
b.  No more than 35% of the parking spaces may exhibit minimum dimensions of 8 feet in width by 17 feet in length. Such spaces shall be labelled "compact car only" in a manner acceptable to the director. (See subsection A.8.f. of this section.) 
c.  No parking shall occur in the first 10 feet of a required front or street side yard. 
d.  Where parking abuts an alley, the improved alley may be used as an aisle subject to approval of the parking lot design. 
e.  For parallel parking, minimum aisles are 12 feet and minimum parking space dimensions are 8 feet by 24 feet. 
  See the following diagrams for parking design options. 
4.  Circulation. Mark entrances and exits clearly. Vehicular circulation should be "one-way" in each aisle or "two-way" if the aisle width is a minimum of 20 feet. No aisle shall be less than 12 feet in width. 
5.  Loading Spaces. Such spaces shall be required as specified by the director. 
6.  Buffering. A masonry wall of 6 feet in height shall be provided at the property line where the activities of a commercial or industrial use are anticipated to be incompatible with existing commercial, industrial or residential uses. It shall be the burden of the applicant to prove to the satisfaction of the director or his designated representative that the project will not create or be subject to conditions necessitating a wall at the time of site plan review if a wall is not desired by the applicant. 
7.  Building Design. 
a.  Building design standards applicable to all I zones: 
1)  Roof treatment shall be the same on the periphery of the building, except where a different treatment is required by the city building code. 
2)  Solar access and prevailing winds should be considered in building design and orientation. 
3)  Additions to existing buildings shall generally conform to the design of the existing building. New building size, materials and color shall be consistent with the scale and design of the building to which it is attached. 
b.  Building design standards applicable to the LI and MI zones: 
1)  Building components such as windows, doors, eaves and parapets shall have good proportions and relationships to one another. 
2)  Utility doors, access panels, fire doors, loading docks and other openings shall be treated as part of the architectural composition of buildings. 
c.  Building design standards applicable only to the LI zone: 
1)  An exterior color scheme for all buildings or additions thereto shall be submitted with the building elevations for approval. The color scheme for existing neighboring buildings shall be indicated and considered. 
8.  Landscaping. 
a.  Landscape designs shall be consistent throughout a project site. A combination of landscape materials should be arranged in a harmonious manner as an integral part of project design to enhance building design, public view, and interior spaces and provide buffers and transitions as needed. Unrelated and random choice or placement of plant materials shall be avoided; however, variety may be employed to intensify distinction between spaces or to strengthen a sense of place or movement, or to promote energy and water conservation and mitigate erosion. 






b.  The type, scale and proportion of landscape materials shall be appropriate to the site and/or structures to which they relate. 
c.  Plant material shall be selected for interest in its structure, texture, color, ultimate growth and water efficiency. Plants that are native or climate adaptive to the high desert area of Lancaster and/or others that will be hardy, harmonious with project design, and of good appearance, shall be used. Drought-resistant varieties of plants shall be used wherever feasible. Turf shall not be permitted. Drought-resistant varieties of plants shall be used in accordance with Title 8, Chapter 8.50, Landscaping Installation and Maintenance of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
d.  Landscaped areas shall be irrigated by an automatic system with separate stations for each hydrozone. The irrigation system shall be designed and equipped to incorporate water conservation techniques such as drip systems, moisture sensors and anti-drain valves. Sprinkler systems shall be designed to prevent water from falling onto impervious surfaces. The system shall comply with Title 8, Chapter 8.50, Landscaping Installation and Maintenance of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
e.  All areas which are within a site which has been approved by the city for development as a site plan or approved phase thereof, which are not needed for buildings, sidewalks, vehicle access or parking, shall be landscaped. 
f.  All landscaped planter areas shall be completely bordered by a 6-inch P.C.C. curbing to prevent irrigation runoff and act as a wheel stop where necessary. Where used as a wheel stop, the 6-inch curb may be counted toward the required length of the parking space. 
g.  All interior areas of parking lots shall be landscaped with a minimum of one shade tree plus one shade tree for each 4 parking spaces along with the other plant materials. 
h.  Lots of 5,000 square feet or less in area shall have the area used for vehicle ingress, egress, circulation and parking, landscaped in accordance with the following percentages: 
Zone Landscaping LI 5% MI 3% HI 2%  
  Only landscaped areas exclusive of curbs shall qualify toward meeting this requirement and no landscaped area with a dimension of less than 2 feet shall be credited toward meeting the landscape requirement. 
i.  Lots of more than 5,000 square feet in area shall have the area used for vehicle ingress, egress, circulation and parking, landscaped in accordance with the following percentages: 
Zone Landscaping LI 7% MI 5% HI 4%  
  Only landscaped areas exclusive of curbs shall qualify toward meeting this requirement and no landscaped area with a dimension of less than 2 feet shall be credited toward meeting this landscape requirement. 
j.  Where off-street parking areas abut local or collector public streets, such areas shall be separated from an abutting street by a continuous landscaped planter which extends parallel to the street frontage of the parking area. Said planter shall be a minimum of 10 feet in width exclusive of perimeter curbs. Up to 1/2 of the area of this required landscaped planter may be counted toward fulfilling the requirements of subsection A.8.h. or i. (See Section 17.16.130B.2., 4., regarding landscaping in yards.) 
k.  Trees and landscaping shall be utilized wherever possible to shade buildings as a means of enhancing energy conservation. 
l.  No tree shall be less than 15 gallon size. At least 50% of all shrubs shall be of 5-gallon size, and no shrub shall be less than one-gallon size. Ground covers shall be planted no further apart than 6 inches on center. 
m.  All landscaped areas shall be continuously and properly maintained in good condition. (See definition of landscape maintenance in Section 17.04.240.) 
9.  Lighting. The intent of this requirement is to properly illuminate the site without producing an adverse impact on neighboring property. Exterior lighting of the building and site shall be provided, maintained and utilized during the hours of darkness in accordance with the following requirements: 
a.  Exterior lighting shall be part of the architectural concept. Fixtures, standards, and all exposed accessories shall be compatible with building design. 
b.  Placement of lighting shall be in accordance with recognized crime prevention, and safety principles. 
10.  Outside storage or display. All outside storage shall be developed to comply with all standards set forth herein, except for those uses which have been specifically exempted therefrom: 
a.  The uses listed in Section 17.16.130 B.5. are exempt from these requirements except for the following uses which shall comply: 
1)  Automobile impound yards; 
2)  Electric distribution substations; 
3)  Equipment rental and sales shall comply in the LI zone only; 
4)  Gas metering and control stations, public utility. 
b.  All outside storage or display in the LI zone which is open to view from any street or highway abutting the lot or parcel of land upon which it is conducted, or which is open to view from any other lot or parcel shall be screened from view by a solid masonry wall constructed to Los Angeles County D-65 standards or as otherwise specified by the city. Gates, where used, shall also be of solid construction unless another design is approved by the director. Chain link with slats is not acceptable. 
c.  All outside storage or display in the MI and HI zones which is open to view from freeways, expressways or arterial streets abutting the lot or parcel of land upon which it is conducted, or which is open to view from any area zoned or used for residential purposes, or which is open to view from any existing industrial use of a nature which, in the opinion of the director, is adversely affected by the appearance of the outside storage or display, shall be screened from view by a solid masonry wall constructed to Los Angeles County D-65 standards or as otherwise specified by the city. Gates, where used, shall be of solid construction unless another design is approved by the director. Chain link with slats is not acceptable. 
d.  All walls or fences shall be of uniform height in relation to the ground upon which they stand and shall be a minimum of 6 feet and shall not exceed 15 feet in height. The actual height shall be based upon the height of the materials to be stored and methods of stacking said materials and the need for security. (See subsection A.10.f.4) of this section for clarification.) 
e.  All outside storage and display or portions thereof which do not fall under the requirements of subsection A.10.c. of this section shall be fenced with chain link or other durable metal material approved by the director. No wood fence materials will be allowed. All fences shall be of uniform height in relation to the ground upon which they stand and no fence shall be less than 6 feet and shall not exceed 15 feet in height. The actual height shall be based upon the height of materials to be stored and methods of stacking such materials and the need for security. 
f.  All portions of outside storage and display areas shall meet the following requirements: 
1)  The site shall be graded to drain properly as required by the director of public works. 
2)  Applicants must obtain approval of the Los Angeles County Fire Department prior to obtaining any city permits for any use that includes the manufacture, use or storage of hazardous materials or wastes. 
3)  The surface of the site shall be covered with at least 2 inches of crushed rock to prevent dust, or if hazardous materials are used or wastes are stored anywhere in the outdoor storage area, the entire area where such materials are used or stored shall, at a minimum, be paved in accordance with the standards of subsection A.2.a. of this section without expansion joints and with a curb for containment in accordance with city standards. Additional requirements may be imposed by the Los Angeles County Fire Department. 
4)  All raw material, equipment, by-product, waste or finished products: 
a)  Shall not be stored above the height of the wall or fence enclosing the area; and 
b)  Shall not be stored within 300 feet of residentially zoned property, except where such property is separated by an arterial street; and 
c)  Shall be stored in a manner that will not allow any material to be blown from the enclosed storage area; and 
d)  Shall not be placed or allowed to remain outside the enclosed storage area. 
g.  The design requirements for outside storage and display as set forth in this title shall not relieve the proprietors of such uses from complying with all applicable regulations, laws and ordinances of the city of Lancaster, county of Los Angeles, state of California, or the United States. 
11.  Screening. 
a.  Screening standards applicable to all I zones: 
1)  Where mechanical equipment, junction boxes, satellite antennae, meters and similar utility equipment is ground mounted it shall be enclosed or screened from view where necessary to preclude visibility from freeways, expressways and arterial streets and adjacent properties. 
2)  Parking areas adjacent to streets shall be screened with landscaping in the required yards and with low decorative walls, berms or combinations thereof. Where walls are used they shall be placed so as not to obscure landscaped areas from the street. 
b.  Screening standards applicable to the LI zone: 
1)  All rooftop mechanical equipment, ducts, tanks, satellite antennae, etc., shall be enclosed or otherwise screened from view from all sides of the building. (This requirement does not include wind-powered turbines used for ventilation.) 
2)  Loading areas shall be screened from view where necessary to preclude visibility from public streets and highways and adjacent properties. 
c.  Screening standards applicable to the MI and HI zones: 
1)  All rooftop mechanical equipment, ducts, tanks, satellite antennae, etc., shall be enclosed or otherwise screened from view from all sides of the building only where necessary to preclude visibility from freeways, expressways or arterial streets or adjoining residential, commercial or light industrial areas. (This requirement does not include wind-powered turbines used for ventilation.) 
2)  Loading areas shall be screened from view only where necessary to preclude visibility from freeways, expressways and arterial streets and adjacent residentially and commercially zoned properties. 
12.  Service for Utilities. All on-site utility services shall be underground. 
13.  Signs. 
a.  Sign design standards applicable to all I zones: 
1)  The colors, materials and lighting of every sign shall be restrained and harmonious with the building and site to which it principally relates. 
2)  The number of graphic elements on a sign shall be held to the minimum needed to convey the sign's major message and shall be composed in proportion to the area of the sign face. 
3)  The light source of externally illuminated signs shall not be visible. 
4)  No sign shall be placed in or over any public right-of-way. 
5)  Street numbers of all buildings shall be prominently located and not less than 8 inches in height on a contrasting background to be easily read from the street by public safety personnel (i.e., police, fire, ambulance). 
b.  Sign design standards applicable only to the LI zone: 
1)  Use of individual letters for all signing is preferred and encouraged over "cabinet" signs. Where cabinet signs are utilized, such cabinet must be integrated into the design of the building or structure. 
14.  Refuse/Recycling Storage. Commercial, industrial and institutional uses shall have on the same lot or parcel a refuse/recycling storage area at a ratio of 20 square feet of refuse/recycling storage area for each 1,000 square feet or portion thereof of net floor area of the facility but not less than 6 feet in width nor less than 18 in length (exterior dimension). Such storage areas shall include separate containers for waste and for materials to be recycled. Each container shall be clearly marked or color coded for its intended use. Such storage areas shall be enclosed on 3 sides by a minimum 5-foot-high reinforced masonry or concrete wall with a sight-obscuring gate of noncombustible materials which is the same height as the enclosing walls. The floor of the enclosure shall be of concrete construction and the walls shall be protected by a concrete curb not less than 2 inches high by 6 inches wide or conventional concrete wheel stops to preclude damage by dumpsters. Such storage areas shall not be placed in a location which is openly exposed to a fronting street or a neighboring residential area. 
15.  Special Standards for Automobile Dismantling, Scrap Metal Processing Yards and Junk and Salvage Yards. No automobile dismantling yard or junk and salvage yard (as defined in Section 17.04.240) shall be permitted or maintained in the HI zone unless it complies with the following requirements: 
a.  All operations and storage, including all equipment used in conducting such business, other than parking, shall be conducted within an enclosed building, or within an area fully enclosed by a solid wall. No wrecked or dismantled vehicles, salvage or junk shall be placed or allowed to remain outside of the enclosed yard area. 
b.  No wrecked or dismantled vehicles, salvage or junk shall be stored at a height greater than the surrounding wall. 
c.  Where walls are required they shall be developed in accordance with the following standards: 
1)  All walls shall be of a uniform height in relation to the ground upon which they stand, and shall be a minimum of 8 feet and shall not exceed 15 feet in height. No walls shall be placed in a required front or street side yard established by Section 17.16.130B.2. 
  The required setback shall be landscaped in accordance with Sections 17.16.130B.2.e., 17.16.130 B.4. and 17.16.220. All landscaped areas shall be continuously and properly maintained in good condition as defined in this title. 
2)  Walls shall be constructed of masonry to the structural standards specified by the director of public works. 
3)  Gates: shall be of solid construction. (Chain link with slats does not fulfill this requirement.) 
4)  Other interior fences or walls not open to view may be constructed of alternative materials as approved by the director of community development. 
5)  All fences and walls shall be constructed in a workmanlike manner and shall consist solely of new materials unless the director of community devlopment approves the substitution of used materials where, in his opinion, such used materials will provide the equivalent in service, appearance, and useful life. 
6)  All walls shall be a uniform neutral color excluding black, which blends with the surrounding terrain and improvements and shall be maintained in a neat, orderly condition at all times. Such wall may contain signs as approved by the director of community development in lieu of freestanding signs with an area not to exceed the sign area permitted for freestanding signs. 
7)  Any structures which are used as part of the yard boundaries and/or are exposed to view from the street frontage shall be painted to conform with the color of the fencing. The director of community development may approve other appropriate architectural treatment. 
d.  Paving. 
1)  The entire yard shall be paved with an asphalt surfacing as specified in subsection A.2.b. of this section or the director may approve other paving materials which provide, in his opinion, the equivalent in service and useful life. The requirement may be waived where the director finds that no dust or other problem would be aggravated by the absence of surfacing. 
2)  If hazardous materials are used or wastes are stored anywhere in an outdoor storage area, the entire storage area and area where the materials are used shall be paved in accordance with subsection A.2.a. of this section without expansion joints and with a curb sufficient for containment in accordance with city standards. 
e.  The special standards for automobile dismantling yards and junk and salvage yards set forth in this title shall not relieve the proprietors of such yards from complying with all regulations, laws and ordinances of the city of Lancaster, county of Los Angeles, state of California or the United States. 
16.  Hazardous Materials. Applicants must obtain the approval of the Los Angeles County Fire Department prior to obtaining any city permits for any use which includes the manufacture or use, of hazardous materials or the storage of hazardous materials or wastes. 
17.  Radioactive Materials. The use of radioactive materials shall be limited to measuring, gauging or calibration equipment. 
18.  Noise. Uses which generate noise by the nature of their function and/or processes shall be required to demonstrate that the noise levels emitted from the use shall not exceed 65 dBA at any property line which abuts a commercial or residential zone or use. A detailed noise attenuation study by a qualified acoustical engineer may be required by the director or his designated representative to determine appropriate mitigation and methods to incorporate same into project design. Site design methods which may be utilized to reduce noise include: 
a.  The use of building setbacks and dedication of noise easements to increase the distance between the noise source and receiver; 
b.  The location of uses and orientation of buildings which are compatible with higher noise levels adjacent to noise generators or in clusters to shield more noise-sensitive areas and uses; 
c.  The placement of noise-tolerant land uses, such as parking areas, between the noise source and receiver; 
d.  The placement of noise-tolerant structures, such as garages or carports, to shield noise-sensitive areas; 
e.  Clustering of office or commercial structures to reduce interior open space noise levels. 
19.  Projections Permitted into Yards. The following projections are permitted in the LI zone only. 
a.  Eaves, cantilevered roofs, awnings and similar architectural features may project a maximum distance of 21/2 feet into any required front or side yard or 5 feet into a rear yard, provided that such features shall maintain a minimum distance of 3 feet from any property line and is not less than 8 feet in height above grade. Such appendages shall be supported only at or behind the building setback line. 
b.  Landing places including access stairs, which exceed an average height of 21/2 feet and do not extend above the level of the first floor may project a maximum distance of 2 feet into required interior side yards, and a maximum distance of 5 feet into required front and side yards, provided such features shall maintain a minimum distance of 3 feet from any property line, and that an open-work railing installed shall not exceed 31/2 feet in height. 
c.  Rain conductors, spouts, utility service risers, shutoff valves, water tables, sills, capitals, bases, cornices and belt courses may project a maximum distance of one foot into any required yard. 
d.  Water heaters, water softeners, and gas or electric meters, including service conduits and pipes, enclosed or in the open, may project a maximum distance of 21/2 feet into a required interior or rear yard provided that such structures or equipment shall maintain a minimum distance of 3 feet to any property line. 
20.  Electric Vehicle Charging Stations (EVCS). New commercial development shall provide for electric vehicle charging stations in the manner prescribed as follows: 
a.  New residential uses shall provide EVCSs in accordance with Section 17.08.150T. 
b.  New commercial, industrial and other uses with the building or land area, capacity, or numbers of employees listed herein shall provide the electrical service capacity necessary and all conduits and related equipment necessary to ultimately serve 2% of the total parking spaces with EVCSs in a manner approved by the building and safety official. Of these parking spaces, 1/2 shall initially be provided with the electric vehicle supply equipment necessary to function as on-line EVCSs upon completion of the project. The remainder shall be installed at such time as they are needed for use by customers, employees or other users. EVCSs shall be provided in disabled person parking spaces in accordance with state requirements. 
1)  Construction of a hospital of 500 or more beds, or expansion of a hospital of that size by 20% or more. 
2)  Construction of a post-secondary school (college), public or private, for 3,000 or more students, or expansion of an existing facility having a capacity of 3,000 or more students by an addition of at least 20%. 
3)  Hotels or motels with 500 or more rooms. 
4)  Industrial, manufacturing, or processing plants or industrial parks that employ more than 1,000 persons, occupy more than 40 acres of land, or contain more than 650,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
5)  Office buildings or office parks that employ more than 1,000 persons or contain more than 250,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
6)  Shopping centers or trade centers that employ 1,000 or more persons or contain 500,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
7)  Sports, entertainment, or recreation facilities that accommodate at least 4,000 persons per performance or that contain 1,500 or more fixed seats. 
8)  Transit projects (including but not limited to transit stations and park and ride lots). 
B.  When abutting or adjacent to residentially zoned property, the following requirements shall also be applied: 
1.  Artificial lighting used to illuminate the premises shall be directed away from adjacent residentially zoned properties. 
2.  Where multi-story buildings are to be utilized on lots abutting residentially zoned properties, such buildings shall be located or oriented in a manner which will minimize visual intrusion into neighboring residentially zoned property. (This may be accomplished by setting the building back from the abutting property line beyond the distance required for the yard, selective placement or screening of windows, orienting the building in a manner which will not give occupants a direct view into the yards or windows of neighboring residents.) 
3.  No signs shall be placed in a manner which visually intrudes into adjoining residentially zoned property. 
4.  Trees shall be utilized as a means of improving the interface between commercial and residential uses where appropriate. 
5.  When abutting residentially zoned property, a masonry wall of not less than 6 feet in height shall be provided at the property line in accordance with the provisions for walls specified in Section 17.28.030C to minimize conflicts between commercial and residential uses. This requirement shall be modified, where necessary to preclude interference with line-of-sight of a driver within 10 feet of any street, highway or alley, down to a maximum height of 42 inches. The design of the wall shall be considered as part of the site plan review. The site and any buildings thereon shall be designed to locate noise- and odor-generating equipment and activity in a manner which will have a minimal impact on abutting residentially zoned property. Such techniques may include, but are not limited to, no windows on the building wall(s) facing residentially zoned property, insulating structures housing equipment against noise, limitation of the hours of equipment operation, and other controls designed for specific problems. It shall be the burden of the applicant to prove that his project will not have a detrimental effect on neighboring residential property at the time of site plan review. 
C.  All uses shall comply with the air quality standards of the Air Quality Management District (AQMD) or the city of Lancaster, whichever is more restrictive. 
(Ord. 790 § 1 (Exh. A), 2001; Ord. 713 § 5 (part), 1995; Ord. 711 §§ 17 (part), 18 (part), 19(C) (part), 29 (part), 34 (part), 35 (part), 1995; prior zoning ord. § 241.080) 
(Ord. No. 907, § 6, 10-28-08) 
Article III. - Reserved[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 945, § 5, adopted July 13, 2010, amended the Code by repealing former Art. III, §§ 17.16.230-17.16.430, in its entirety. Former Art. III pertained to the Business Park (BP) zone, and derived from the prior zoning ord., §§ 242.010, 242.020, 242.021, 242.023-242.027, 242.030, 242.031, 242.040, 242.041, 242.050, 242.060, 242.061, 242.063-242.065, 242.067, 242.068, 242.070-242.072, 242.074, 242.075, 242.080; Ord. 651 of 1993; Ord. 676 of 1996; Ords. 711 and 713 of 1995; and Ord. No. 924, adopted August 25, 2009. 

17.16.230-17.16.430 - Reserved. 
Article IV. - Sexually Oriented Businesses 

17.16.440 - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the intent of this article to prevent community wide adverse economic impacts, increased crime, increased incidence of communicable disease, decreased property values, and the deterioration of neighborhoods which can be brought about by the concentration of adult-oriented businesses in close proximity to each other or to other incompatible uses such as schools for minors, churches, and residentially zoned districts or uses. The city council finds that it has been demonstrated in various communities that the concentration of adult-oriented businesses causes an increase in the number of transients in the area, and an increase in crime, and in addition to the effects described above can cause other businesses and residents to move elsewhere. It is, therefore, the purpose of this article to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of adult-oriented businesses or their close proximity to incompatible uses, while permitting the location of adult-oriented businesses in certain areas. 
    It is the further purpose of this article to regulate adult-oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including adult-oriented materials and paraphernalia protected by the First Amendment. Similarly, it is not the intent or effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to adult-oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors and performers of adult-oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent or effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(Ord. 801 § 2 (part), 2001: Prior zoning ord. § 251.010) 
17.16.450 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article certain terms and words are defined as follows: 
    "Adult-oriented business" means any one of the following: 
1.  "Adult arcade" means an establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more electrically, electronically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines or projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image producing devices are maintained, for viewing by 5 or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and are used to show films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions, 30 percent or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
2.  "Adult bookstore" means a commercial establishment which, as a regular and substantial course of conduct, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
a.  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, any material in digital form (including, but not limited to, compact disc (CD) or digital video disc (DVD), slides, or other visual representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or, 
b.  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia, except for clothing, which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. The phrase "regular and substantial course of conduct" as applied to an adult bookstore shall mean the following: 
1)  The business devotes more than 25% of its retail inventory (not measured by the number of items but rather by the cost to the business owner of the inventory) to merchandise distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
2)  The business devotes more than 25% of the retail floor area to merchandise that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities and specified anatomical areas; or 
3)  The retail value of merchandise that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities and specified anatomical areas exceeds 25% of the total retail value of inventory offered in each of the following categories: (a) books, (b) magazines, (c) video tapes or any material in digital format (including, but not limited to, compact disc (CD) or digital video disc (DVD)), for sale or rental, (d) novelties and devices, and (e) on-premises viewing of images, films, and/or videos; or 
4)  Gross revenue derived from merchandise in any category set forth in paragraph (c) above exceeds 25% of the total gross revenue for the category. 
    "Adult cabaret" means a nightclub, restaurant, bar or similar business establishment which regularly features (1) live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; and/or (2) persons who appear semi-nude or nude; and/or (3) films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions (including without limitation digital images such as compact disc (CD) or digital video disc (DVD) images), which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    "Adult hotel/motel" means a hotel or motel or similar business establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration which, (1) provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions 30 percent or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and (2) either (a) rents, leases, lets or allows the subletting or subrental of any room for less than a 10-hour period, or rents, leases, or lets any single room more than twice in a 24-hour period, or (b) has a sign visible from the public right of way which advertises the availability of the above-described photographic reproductions. 
    "Adult motion picture theater" means a business establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown for viewing by 5 or more patrons at any one time, 30 percent or more of the number of which, in any month, are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    "Adult theater" means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar business establishment which, for any form of consideration regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity and/or features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
    "Adult-oriented business operator" (hereinafter "operator") means a person who supervises, manages, inspects, directs, organizes, controls or in any other way is responsible for or in charge of the premises of an adult-oriented business or the conduct or activities occurring on the premises thereof. 
    "Applicant" means a person who is required to file an application for a permit under this chapter, including an individual owner, managing partner, officer of a corporation, or any other operator, manager, employee, or agent of an adult-oriented business. 
    "Bar" means any commercial establishment licensed by the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control to serve any alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
    "City manager" means the city manager of the city of Lancaster or the authorized representatives thereof. 
    "Distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon" means and refers to the dominant or essential theme of the object described by such phrase. For instance, when the phrase refers to films "which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon" the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, the films so described are those whose dominant or predominant character and theme are the depiction of the enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas. 
    "Employee" means a person who performs any service on the premises of an adult-oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent or otherwise and whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said business. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises of the adult-oriented business to render only repair or maintenance services or to deliver equipment or goods to the adult-oriented business as long as such persons are not nude or semi-nude. 
    "Establishment" of an adult-oriented business. As used herein, to "establish" an adult-oriented business shall mean and include any of the following: 
1.  The opening or commencement of any adult-oriented business as a new business; 
2.  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult-oriented business, to any adult-oriented business as defined herein; 
3.  The addition of any of the adult-oriented businesses defined herein to any other existing adult-oriented business; or 
4.  The relocation of any such adult-oriented business. 
    "Figure model" means any person who, for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire or reward, poses in a modeling studio to be observed, sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise depicted. 
    "Health officer" means the health officer of the city or his or her duly authorized representative. 
    "Modeling studio" means a business which provides, for pecuniary compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire or reward, figure models who, for the purposes of sexual stimulation of patrons, display specified anatomical areas to be observed, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted or otherwise depicted by persons paying such consideration. 
    "Nude," "nudity," or a "state of nudity" means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or anus with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of completely or opaquely covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
    "Operate an adult-oriented business" means the supervising, managing, inspecting, directing, organizing, controlling or in any way being responsible for or in charge of the conduct of activities of an adult-oriented business or activities within an adult-oriented business. 
    "Permittee" means the person to whom an adult-oriented business permit or adult-oriented business employee permit is issued. 
    "Person" means any individual, proprietorship, partnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation, or other legal entity, or combination of the above in whatever form or character. 
    "Regularly features" with respect to an adult theater or adult cabaret means a regular and substantial course of conduct. The fact that live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities occur on 2 or more occasions within a 30 day period; 3 or more occasions within a 60 day period; or 4 or more occasions within a 180 day period, shall to the extent permitted by law be deemed to be a regular and substantial course of conduct. 
    "Religious institution" means a structure which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities. 
    "School" means any child or day care facility, or an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, offering instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code and maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, middle or junior high school, senior high school, or any special institution of education, but it does not include a vocational or professional institution of higher education, including a community or junior college, college, or university. 
    "Semi-nude" means a state of dress in which opaque clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, anus and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. This definition shall include a state of dress in which the entire lower portion of the human female breast is exposed, but shall not include any state of dress in which the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel is exposed, so long as the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
    "Sexual encounter center" means a business enterprise that, as one of its principal purposes, offers for any form of consideration physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between individuals, one or more of whom is in a state of nudity or a semi-nude condition. 
    "Specified anatomical areas" shall mean and include any of the following: 
1.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human (i) genitals or pubic region; (ii) anus or buttocks; and (iii) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; 
2.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; 
3.  Any device, costume or covering that simulates any of the body parts included in subsections 1 or 2 above. 
    "Specified sexual activities" shall mean and include any of the following, whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other covering: 
1.  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast; 
2.  Sex acts, including but not limited to intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
3.  Masturbation; 
4.  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the other activities described in subdivision 1 through 3 of this subsection. 
    "Transfer ownership or control of an adult-oriented business" means and includes (i) the sale, lease, or sublease of the business; or (ii) the transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or (iii) the establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which transfers ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law on the death of a person possessing ownership or control. 
(Ord. 801 § 2 (part), 2001: Prior zoning ord. § 251.010) 
17.16.460 - Prohibition. 
    From and after January 10, 2002, no adult-oriented business shall be established, located or operated in any zone in the city other than within the heavy industry (HI) category of the industrial (I) zones, as specified in this article, and subject to all regulations and conditions enumerated in this title. Any business which did not constitute an adult oriented business or a sexually oriented business prior to January 10, 2002, but which would be deemed an adult-oriented business under this article, which was legally established and for which all applicable permits and licenses were issued and remain effective as of January 10, 2002 shall not be deemed to be an adult-oriented business subject to the provisions of this article, except to the extent (i) such business ceases operating in conformity with any permit issued in conjunction with the establishment thereof; or (ii) the floor area of such business utilized for the sale of merchandise distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas increases by more than 15% over the floor area utilized for such purpose and existing as of January 10, 2002; or (iii) the retail inventory (measured by cost to the business owner of the inventory or by the retail value of the merchandise) distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas increases by more than 15% over the amount of such inventory being merchandised as of January 10, 2002; or (iv) the number of performances distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities increases by 15% in any applicable period of time. 
(Ord. 801 § 2 (part), 2001: Prior zoning ord. § 251.020) 
17.16.470 - Amortization of nonconforming adult-oriented business uses. 
    Any use of real property as an adult-oriented business existing on the effective date of this ordinance, which was in conformity with the provisions of Article IV of Chapter 17.16 of Title 17 of the code prior to effective date of this ordinance, and which was constructed, operated, and maintained in compliance with all previous regulations, but which, after the date of this ordinance does not comply with Sections 17.16.460 and 17.16.490 of the code (but does comply with all other provisions of this article), shall be regarded as a nonconforming use which may be continued until 18 months after the effective date of this ordinance. On or before such date, all such nonconforming uses shall be terminated unless an extension of time has been approved by the director in accordance with the provisions of this Section 17.16.470. This section does not authorize a business subject to its terms to expand or materially change the nature of its operation during the period in which such business is allowed under this section to continue its operation. 
A.  Abandonment. Notwithstanding the above, any discontinuance or abandonment of the use of any lot or structure as a legal nonconforming adult-oriented business shall result in a loss of the legal nonconforming status of such use. 
B.  Amortization - annexed property. Any adult-oriented business which was a legal use at the time of annexation of the property and which is located in the city, but which does not conform to the provisions of Section 17.16.460 and Section 17.16.490 shall be terminated within 18 months of the date of annexation unless an extension of time has been approved by the director in accordance with the provisions of this Section 17.16.490. 
(Ord. 801 § 2 (part), 2001: Prior zoning ord. § 251.021) 
17.16.480 - Application for extension of amortization period. 
    The owner or operator of a nonconforming use as described in this section may apply under the provisions of this section to the planning commission for an extension of time within which to terminate the nonconforming use. 
A.  Time and manner of application. An application for an extension of time within which to terminate a use made nonconforming by the provisions of this section, may be filed by the owner of the real property upon which such use is operated, or by the operator of the use. Such an application must be filed with the director at least 90 days but no more than 180 days prior to the time established in this Section for termination of such use. 
B.  Content of application-Fees. The application shall state the grounds for requesting an extension of time. The filing fee for such application shall be set forth in the schedule of fees established by resolution from time to time by the city council. 
C.  Hearing procedure. Within 10 days following receipt of the application, the director shall set the matter for an administrative hearing and notify the applicant of the time and date of such hearing. Such administrative hearing shall be conducted by the director or his designee, and shall be scheduled for a time and date within 30 days after the director's receipt of a completed application accompanied by the requisite filing fee. The applicant shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary and tangible evidence relevant to the issues, and may be represented by counsel. Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time not exceeding 10 days upon agreement of all parties, for the convenience of a party or a witness. The decision of the director shall be subject to appeal pursuant to Section 17.16.580 and subject to judicial review pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.8. 
D.  Approval of extension-Findings. An extension under the provisions of this section shall be for a reasonable period of time commensurate with the investment involved, and shall be approved only if the director finds that: 
1.  The applicant has made a substantial investment (including but not limited to lease obligations) in the property or structure on or in which the nonconforming use is conducted; such property or structure cannot be readily converted to another use; and such investment was made prior to the date of this ordinance; and 
2.  The applicant will be unable to recoup said investment as of the date established for termination of the use; and 
3.  The applicant has made good faith efforts to recoup the investment and to relocate the use to a location in conformance with Section 17.16.460 and Section 17.16.490. 
(Ord. 801 § 2 (part), 2001: Prior zoning ord. § 251.022) 
17.16.490 - Locational requirements. 
    No adult-oriented business shall be established, located, or operated within certain distances of certain specified land uses or zones as set forth below: 
A.  No such business shall be established or located within 1,500 feet of any other adult-oriented business. 
B.  No such business shall be established or located within 1,500 feet of any existing residential zone (to the extent such residential zone may feasibly be used for a residential dwelling unit of a type permitted by the city), residential use, park, public building (which the public is authorized to attend), church, school, boys club, girls club, or similar existing youth organization. 
C.  The distances set forth above shall be measured as a radius from the primary entrance of the adult-oriented business to the property lines of the property so zoned or used without regard to intervening structures. 
(Ord. 801 § 2 (part), 2001: Prior zoning ord. § 251.026) 
17.16.500 - Adult-oriented business permit required. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises in the city of Lancaster the operation of an adult-oriented business unless the person first obtains and continues to maintain in full force and effect a permit from the city of Lancaster as herein required ("adult-oriented business permit"). 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any persons to engage in or participate in any live performance depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities in an adult-oriented business unless the person first obtains and continues in full force and effect a permit from the city of Lancaster as herein required ("adult-oriented employee permit") 
(Ord. 801 § 2 (part), 2001) 
17.16.510 - Adult-oriented business permits. 
A.  Every person who proposes to maintain, operate or conduct an adult-oriented business in the city of Lancaster shall file an application with the city manager upon a form provided by the city of Lancaster and shall pay a filing fee, as established by resolution adopted by the city council from time to time, which shall not be refundable. 
B.  Adult-oriented business permits are nontransferable, except in accordance with Section 17A6.530. Therefore, all applications shall include the following information: 
1.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name, including any aliases, address, and submit satisfactory written proof that he or she is at least 18 years of age. 
2.  If the applicant is a partnership, the partners shall state the partnership's complete name, address, the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and attach a copy of the partnership agreement, if any. 
3.  If the applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall provide its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of California, the names and capacity of all officers and directors, the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process. 
4.  If the applicant is an individual, he or she shall sign the application. If the applicant is other than an individual, an officer of the business entity or an individual with authority to bind the entity shall sign the application. 
5.  If the applicant intends to operate the adult-oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant shall file the fictitious name of the adult-oriented business and show proof of registration of the fictitious name. 
6.  A description of the type of adult-oriented business for which the permit is requested and the address where the adult-oriented business is proposed to operate, plus the names and addresses of the owners and lessors of the adult-oriented business site. 
7.  The address to which notice of action on the application is to be mailed. 
8.  The names of all employees, independent contractors, and other persons who will perform at the adult-oriented business, who are required by Section 17.16.540 to obtain an adult-oriented business employee permit (for ongoing reporting requirements see Section 17.16.540, subsection A). 
9.  A sketch or diagram showing the interior configuration of the premises, including a statement of the total floor area occupied by the adult-oriented business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus 6 inches. 
10.  A straight-line drawing prepared within 30 days prior to application accurately depicting the building and the portion thereof to be occupied by the adult-oriented business, and: (1) the property line of any other adult-oriented business within 1500 feet of the primary entrance of the adult-oriented business for which a permit is requested; and (2) the property lines of any church, school, park, public building, boys club, girls club, youth center, recreational area, or residential zone or use within 1500 feet of the primary entrance of the adult-oriented business. 
11.  A diagram of the off-street parking areas and premises entries of the adult-oriented business showing the location of the lighting system required by Section 17.16.590(c). 
12.  Whether the applicant or principals thereof have been convicted, within the past five years, of a sexual crime against children, sexual abuse, rape, or crimes connected with another adult-oriented business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity or material harmful to minors, prostitution or pandering and, if so, the dates of conviction, confinement, and release, or has been convicted of a crime requiring registration under Penal Code Section 290. 
13.  Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals identified in the application pursuant to this section has bad a previous permit under this title or other similar ordinances from another city or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the adult-oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant or any other individual identified in the application pursuant to this section has been an owner, partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is permitted under this article whose permit has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the adult-oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation. 
14.  Whether the applicant or any other individual identified in the application pursuant to this section holds any other permits and/or licenses under this article or any other similar adult oriented business ordinance from another city or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other permitted businesses. 
B.  The fact that an applicant possesses other types of state or city permits or licenses does not exempt the applicant from the requirement of obtaining an adult-oriented business permit. 
(Ord. 801 § 2 (part), 2001) 
17.16.520 - Investigation and action on application for adult-oriented business permit. 
A.  The city manager shall determine whether the application contains all of the information required by the provisions of this article. If it is determined that the application is not complete, the applicant shall be sent a notice in writing within 10 business days after the date of receipt of the application that the application is not complete and the reasons therefor. The applicant shall have 30 calendar days from the date of the notice to submit additional information to render the application complete. The applicant's failure to submit the additional information within this time period renders the application null and void. Within 5 business days following the receipt of a supplemental or amended application, the city manager shall again determine whether the application is complete. Evaluation and notification shall occur as provided above until such time as the application is found to be complete. Once the application is found to be complete, the applicant shall be notified within 5 business days of that fact. If an applicant submits 2 consecutive incomplete applications, the applicant shall be notified in writing that a new application must be filed with the city manager as set forth herein. 
B.  Upon receipt of a completed application and payment of the filing fee, the city manager or his or her designee shall immediately stamp the application as received, and issue a temporary permit to the applicant, which shall be valid for 30 business days after the date of issuance, unless earlier terminated by the denial of the adult business permit. The city manager or his or her designee shall promptly investigate the information contained in the application to determine whether the applicant shall be issued an adult-oriented business permit. As part of this investigation, the city manager or his or her designee shall promptly send photocopies of the completed application to the Los Angeles County sheriff's office and any other city departments or other agencies responsible for enforcement of health, fire and building codes and laws. Each department or agency shall promptly investigate the applicant, application and proposed adult oriented business in accordance with its responsibilities under law and as set forth in this title, which investigation shall be completed prior to the expiration of the 30 day time period set forth in subsection C below. At the conclusion of such investigation, each department or agency shall indicate on the photocopy of the application its approval or disapproval of the application, date it, sign it, and, in the event it disapproves, state the reasons therefor and return the photocopy immediately to the city manager or his or her designee. A department or agency shall only disapprove an application if it finds the proposed adult-oriented business will violate any provision of any statute, code, ordinance, regulation or other law in effect in the city. The Los Angeles County Sheriff's office shall only be required to certify the records request check and shall not be required to approve or disapprove applications. In no event shall the temporary permit issued pursuant hereto constitute or grant a right to the applicant to operate an adult-oriented business in violation of Sections 17.16.460 and 17.16.490 of the code or in violation of any other zoning, building and safety, or business licensing provisions of the code. 
C.  Within 30 days of receipt of the completed application, the city manager shall complete the investigation, grant or deny the application in accordance with the provisions of this section, and so notify the applicant as follows: 
1.  The city manager shall write or stamp "Granted" or "Denied" on the application and date and sign such notation. 
2.  If the application is denied, the city manager shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for denial. 
3.  If the application is granted, the city manager shall attach to the application an adult-oriented business permit. 
4.  The application as granted or denied and the permit, if any, shall be placed in the U.S. mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the address stated in the application. All notices given hereunder shall be deemed given upon the date they are deposited in the U.S. mail or the date upon which personal service is provided. 
D.  The city manager shall grant the application and issue the adult-oriented business permit upon findings that the proposed business meets the locational criteria of Section 17.16.460 and Section 17.16.490; and that the applicant has met all of the development and performance standards and requirements of Section 17.16.590 unless the application is denied for one or more of the reasons set forth in subsection F hereof. The permittee shall post the permit conspicuously in the adult-oriented business premises so that it may be easily read at any time by persons entering the adult-oriented business. 
E.  If the city manager grants the application or if the city manager neither grants nor denies the application within 30 days after it is stamped as received (except as provided in Section 17.1 6.540A, subsection C), the applicant may begin operating the adult-oriented business for which the permit was sought, subject to strict compliance with the development and performance standards and requirements of Section 17.16.590. 
F.  The city manager shall deny the application for any of the following reasons: 
1.  The building, structure, equipment, or location used by the business for which an adult-oriented business permit is required do not comply with the requirements and standards of the health, zoning, fire and safety laws of the city, the county, and the state of California, or with the locational or development and performance standards and requirements of these regulations; 
2.  The applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, shareholder or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for an adult business permit, or has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the permit on the application form; 
3.  An applicant is under 18 years of age; 
4.  The required application fee has not been paid; 
5.  The adult-oriented business does not comply with the city's zoning ordinance; 
6.  The granting of the permit would violate a statute, ordinance, or court order; 
7.  The applicant has had a permit issued pursuant to this ordinance which has been suspended or revoked at the time of application; 
8.  Applicant has been convicted of a criminal act specified in Section 17.16.510, subsection B, paragraph 12 for which: 
a.  Less than 2 years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense for the specified criminal act, or 
b.  Less than 5 years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense for the specified criminal act, or 
c.  Less than 5 years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of 2 or more misdemeanors for the specified criminal acts occurring within any 24-month period. 
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on disqualification of the applicant. 
G.  If the city manager or his/her designee denies the application, he/she shall notify the applicant of the denial and state the reasons for the denial. 
H.  If a person applies for a permit for a particular location within a period of 112 months from the date of denial of a previous application for a permit at the location, and there has not been an intervening change in the circumstances which could reasonably be expected to lead to a different decision regarding the former reasons for denial, the application shall be denied. 
(Ord. 801 § 2 (part), 2001) 
17.16.530 - Transfer and expiration of adult-oriented business permits. 
A.  A permittee shall not operate an adult-oriented business under the authority of an adult-oriented business permit at any place other than the address of the adult-oriented business stated in the application for the permit. 
B.  A permittee shall not transfer ownership or control of an adult-oriented business permit to another person unless and until the transferee obtains an amendment to the permit from the city manager stating that the transferee is now the permittee. Such an amendment may be obtained only if the transferee files an application with the city manager in accordance with Sections 17.16.510, accompanies the application with a transfer fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council, and the city manager determines in accordance with Section 17.16.510 and/or 17.16.520 that the transferee would be entitled to the issuance of an original permit under the ordinances and regulations which were in effect as of the time of the initial issuance of the original adult-oriented business permit. Notwithstanding the forgoing, to the extent the adult-oriented business is operating as a legal nonconforming use, an amendment to the permit shall not extend the legal nonconforming status of such business beyond the amortization period, if any, applicable to the adult-oriented business unless such amortization period is extended pursuant to any local ordinance or regulations in effect as of the time of the extension request. 
C.  No permit may be transferred when the city manager has notified the permittee that the permit has been or may be suspended or revoked. 
D.  Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is hereby declared void, and the permit shall be deemed revoked. 
E.  Each adult-oriented business permit shall expire 1 year from the date of issuance, and may be renewed only by filing with the city manager a written request for renewal, accompanied by the filing fee as established from time to time by the city council, and a copy of the permit to be renewed. The request for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date of the permit. When made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit will not be stayed. Applications for renewal shall be acted on as provided herein for action upon applications for permits. If the city manager or his or her designee determines that there has been no change in the configuration or operation of the permitted adult-oriented business which would call into question the continued satisfaction of all requirements of this ordinance, the permit shall be renewed. If the city manager or his or her designee determines that there has been such a change in the configuration or operation of the adult- oriented business, the city manager may require the permittee to submit a complete new permit application pursuant to Section 17.16.510. In such event, and to the extent the request for renewal has been submitted at least 30 days prior to expiration of the permit, the expiration of the existing permit shall be stayed pending a decision on the new permit application. 
(Ord. 801 § 2 (part), 2001: Prior zoning ord. § 251 .027) 
17.16.540 - Adult-oriented business employee permit. 
A.  No person shall engage in or participate in any live performance depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities in an adult-oriented business, nor shall any employee as defined in Section 17.16.450, be employed at an adult-oriented business, without a valid adult-oriented business employee permit issued by the city to such person. All persons who have been issued an adult-oriented business permit shall promptly supplement the information provided as part of the application for the permit required by Section 7.16.510, subsection B, with the names of all performers and employees required to obtain an adult-oriented business employee permit, within 30 days of any change in the information originally submitted. Failure to submit such changes shall be grounds for suspension of the adult-oriented business permit. 
B.  The city manager shall grant, deny and renew adult-oriented business employee permits. 
C.  The application for a permit shall be made on a form provided by the city manager. An original and 2 copies of the completed and sworn permit application shall be filed with the city manager. 
D.  The completed application shall contain the following information and be accompanied by the following documents: 
1.  The applicant's legal name and any other names (including "stage names" and aliases) used by the applicant; 
2.  Age, date and place of birth; 
3.  Height, weight, hair and eye color; 
4.  Present residence address and telephone number, and business address and telephone number, if any; 
5.  Whether the applicant has been convicted in the past 5 years as of the date of the application of: 
a.  Any of the offenses set forth in Sections 311 through 313.4, 315, 316, 318, 266a, 266b, 266c, 266e, 266g, 266h, 266i, -647(a), 647(b) and 647(D) of the California Penal Code, or any offense requiring registration under Penal Code section 290 of the California Penal Code, as those sections now exist or may hereafter be amended or renumbered. 
b.  The equivalent of the aforesaid offenses outside the state of California. 
6.  Whether such person is or has ever been licensed or registered as a prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other jurisdiction to engage in prostitution in such other jurisdiction. If any person mentioned in this subsection has ever been licensed or registered as a prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other state to engage in prostitution, a statement shall be submitted giving the place of such registration, licensing or legal authorization, and the inclusive dates during which such person was so licensed, registered, or authorized to engage in prostitution. 
7.  Date, issuing state and number of state issued driver's license or identification card and social security number; 
8.  Satisfactory written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
9.  The applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the sheriff's department, and a color photograph clearly showing the applicant's face. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant; 
10.  If the application is made for the purpose of renewing a license, the applicant shall attach a copy of the license to be renewed. 
E.  The completed application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee. The amount of the fee shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
F.  Upon receipt of an application and payment of the application fees, the city manager shall immediately stamp the application as received, issue a temporary license to the applicant which shall be valid for 15 days unless earlier terminated by the denial of an adult-oriented business employee permit, and promptly investigate the application. 
G.  If the city manager determines that the applicant has completed the application improperly or the application is otherwise incomplete, the city manager shall notify applicant of such fact within 10 business days of the date of receipt of the application, including the reasons the application is not complete. The city manager shall, in such event, grant the applicant an extension of time of 10 days to complete the application properly. In addition, the applicant may request an extension, not to exceed 10 days, of the time for the city manager to act on the application. The time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time. 
(Ord. 801 § 2 (part), 2001: Prior zoning ord. § 251.030) 
17.16.550 - Investigation and action on application. 
A.  Within 15 days after receipt of the properly completed application, the city manager shall grant or deny the application and so notify the applicant as follows: 
1.  The city manager shall write or stamp "Granted" or "Denied" on the application and date and sign such notation. 
2.  If the application is denied, the city manager shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for denial. 
3.  If the application is granted, the city manager shall attach to the application an adult-oriented business employee permit. 
4.  The application as granted or denied and the permit, if any, shall be placed in the U.S. mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the residence address stated in the application. 
B.  The city manager shall grant the application and issue the permit unless the application is denied for one or more of the reasons set forth in subsection C of this section. 
C.  The city manager shall deny the application for any of the following reasons: 
1.  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a permit or in any report or document required to be filed with the application or has omitted information reasonably necessary for issuance of the permit; 
2.  The applicant is under 18 years of age; 
3.  The adult-oriented business employee permit is to be used for employment in a business prohibited by state or local laws, ordinances, or regulations; 
4.  The applicant has been registered in any state as a prostitute; 
5.  The applicant has been convicted of any criminal act enumerated in Section 17.16.540, subsection D.5., or convicted of an offense outside the state of California that would have constituted any of the described offenses if committed within the state of California, for which: 
a.  Less than 2 years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense for the specified criminal act, or 
b.  Less than 5 years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense for the specified criminal act, or 
c.  Less than 5 years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of 2 or more misdemeanors for the specified criminal acts occurring within any 24-month period. 
D.  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted, and the expiration date. The city manager shall provide each person issued an adult-oriented business employee permit with an identification card containing the name, address, photograph, and permit number of the permittee, 
E.  Both the permit and identification card shall be available for inspection at all times during which the permittee is on the premises of the adult-oriented business. 
F.  If the city manager neither grants nor denies a completed application for which the filing fees have been paid, within 15 business days after its receipt, the applicant may begin the employment for which the license is sought, subject to strict compliance with the development and performance standards and regulations and other provisions of Article IV of this chapter. 
(Ord. 801 § 2 (part), 2001: Prior zoning ord. § 251.031) 
17.16.560 - Expiration of adult-oriented business employee permit. 
    Each adult-oriented business employee permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance, and may be renewed only by filing with the city manager a written request for renewal, accompanied by the filing fee as established from time to time by the city council, and a copy of the permit to be renewed. The request for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date of the permit. When made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit will not be stayed. Applications for renewal shall be acted on as provided herein for action upon applications for permits. If the city manager or his or her designee determines that there has been no change in the facts upon which the permit was issued which would call into question the continued satisfaction of all requirements of this ordinance, as amended from time to time, the permit shall be renewed. If the city manager or his or her designee determines that there has been such a change, the city manager may require the permittee to submit a complete new permit application pursuant to Section 17.16.540. In such event, the expiration of the existing permit shall be stayed pending a decision on the new permit application. 
(Ord. 801 § 2 (part), 2001: Prior zoning ord. § 251.032) 
17.16.570 - Suspension or revocation of adult-oriented business permits and adult-oriented business employee permits. 
A.  An adult-oriented business permit or adult-oriented business employee permit may be suspended or revoked in accordance with the procedures and standards of this section. 
1.  On determining that grounds for permit suspension or revocation exist, the city manager shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension or revocation to the permittee. Such notice shall set forth the time and place of a hearing to be conducted by the city manager or a hearing officer appointed by the city manager, and the ground or grounds upon which the hearing is based, the pertinent code sections, and a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the permittee, or shall be delivered to the permittee personally, at least 10 working days prior to the hearing date. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the city manager, but at a minimum shall adhere to the provisions of subsection 2. 
2.  The applicant shall have a right to offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence relevant to the issues; and may be represented by counsel. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness upon agreement of all parties. The hearing officer's decision may be appealed in accordance with Section 17.16.580. 
3.  The city manager shall suspend a permit for a period not to exceed 30 days if the hearing officer determines, following notice to the permittee and a hearing as set forth above, that the permittee or an employee of a permittee has violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter, or has refused to allow an inspection of the adult-oriented business premises as authorized by this chapter. 
4.  The city manager shall revoke a permit if the hearing officer determines, following notice to the permittee and a hearing as set forth above, that any of the following conditions arising from the acts or omissions of the permittee, or an employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, or manager of an adult-oriented business, has occurred: 
a.  A cause of suspension as set forth in subsection 3 has occurred and the permit has been previously suspended within the preceding 12 months. 
b.  The permittee has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material facts in the application for a permit, or in any report or record required to be filed with the city. 
c.  The permittee, employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, or manager of an adult-oriented business has knowingly allowed or permitted, and has failed to make a reasonable effort to prevent the occurrence of any of the following activities on the premises of the adult-oriented business, or in the case of an adult-oriented business employee permit holder, the permittee has engaged in one of the activities described below while on the premises of the adult-oriented business: 
1.  Any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation, with the exception of an adult hotel/motel, unless the adult-oriented business employee or adult-oriented business operator of such adult hotel/motel knowingly allowed such act to occur in a public place or within public view; 
2.  Use of the establishment as a place where unlawful solicitations for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation occur; 
3.  Any conduct constituting a criminal offense which requires registration under Section 290 of the California Penal Code; 
4.  The occurrence of acts of lewdness, assignation, or prostitution, including any conduct constituting violations of Sections 315, 316, or 318 or Subdivision b of Section 647 of the California Penal Code; 
5.  Any act constituting a violation of provisions in the California Penal Code relating to obscene matter or distribution of harmful matter to minors, including but not limited to Sections 311 through 313.4; 
6.  Any conduct prohibited by this chapter. 
d.  Failure to abide by any disciplinary action previously imposed by an appropriate city official. 
(Ord. 801 § 2, 2001: Prior zoning ord. § 251.040) 
17.16.580 - Appeal of denial, suspension or revocation. 
    All decisions of the hearing officer or city manager to, issue, renew, deny, suspend or revoke a permit issued pursuant to this article are final unless appealed in accordance herewith. 
    An applicant or permittee may appeal a decision by the city manager or a hearing officer to deny an application for, or to revoke or suspend, an adult-oriented business permit or adult-oriented business employee permit by filing an appeal with the city clerk pursuant to Chapter 2.44 of the code. A hearing by the city council on such appeal shall be scheduled for the first available regular meeting of the city council for which proper notice can be given, but in no event shall such hearing occur more than 30 days after the appeal is filed. The city council shall make a decision on the appeal during the same meeting at which the hearing is held. 
    After any denial, or a suspension or revocation, the applicant or permittee may seek prompt judicial review of such decision in any court of competent jurisdiction as provided by law, and specifically as provided by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. Notwithstanding the applicant's or licensee's right to initiate judicial review, the city shall, upon the written request of an aggrieved applicant or licensee received within 30 calendar days following the decision of the city council, file an action pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8 with a court of competent jurisdiction seeking declaratory and injunctive relief, including temporary and preliminary relief, as to the propriety of the denial, revocation, or suspension. 
    If the city denies an initial or renewal application and the aggrieved applicant commences a legal action to determine the validity of the denial or makes a written request in the manner set forth herein that the city commence such action, then the city shall issue a temporary permit. This temporary permit shall remain in effect only until the court in which the action is pending renders a judicial decision on an application for temporary restraining order, a motion for preliminary injunction, etc., as to the propriety of the denial. 
    If the city revokes, or suspends an existing permit, and the aggrieved applicant or the permittee commences a legal action to determine the validity thereof or makes a written request in the manner set forth herein that the city commence such action, the city's revocation or suspension of the permit will be stayed pending a judicial decision on the propriety of the denial based upon an application for temporary restraining order, a motion for preliminary injunction or other form of judicial review, whichever is earliest. 
    Any temporary permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall not grant any vested rights on the holder of the temporary permit, nor shall it grant a right to the holder to operate or serve as an employee in an adult-oriented business which is in violation of Sections 17.16.460 or 17.16.490 of this article or in violation of any other zoning, building and safety, or business licensing provisions of the code. 
(Ord. 801 § 2 (part), 2001: Prior zoning ord. § 251.041) 
17.16.590 - Adult-oriented business development and performance standards. 
A.  Maximum occupancy load, fire exits, aisles and fire equipment shall be regulated, designed and provided in accordance with the fire department and building regulations and standards adopted by the city. 
B.  No adult-oriented business shall be operated in any manner that permits the observation of any material or activities depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from any public way or from any location outside the building or area of such establishment. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening. 
C.  All off-street parking areas and premise entries of the sexually oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one foot candle of light on the parking surface and/or walkways. The required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the adult-oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. The lighting shall be shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premises. 
D.  The premises within which the adult-oriented business is located shall provide sufficient sound-absorbing insulation so that noise generated inside said premises shall not be audible anywhere on any adjacent property or public right-of-way or within any other building or other separate unit within the same building. 
E.  Except for those businesses also regulated by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, an adult-oriented business may be open for business only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and midnight on any particular day, unless alternative hours are mandated as a condition of approval of a zone change. 
F.  The building entrance to an adult-oriented business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under 18 years of age are precluded from entering the premises. Said notice shall be constructed and posted to the satisfaction of the community development director or designee. No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted within the premises at any time. 
G.  All indoor areas of the adult-oriented business within which patrons are permitted, except rest rooms, shall be open to view by the management at all times. 
H.  Any adult-oriented business which is also an "adult arcade", shall comply with the following provisions: 
1.  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
2.  The view area specified above shall remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times. No patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted. 
3.  No viewing room or booth may be occupied by more than one person at any one time. 
4.  The walls or partitions between viewing rooms or booths shall be maintained in good repair at all times, with no holes between any two such rooms such as would allow viewing from one booth into another or such as to allow physical contact of any kind between the occupants of any two such booths. 
5.  Customers, patrons or visitors who are not actively engaged in shopping for or reviewing the products available on display for purchaser viewing shall not be allowed to stand idly by in the vicinity of any such video booths, or in the common area of such business. Signs prohibiting loitering shall be posted in prominent places in and near the video booths. 
6.  The floors, seats, walls and other interior portions of all video booths shall be maintained clean and free from waste and bodily secretions. Presence of human excrement, urine, semen or saliva in any such booths shall be evidence of improper maintenance and inadequate sanitary controls; repeated instances of such conditions may justify suspension or revocation of the owner and operator's license to operate the adult-oriented business. 
I.  All areas of the adult-oriented business shall be illuminated at a minimum of the following foot-candles, to be maintained and evenly distributed at ground level: 
Area Foot-Candles Bookstores and other retail establishments 20 Theaters and cabarets 5 (except during performances, at which times lighting shall be at least 1.25 foot-candles Arcades 10 Motels/Hotels 20 (in public areas) Modeling studios 20  
J.  The adult-oriented business shall provide and maintain separate rest room facilities for male patrons and employees, and female patrons and employees. Male patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the rest room(s) for females, and female patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the rest room(s) for males, except to carry out duties of repair, maintenance and cleaning of the rest room facilities. The rest rooms shall be free from any materials depicting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Rest rooms shall not contain television monitors or other motion picture or video projection, recording or reproduction equipment. The foregoing provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to an adult-oriented business which deals exclusively with sale or rental of materials which are not used or consumed on the premises, such as an adult bookstore, and which does not provide rest room facilities to its patrons or the general public. 
K.  The following additional requirements shall pertain to adult-oriented businesses providing live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities, except for businesses regulated by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission: 
1.  No person shall perform live entertainment for patrons of an adult-oriented business except upon a stage at least 18 inches above the level of the floor which is separated by a distance of at least 10 feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons, and no patron shall be permitted within 10 feet of the stage while the stage is occupied by an entertainer. "Entertainer" shall mean any person who is an employee or independent contractor of the adult-oriented business, or any other person who, with or without any compensation or other form of consideration, performs live entertainment for patrons of an adult-oriented business. 
2.  The adult-oriented business shall provide separate dressing room facilities for entertainers which are exclusively dedicated to the entertainers' use. 
3.  The adult-oriented business shall provide an entrance/exit for entertainers which is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons. 
4.  The adult-oriented business shall provide access for entertainers between the stage and the dressing rooms which is completely separated from the patrons. If such separate access is not physically feasible, the adult-oriented business shall provide a minimum 3 foot wide walk aisle for entertainers between the dressing room area and the stage, with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the entertainers capable of (and which actually results in) preventing any physical contact between patrons and entertainers. 
5.  No entertainer, either before, during or after performances, shall have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical contact with any entertainer either before, during or after performances by such entertainer. This subsection shall only apply to physical contact on the premises of the adult-oriented business, including without limitation, any parking areas. 
6.  Fixed rail(s) at least 30 inches in height shall be maintained establishing the separations between entertainers and patrons required by this subsection. 
7.  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any entertainer and no entertainer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
8.  No owner or other person with managerial control over an adult-oriented business shall permit any person on the premises of the adult-oriented business to engage in a live showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or anus with less than a fully opaque coverage, and/or the female breast with less than a fully opaque coverage over any part of the nipple or areola and/or covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. This provision may not be complied with by applying an opaque covering simulating the appearance of the specified anatomical part required to be covered. 
M.  Additional Regulations for Adult Motels. 
1.  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated 2 or more times in a period of time that is less than 10 hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel. 
2.  It is a violation of this chapter when, as a person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have an adult-oriented business permit, the person rents or sub-rents a sleeping room to a person and, within 10 hours from the time the room is rented, rents or sub-rents the same sleeping room again. 
3.  For purposes of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this section, the terms "rent" or "sub-rent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
N.  Additional Regulations Relating to the Exhibition of Sexually Explicit Films, Videos or Live Entertainment in Viewing Rooms. A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult-oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, live entertainment or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Upon application for an adult-oriented business permit, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas The city manager may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was first prepared. 
2.  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior written approval of the city manager based upon the city manager's finding that such alteration complies with this section. 
3.  It is the duty of the permittee of the adult-oriented business to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the adult-oriented business. 
4.  The interior of the adult-oriented business shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the adult-oriented business to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video viewing equipment or any materials depicting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. If the adult-oriented business has 2 or more designated manager's stations, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the adult-oriented business to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required by this section must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
5.  It shall be the duty of the permittee to ensure that the view area specified in this section remains unobstructed at all times by any doors, curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials. 
6.  It shall be the duty of the permittee to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the adult-oriented business which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted pursuant to paragraph 1 of this subsection. 
7.  No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time. 
8.  The adult-oriented business shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than 10-foot candles as measured at the floor level. 
9.  It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the illumination required by this section is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
10.  No openings of any kind shall exist between viewing rooms or booths. 
11.  No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between viewing booths or rooms. 
12.  The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes exist. 
13.  The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting. 
14.  The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or other porous material shall be used within 48 inches of the floor. 
15.  It is a violation of this chapter for a person having a duty under this section to knowingly fail to fulfill that duty. 
P.  Additional Regulations Concerning Public Nudity. 
1.  It is a violation of this chapter for a person knowingly and intentionally to appear in a state of nudity in an adult-oriented business or any other public place. 
2.  It is a violation of this chapter for a person knowingly or intentionally, in an adult-oriented business, to appear in a semi-nude condition unless the person is an employee who, while semi-nude, is upon a stage at least 18 inches above the level of the floor which is separated by a distance of at least 10 feet from the nearest areas occupied by patrons. 
3.  It is a violation of this chapter for an employee or performer while semi-nude in an adult-oriented business, to solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer or for any patron or customer to pay or give any gratuity to any employee. 
4.  It is a violation of this chapter for an entertainer, while semi-nude, to touch a patron or the clothing of a patron, or for a patron to touch an entertainer who is semi-nude. 
Q.  Adult-oriented businesses shall employ security guards in order to maintain the public peace and safety, based upon the following standards: 
1.  Adult-oriented businesses featuring live entertainment shall provide at least one security guard at all times while the business is open. If the occupancy limit of the premises is greater than 35 persons, an additional security guard shall be on duty. 
2.  Security guards for other adult-oriented businesses may be required if it is determined by the city manager that their presence is necessary in order to prevent any illegal conduct from occurring on the premises. 
3.  Security guard(s) shall be charged with preventing violations of law and enforcing compliance by patrons of the requirements of these regulations. Security guards shall be uniformed in such a manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the public and shall be duly licensed as a security guard as required by applicable provisions of state law. No security guard required pursuant to this subsection shall act as a door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person, or sole occupant of the manager's station while acting as a security guard. 
    The foregoing applicable requirements of this Section shall be deemed conditions of adult-oriented business Permit approvals, and failure to comply with every such requirement shall be grounds for revocation of the Permit issued pursuant to these regulations. 
(Ord. 801 § 2 (part), 2001: Prior zoning ord. § 251.042) 
17.16.600 - Reserved. 
(Ord. 801 § 2 (part), 2001: Prior zoning ord. § 251 .043) 
17.16.610 - Separate offense for each day. 
    Any person that violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any such person commits, continues, permits, or causes a violation hereof, and each offense shall be punishable separately. 
(Ord. 801 § 2 (part), 2001: Prior zoning ord. § 251.044) 
17.16.620 - Public nuisance. 
    Any use or condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by the city pursuant to Chapter 8.28 of the code. 
(Ord. 801 § 2 (part), 2001: Prior zoning ord. § 251.045) 
17.16.630 - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates, causes, or permits another person to violate any provision of this chapter commits an infraction. Any person convicted of an infraction shall be subject to a civil fine to the maximum amount permitted by state law. Any person twice convicted of an infraction for repeat violations of the same provision within a one year period, may be charged with a misdemeanor upon being issued a citation for the repeated violation of the same provision. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor shall be subject to the maximum punishment permitted by state law. 
    Pursuant to Government Code Section 3 6900(a), the city attorney may prosecute these violations in the name of the people of the state of California. 
(Ord. 801 § 2 (part), 2001: Prior zoning ord. § 251.050) 
17.16.640 - Civil injunction. 
    The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared to be contrary to the public interest and shall, at the discretion of city, create a cause of action for injunctive relief. 
(Ord. 801 § 2 (part), 2001: Prior zoning ord. § 251.060) 
17.16.650 - Administrative remedies. 
    In addition to the civil remedies and criminal penalties set forth above, any person that violates the provisions of this chapter may be subject to administrative remedies, as set forth by city ordinance. 
(Ord. 801 § 2 (part), 2001: Prior zoning ord. § 251.061) 
17.16.670 - Register and permit number of employees. 
    Every permittee of an adult-oriented business permit which provides live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities must maintain a register of all persons in the past and currently so performing on the premises and their adult-oriented business employee permit numbers. Such register shall be available for inspection during regular business hours by any police officer, sheriff or deputy sheriff, or health officer of the city. 
(Ord. 801 § 2 (part), 2001: Prior zoning ord. § 251.063) 
17.16.680 - Display of permit and identification cards. 
A.  Every adult-oriented business shall display at all times during business hours the permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for such adult-oriented business in a conspicuous place so that the same may be readily seen by all persons entering the adult-oriented business. 
B.  The city manager shall provide each adult-oriented business employee required to have an adult-oriented business employee permit pursuant to this chapter, an identification card containing the name, address, photograph and permit number of such performer. 
C.  A permitted adult-oriented business employee shall have such card available for inspection at all times during which such person is on the premises of the adult-oriented business. 
(Ord. 801 § 2 (part), 2001: Prior zoning ord. § 251.064) 
17.16.690 - Employment of and services rendered to persons under the age of 18 years prohibited. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any permittee, operator, or other person in charge of any adult-oriented business to employ, or provide any service for which it requires an adult-oriented business permit, to any person who is not at least 18 years of age. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any permittee, operator or other person in charge of any adult-oriented business to permit to enter, or remain within the adult-oriented business, any person who is not at least 18 years of age. 
(Ord. 801 § 2 (part), 2001: Prior zoning ord. § 251.070) 
17.16.700 - Inspection. 
    Representatives of the police, health, fire, planning or other city departments may inspect the premises of an adult-oriented business in accordance with this Section 17.16.700, which inspections shall be solely for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law and the development and performance standards applicable to adult-oriented businesses. Such inspections may be conducted only (1) after a representative of such department has provided evidence satisfactory to the city manager that there is good reason to believe that one or more code sections within the city's municipal code have been violated by the adult-oriented business within 2 weeks of the inspection; or (2) after advising the owner or operator of the adult-oriented business of the provisions of this section and any other sections codified by this ordinance relevant to the scope of the inspection including any sections for which a violation is anticipated, at any time the adult-oriented business is occupied or opened for business. A person who operates an adult-oriented business or his or her agent or employee is in violation of the provisions of this section if he/she refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for business, so long as the inspection is in accordance herewith. 
(Ord. 801 § 2 (part), 2001: Prior zoning ord. § 251.071) 
17.16.710 - Regulations nonexclusive. 
    The provisions of this article regulating adult-oriented businesses are not intended to be exclusive and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other regulations pertaining to the operation of businesses as adopted by the city council of the city. 
(Ord. 801 § 2 (part), 2001: Prior zoning ord. § 25 1.072) 
17.16.720 - EMPLOYMENT OF PERSONS WITHOUT PERMITS UNLAWFUL. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, or permittee in charge of or in control of an adult-oriented business which provides live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities to allow any person to perform such entertainment who is not in possession of a valid, unrevoked adult-oriented business employee permit. 
(Ord. 801 § 2 (part), 2001: Prior zoning ord. § 251.073) 
17.16.730. - Time-limit for filing application for permit. 
    Any person who possesses a current business license for a sexually oriented business which is not subject to Section 17.16.470, or who operates a business which was not deemed to be a sexually- oriented business prior to the effective date of this ordinance but which, through an expansion of such business in the manner set forth in Section 17.16.460 is deemed to constitute an adult-oriented business under Section 17.16.450 and who does not have a validly issued adult-oriented business permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance, and all persons required by this chapter to obtain an adult-oriented business employee permit, must apply for and obtain such a permit within 90 days of the effective date of this ordinance. Failure to do so and continued operation of an adult-oriented business, or continued performances depicting specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in an adult-oriented business after such time without a permit shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 801 § 2 (part), 2001) 
17.16.740. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase in this chapter or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this chapter or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared unconstitutional, or invalid, or ineffective. 
(Ord. 801 § 2 (part), 2001) 
Chapter 17.20 - PUBLIC, OPEN SPACE AND SPECIAL PURPOSE ZONES 
Article I. - In General 

17.20.010 - Definition. 
    As used in this title, "public," "open space," and "special purpose" zones mean: 
A.  Public zones: 
1.  Public (P) 
2.  School (S) 
B.  Open space zones: 
1.  Open space (O) 
2.  Park (Pk) 
3.  Cemetery (Ce) 
C.  Special purpose zones: 
1.  Specific plan (Sp) 
2.  Senior Mobilehome Park Overlay zone (MHP-S) 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.020 - Prohibition. 
    A person shall not use any premises in any public, open space, or special purpose zone except as hereinafter specifically permitted in this title and subject to all regulations and conditions enumerated in this title. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
Article II. - Public Use (P) Zone 

17.20.030 - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of the P Zone is to provide the means necessary to implement the city's general plan, specifically the "public use" category, as set forth in the text of the general plan and as delineated on the general plan map. This zone is intended to be in accordance with applicable goals, objectives, policies and actions set forth by the general plan. This zone is also intended to allow the development of public facilities and uses in order to provide a full range of urban services. It shall also be the intent of this zone to apply the provisions of this zone including, but not limited to, the property development regulations required herein to all new building lots created after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. 
    It shall not be the intent of this title to render previously legally created building lots or legally constructed buildings which do not comply with the new property development regulations or other requirements of this title to be nonconforming where these lots or buildings complied with the ordinances in effect at the time of their creation or construction. However, proof of compliance with ordinances in effect at the time of creation or construction shall be the sole burden of the applicant or property owner. Such proof may include building permits, minutes of council or commission action, case files, or other documentation. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.040 - Permitted uses. 
    The following categories of uses are permitted in the P zone subject to any stated exceptions, development regulations, and approval of the site plan as follows: 
A.  Airports-Owned and operated by a public agency. 
B.  Animal shelters and related facilities-Operated by a public agency. 
C.  Existing residential uses-Such uses may continue to be used as a permitted use provided that such uses may not be expanded by a cumulative total of more than 500 square feet of floor area. 
D.  Flood control and drainage facilities-Maintained by a public agency. 
E.  Maintenance yards and related activities-Operated by a public agency. 
F.  Offices-Government. This category is limited to federal, state, county, city or special district offices, libraries and court facilities, public utilities, and similar office uses. 
G.  Prisons-Public or privately operated. 
H.  Sewage treatment plants-Operated by a public agency, provided that no stockpiling, commercial composting, processing, or handling of sludge or biosolid material is conducted within an enclosure or inside of a building. 
I.  Water reservoirs, dams, treatment plants, gauging stations, pumping stations, tanks, wells, and any use normal and appurtenant to the storage and distribution of water. 
J.  Other uses. This category includes those uses which do not fall into any other category, and are not temporary uses, which in the opinion of the director are consistent with the purpose and intent of this zone and similar to other uses permitted herein. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.050 - Accessory and temporary uses. 
A.  The following uses are considered as accessory uses to the permitted uses in the P Zone: 
1.  Accessory buildings and structures customarily used in conjunction therewith. 
2.  Electric Vehicle Charging Station. An electric vehicle charging station (EVCS) shall be permitted as an accessory use within a parking lot or in a parking garage of any publicly owned facility subject to all applicable city code requirements and the following: 
a.  The EVCS's shall be located in a manner which will be easily seen by the public for informational and security purposes and shall be illuminated during evening business hours; and 
b.  Be located in desirable and convenient parking locations which will serve as an incentive for the use of electric vehicles; and 
c.  The EVCS pedestals shall be protected as necessary to prevent damage by automobiles; and 
d.  The EVCS pedestals shall be designed to minimize potential damage by vandalism and to be safe for use in inclement weather; and 
e.  Complete instructions and appropriate warnings concerning the use of the EVCS shall be posted on a sign in a prominent location on each station for use by the operator; and 
f.  One standard nonilluminated sign, not to exceed 4 square feet in area and 10 feet in height, may be posted for the purpose of identifying the location of each cluster of EVCS's; and 
g.  The EVCS may be on a timer that limits the use of the station to the normal business hours of the use(s) which it serves to preclude unauthorized use after business hours; and 
h.  Where determined by the director to be necessary, new public uses shall provide the electrical service capacity necessary and all conduits and related equipment necessary to ultimately serve 2 percent of the total parking spaces with EVCS's in a manner approved by the building and safety official. Of these parking spaces, 1/2 shall initially be provided with the electric vehicle supply equipment necessary to function as on-line EVCS's upon completion of the project. The remainder shall be installed at such time as they are needed for use by customers, employees or other users. EVCS's shall be provided in disabled person parking spaces in accordance with state requirements. 
B.  The following uses are considered as temporary uses in the P zone: 
1.  Building materials, storage of, used in a building or construction project, during the construction and 30 days thereafter, including the contractor's temporary office provided that any lot or parcel of land so used shall be part of the project, or on property adjoining the construction site. 
2.  Temporary Commercial Coach. Use of commercial coaches as temporary offices subject to the provisions of Article X of Chapter 17.40 and this zone. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.060 - Uses subject to director's review and approval. 
    All permitted, temporary and accessory uses shall be subject to review and approval by the director. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.070 - Property development regulations. 
A.  General. 
1.  No new building or commercial coach shall be erected, constructed, moved onto, or established on an existing legal lot or parcel of land unless said building or temporary commercial coach shall comply with all of the regulations set forth in city ordinances, standards, guidelines or policies and subsection B of this section, or Article X of Chapter 17.40 which are pertinent to its placement on said lot or parcel. 
2.  No existing building or temporary commercial coach located on an existing legal lot or parcel of land shall be converted, enlarged, or moved unless said building, or addition thereto, shall comply with all of the regulations set forth in city ordinances, standards, guidelines or policies and subsection B of this section, or Article X of Chapter 17.40 which are pertinent to its placement on said lot or parcel. 
3.  No new lot shall be created or any building, or portion thereof, existing on such new lot be used, unless said lot and said building location shall comply with all of the regulations set forth in city ordinances, standards, guidelines or policies and subsection B of this section. 
B.  P Zone. Wherever property is designated as a P zone on the zoning map, the following regulations shall apply: 
1.  Lot dimensions and Yard requirements. Lot dimensions and yard requirements for this section shall be determined by the director on a case by case basis. Determination of lot dimensions, yards, setbacks and projections permitted in yards for a proposed public facility shall take into consideration the configuration of the lot, and the type, height layout, and intended use for the facility, the surrounding land uses, and any potentially adverse impact on surrounding properties from the intended use. In determining lot dimensions, yards and setback requirements for a particular public use, consideration shall be given to similar requirements on adjacent properties and to required lot dimensions and yard requirements in other sections of this title that most closely approximate the intended public use. 
2.  Height. The height of buildings and structures shall comply with the following: 
a.  No building in the P zone which is within 100 feet of any RR, SRR or R zone shall exceed a height of 2 stories or 35 feet, whichever is less. 
b.  No building may be constructed which would shade any existing active solar energy system on adjoining property without the consent of the affected property owner. (See subsection 1 in the definition of solar energy system in Section 17.04.240.) 
c.  Exceptions for Solar Systems. Solar collectors may exceed the height limit when mounted on the roof of a legal, conforming building. The right to exceed the height limit shall be exercised only in the event that: there is no other practical means or location for achieving an efficient placement on the building or site in question; such collectors may exceed the height limit only to the extent necessary to achieve efficient placement; in no case shall such solar collectors (or related equipment) encroach more than 5 feet beyond the limit. Also the placement of a solar collector shall not shade or otherwise diminish the efficiency of existing solar collectors on neighboring property, or preclude such property from sufficient solar access to successfully operate a solar energy system sufficient to serve the needs of the business or occupants. 
3.  Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): 1.0. (See definition in Section 17.04.240.) 
4.  Landscaping. Landscaping requirements for this section shall be determined by the director on a case by case basis. Determination of landscaping requirements for a proposed public facility shall take into consideration the type, height, layout, and the intended use for the facility, the surrounding land uses, and any potentially adverse impact on surrounding properties from the intended use. In establishing landscaping requirements for a particular public use, consideration shall be given to landscaping requirements in other sections of this title that most closely approximate the intended public use. 
5.  Outside Storage. Outside storage requirements for this section shall be determined by the director on a case by case basis. Determination of outside storage requirements for a proposed public facility shall take into consideration the type, layout, and the intended use for the facility, the surrounding land uses, and any potentially adverse impact on surrounding properties from the intended use. In establishing outside storage requirements for a particular public use, consideration shall be given to outside storage requirements in other sections of this title that most closely approximate the intended public use. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.080 - Signs. 
    Sign requirements for this section shall be determined by the director on a case by case basis. Determination of sign requirements for a proposed public facility shall take into consideration the type, height, layout, and the intended use for the facility, the surrounding land uses, and any potentially adverse impact on surrounding properties from the intended use. In establishing sign requirements for a particular public use, consideration shall be given to sign requirements in other sections of this title that most closely approximate the intended public use. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.090 - Off-street parking. 
    The automobile parking facilities required by this section shall be provided and permanently maintained as such unless and until a substitute has been provided which is in full compliance with the provisions of this title. The following parking requirements shall be complied with in the P zone: 
A.  Parking Requirements by Use. Parking requirements in the P zone shall be provided as determined by the director to be appropriate on a case by case basis. In general, parking facilities shall comply with the requirements and design standards for similar uses as contained in this title. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.100 - Design and performance standards. 
    The following design and performance standards shall be met for development in the P zone: 
A.  General Requirements. Design and performance standards including access, paving, size and marking of spaces and circulation of parking lots, loading spaces, buffering, building design, landscaping, lighting, outside storage and display, screening, service for utilities, signs and similar requirements not hereafter detailed in this subsection, shall be determined by the director on a case by case basis. Determination of design and performance standards for a proposed public facility shall take into consideration the configuration of the lot, the height, type, layout, and the intended use for the facility, the surrounding land uses, and any potentially adverse impact on surrounding properties from the intended use. In determining design and performance standards for a particular public use, consideration shall be given to design and performance standards in other sections of this title that most closely approximate the intended public use. 
B.  Specific Requirements. 
1.  Refuse/Recycling Storage Enclosures. All public uses shall have on the same lot or parcel a refuse/recycling storage area at a ratio of 20 square feet of refuse/recycling storage area for each 1,000 square feet or portion thereof of net floor area of the facility or as may be determined necessary by the director. The enclosure shall be a minimum size of 6 feet in width by 18 feet in length (exterior dimension). Such storage areas shall be enclosed on 3 sides by a minimum 5-foot-high reinforced masonry or concrete wall with a sight-obscuring gate (chain link with slats is not acceptable) of noncombustible materials which is substantially the same height as the enclosing walls. The floor of the enclosure shall be of concrete construction. Such storage areas shall not be placed in a location which is openly exposed to a fronting street or a neighboring residential area. 
2.  Hazardous Materials. Applicants must obtain the approval of the Los Angeles County fire department prior to obtaining any city permits for any use which includes the use of hazardous materials or the storage of hazardous materials or wastes. 
3.  Radioactive Materials. The use of radioactive materials shall be limited to measuring, gauging or calibration equipment. 
4.  Noise. Uses which generate noise by the nature of their function and/or processes shall be required to demonstrate that the noise levels emitted from the use shall not exceed 65 dBA at any property line which abuts a residential zone or use. A detailed noise attenuation study by a qualified acoustical engineer may be required by the director to determine appropriate mitigation and methods to incorporate same into project design. Site design methods which may be utilized to reduce noise include: 
a.  The use of building setbacks and dedication of noise easements to increase the distance between the noise source and receiver; 
b.  The location of uses and orientation of buildings which are compatible with higher noise levels adjacent to noise generators or in clusters to shield more noise-sensitive areas and uses; 
c.  The placement of noise-tolerant land uses, such as parking areas, between the noise source and receiver; 
d.  The placement of noise-tolerant structures to shield noise-sensitive areas. 
C.  When adjacent to a residential zone or use the following requirements shall also be applied: 
1.  Artificial lighting used to illuminate the premises shall be directed away from adjacent residential zone or use. 
2.  Where multistory buildings are to be utilized on lots abutting residentially zoned or used properties, such buildings shall be located or oriented in a manner which will minimize visual intrusion into neighboring property which is residentially zoned or used. (This may be accomplished by setting the building back from the abutting property line beyond the distance required for the yard, selective placement of windows, orienting the building in a manner which will not give occupants a direct view into the yards or windows of neighboring residents.) 
3.  No signs shall be placed in a manner which visually intrudes into adjoining property which is residentially zoned or used. 
4.  Trees shall be utilized as a means of improving the interface between public uses and residential uses where appropriate. 
5.  Buffering. When abutting property which is residentially zoned or used a masonry wall of not less than 6 feet in height shall be provided at the property line in accordance with the provisions for walls specified in Section 17.28.030C to minimize conflicts between public uses and residential uses. A 10 foot landscaped setback shall be placed next to the wall. This requirement shall be modified, where necessary to preclude interference with line-of-sight of a driver within 10 feet of any street, highway or alley, down to a maximum height of 42 inches. The design of the wall shall be considered as part of the site plan review. The site and any buildings thereof shall be designed to locate noise- and odor-generating equipment and activity in a manner which will have a minimal impact on abutting property which is residentially zoned or used. Such techniques may include, but are not limited to, no windows on the building wall(s) facing residentially zoned property, insulating structures housing equipment against noise, limitation of the hours of equipment operation, and other controls designed for specific problems. It shall be the burden of the applicant to prove that his project will not have a detrimental effect on neighboring residential property at the time of site plan review. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
Article III. - School (S) Zone 

17.20.110 - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of the School (S) zone is to implement policies contained in the Lancaster General Plan, particularly policies pertaining to school facilities, prescribed within the Public Use land use category. It is the further purpose of these regulations to provide the city and public with increased involvement in the planning of future uses at existing school sites, including working with local school districts and neighborhood residents on appropriate land uses for school sites no longer needed for educational purposes, coordination with the school districts on joint use of school facilities for community-wide use, and acquisition of closed school sites for recreation, childcare and other appropriate public purposes. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.120 - Permitted uses. 
    The following categories of uses are permitted in the S zone subject to any stated exceptions, development regulations, and approval of the site plan as follows: 
A.  Schools-Public. This category is limited to elementary, middle, high-school and colleges and associated uses and activities including day care facilities and dormitories as appurtenant uses to public schools. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.130 - Uses subject to conditional use permit. 
    The following uses may be permitted in the S zone provided a conditional use permit has first been obtained as provided in Article I of Chapter 17.32, and while such permit is in full force and effect in conformity with conditions of such permit: 
A.  Schools-Private. This category is limited to elementary, middle, high-school and colleges and associated uses and activities including day care facilities, dormitories, athletic facilities, and administrative offices as appurtenant uses to private schools. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.140 - Accessory and temporary uses. 
A.  The following uses are considered as accessory uses to the permitted uses in the S Zone: 
1.  Community Education. For purposes of this chapter, community education includes uses customarily accessory to school uses including: 
a.  Citizen/parent-teachers' associations; 
b.  Camp Fire girls; 
c.  Boy and Girl Scout troops; 
d.  Boys and Girls Club; 
e.  School-community advisory councils, senior citizens' organizations, clubs, and associations formed for recreational, educational, political, economic, artistic, or moral activities of the public school districts; 
f.  Public, literary, scientific, recreational, educational, or public agency meetings; administration of examinations for the selection of personnel or the instruction of precinct board members by public agencies; and 
g.  Supervised recreational activities including, but not limited to, sports league activities. 
B.  The following uses are considered as temporary uses in the S zone: 
1.  Building materials, storage of, used in a building or construction project, during the construction and 30 days thereafter, including the contractor's temporary office provided that any lot or parcel of land so used shall be part of the project, or on property adjoining the construction site. 
2.  Temporary Commercial Coach. Use of commercial coaches as temporary offices subject to the provisions of Article X of Chapter 17.40 and this zone. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.150 - Property development regulations. 
A.  General. 
1.  No new building or commercial coach shall be erected, constructed, moved onto, or established on an existing legal lot or parcel of land unless said building or temporary commercial coach shall comply with all of the regulations set forth in city ordinances, standards, guidelines or policies and subsection B of this section, or Article X of Chapter 17.40 which are pertinent to its placement on said lot or parcel. 
2.  No existing building or temporary commercial coach located on an existing legal lot or parcel of land shall be converted, enlarged, or moved unless said building, or addition thereto, shall comply with all of the regulations set forth in city ordinances, standards, guidelines or policies and subsection B of this section, or Article X of Chapter 17.40 which are pertinent to its placement on said lot or parcel. 
3.  No new lot shall be created or any building, or portion thereof, existing on such new lot be used, unless said lot and said building location shall comply with all of the regulations set forth in city ordinances, standards, guidelines or policies and subsection B of this section. 
B.  S Zone. Wherever property is designated as a S zone on the zoning map, the following regulations shall apply: 
1.  Lot dimensions and Yard requirements. Lot dimensions and yard requirements for this section shall be determined by the director on a case by case basis. Determination of lot dimensions, yards, setbacks and projections permitted in yards for a proposed public facility shall take into consideration the configuration of the lot, and the type, height layout, and intended use for the facility, the surrounding land uses, and any potentially adverse impact on surrounding properties from the intended use. In determining lot dimensions, yards and setback requirements for a particular public use, consideration shall be given to similar requirements on adjacent properties and to required lot dimensions and yard requirements in other sections of this title that most closely approximate the intended public use. 
2.  Height. The height of buildings and structures shall comply with the following: 
a.  No building in the S zone which is within 100 feet of any RR, SRR or R zone shall exceed a height of 2 stories or 35 feet, whichever is less. 
b.  No building may be constructed which would shade any existing active solar energy system on adjoining property without the consent of the affected property owner. (See subsection 1 in the definition of solar energy system in Section 17.04.240.) 
c.  Exceptions for Solar Systems. Solar collectors may exceed the height limit when mounted on the roof of a legal, conforming building. The right to exceed the height limit shall be exercised only in the event that: there is no other practical means or location for achieving an efficient placement on the building or site in question; such collectors may exceed the height limit only to the extent necessary to achieve efficient placement; in no case shall such solar collectors (or related equipment) encroach more than 5 feet beyond the limit. Also the placement of a solar collector shall not shade or otherwise diminish the efficiency of existing solar collectors on neighboring property, or preclude such property from sufficient solar access to successfully operate a solar energy system sufficient to serve the needs of the business or occupants. 
3.  Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): 1.0. (See definition in Section 17.04.240.) 
4.  Landscaping. Landscaping requirements for this section shall be determined by the director on a case by case basis. Determination of landscaping requirements for a proposed public facility shall take into consideration the type, height, layout, and the intended use for the facility, the surrounding land uses, and any potentially adverse impact on surrounding properties from the intended use. In establishing landscaping requirements for a particular public use, consideration shall be given to landscaping requirements in other sections of this title that most closely approximate the intended school use. 
5.  Outside Storage. Outside storage requirements for this section shall be determined by the director on a case by case basis. Determination of outside storage requirements for a proposed public facility shall take into consideration the type, layout, and the intended use for the facility, the surrounding land uses, and any potentially adverse impact on surrounding properties from the intended use. In establishing outside storage requirements for a particular public use, consideration shall be given to outside storage requirements in other sections of this title that most closely approximate the intended public use. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.160 - Design and performance standards. 
    The following design and performance standards shall be met for development in the S zone: 
A.  General Requirements. Design and performance standards including access, paving, size and marking of spaces and circulation of parking lots, loading spaces, buffering, building design, landscaping, lighting, outside storage and display, screening, service for utilities, signs and similar requirements not hereafter detailed in this subsection, shall be determined by the director on a case by case basis. Determination of design and performance standards for a proposed public facility shall take into consideration the configuration of the lot, the height, type, layout, and the intended use for the facility, the surrounding land uses, and any potentially adverse impact on surrounding properties from the intended use. In determining design and performance standards for a particular public use, consideration shall be given to design and performance standards in other sections of this title that most closely approximate the intended public use. 
B.  Specific Requirements. 
1.  Refuse/Recycling Storage Enclosures. All public uses shall have on the same lot or parcel a refuse/recycling storage area at a ratio of 20 square feet of refuse/recycling storage area for each 1,000 square feet or portion thereof of net floor area of the facility or as may be determined necessary by the director. The enclosure shall be a minimum size of 6 feet in width by 18 feet in length (exterior dimension). Such storage areas shall be enclosed on 3 sides by a minimum 5-foot-high reinforced masonry or concrete wall with a sight-obscuring gate (chain link with slats is not acceptable) of noncombustible materials which is substantially the same height as the enclosing walls. The floor of the enclosure shall be of concrete construction. Such storage areas shall not be placed in a location which is openly exposed to a fronting street or a neighboring residential area. 
2.  Hazardous Materials. Applicants must obtain the approval of the Los Angeles County fire department prior to obtaining any city permits for any use which includes the use of hazardous materials or the storage of hazardous materials or wastes. 
3.  Radioactive Materials. The use of radioactive materials shall be limited to measuring, gauging or calibration equipment. 
4.  Noise. Uses which generate noise by the nature of their function and/or processes shall be required to demonstrate that the noise levels emitted from the use shall not exceed 65 dBA at any property line which abuts a residential zone or use. A detailed noise attenuation study by a qualified acoustical engineer may be required by the director to determine appropriate mitigation and methods to incorporate same into project design. Site design methods which may be utilized to reduce noise include: 
a.  The use of building setbacks and dedication of noise easements to increase the distance between the noise source and receiver; 
b.  The location of uses and orientation of buildings which are compatible with higher noise levels adjacent to noise generators or in clusters to shield more noise-sensitive areas and uses; 
c.  The placement of noise-tolerant land uses, such as parking areas, between the noise source and receiver; 
d.  The placement of noise-tolerant structures to shield noise-sensitive areas. 
C.  When adjacent to a residential zone or use the following requirements shall also be applied: 
1.  Artificial lighting used to illuminate the premises shall be directed away from adjacent residential zone or use. 
2.  Where multistory buildings are to be utilized on lots abutting residentially zoned or used properties, such buildings shall be located or oriented in a manner which will minimize visual intrusion into neighboring property which is residentially zoned or used. (This may be accomplished by setting the building back from the abutting property line beyond the distance required for the yard, selective placement of windows, orienting the building in a manner which will not give occupants a direct view into the yards or windows of neighboring residents.) 
3.  No signs shall be placed in a manner which visually intrudes into adjoining property which is residentially zoned or used. 
4.  Trees shall be utilized as a means of improving the interface between public uses and residential uses where appropriate. 
5.  Buffering. When abutting property which is residentially zoned or used a masonry wall of not less than 6 feet in height shall be provided at the property line in accordance with the provisions for walls specified in Section 17.28.030C to minimize conflicts between public uses and residential uses. A 10 foot landscaped setback shall be placed next to the wall. This requirement shall be modified, where necessary to preclude interference with line-of-sight of a driver within 10 feet of any street, highway or alley, down to a maximum height of 42 inches. The design of the wall shall be considered as part of the site plan review. The site and any buildings thereof shall be designed to locate noise- and odor-generating equipment and activity in a manner which will have a minimal impact on abutting property which is residentially zoned or used. Such techniques may include, but are not limited to, no windows on the building wall(s) facing residentially zoned property, insulating structures housing equipment against noise, limitation of the hours of equipment operation, and other controls designed for specific problems. It shall be the burden of the applicant to prove that his project will not have a detrimental effect on neighboring residential property at the time of site plan review. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
Article IV. - Open Space (O) Zone 

17.20.170 - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of the O zone is to provide the means necessary to implement the policies of the City's General Plan regarding open space and the land use designations "O" (open space), as delineated on the general plan map, and to designate zoning for those uses which are open in nature and thus contribute to the visual and spatial relief from continuous urban development. The "O" zone also serves to provide opportunities for outdoor recreation; preserve scenic qualities; protect sensitive or fragile environmental areas; preserve the capacity and water quality of the stormwater drainage system; and to provide pedestrian and bicycle transportation connections. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.180 - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses, excluding uses that stockpile, commercially compost, process, or handle sludge or biosolid materials, are permitted in the O zone: 
A.  Crops: field, tree, bush, berry and row including nursery stock in nonurban areas; 
B.  Floodways; 
C.  Roadside rest area; 
D.  Scenic corridor or scenic easement; 
E.  Vegetative preservation or management areas; 
F.  Wildlife preservation or management areas, except gun clubs and hunting preserves. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.190 - Accessory uses. 
    The following uses are considered as accessory uses to the permitted uses in the O zone: 
A.  Accessory buildings or structures customarily used in conjunction with permitted uses; 
B.  Solar energy systems, whether mounted on or attached to a building or mounted on the ground. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.200 - Temporary uses. 
    The following uses are considered as temporary uses in the O zone: 
A.  Building materials, storage of, used in the construction of a building or building project, during the construction and 30 days thereafter, including the contractor's temporary office provided that any lot or parcel of land so used shall be part of the building project, or on property adjoining the construction site. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.210 - Uses subject to director's review and approval. 
    If site plans or other pertinent information for the proposed use are first submitted to and approved by the director in accordance with Article VI of Chapter 17.32, premises in the O zone may be used for the following uses: 
A.  Access to property lawfully used for a purpose not permitted in the O zone, provided no other practical access to such property is available, and such access will not alter the character of the premises in respect to permitted uses in the O zone. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.220 - Uses subject to permits. 
A.  The following uses, excluding uses that stockpile, commercially compost, process, or handle sludge or biosolid materials, are permitted in the O zone; provided, a conditional use has first been obtained as provided in Article I of Chapter 17.32, and while such permit is in full force and effect in conformity with conditions of such permit for: 
1.  Arboretum; 
2.  Botanical garden; 
3.  Crops: field, tree, bush, berry and row including nursery stock where the site abuts developed, residential property in the R, MHP, MDR or HDR zones; 
4.  Open spaces as a part of an RPD development, public; 
5.  Riding, hiking, bicycle trails but not including trails for motor-driven vehicles; 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.230 - Height regulations. 
    No building in the O zone shall exceed a height of 25 feet. This section does not apply to uses subject to permit which shall be subject to Article I of Chapter 17.32. (See Article XII of Chapter 17.40 for general exceptions.) 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.240 - Exception for solar systems. 
    Solar collectors may exceed the height limit when mounted on the roof of a legal, conforming building. The right to exceed the height limit shall be exercised only in the event that: there is no practical means or location for achieving an efficient placement on the building or site in question; such collectors may exceed the height limit only to the extent necessary to achieve efficient placement; in no case shall such solar collectors (or related equipment) encroach more than 5 feet beyond the limit. Also the placement of a solar collector shall not shade or otherwise diminish the efficiency of existing solar collectors on neighboring property, or preclude such property from sufficient solar access to successfully operate a solar energy system sufficient to serve the household needs of the occupants or the intended use. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.250 - Site plan required. 
    A site plan drawn to scale shall be required of any person seeking to erect new buildings or structures, make additions to any existing buildings or structures, or otherwise improve or develop any lot or portion thereof for a permitted use prior to the issuance of any building permit. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.260 - Property development regulations. 
A.  No new building shall be erected, constructed, moved onto, or established on an existing legal lot or parcel of land unless said building shall comply with all of the regulations set forth in this section which are pertinent to its placement on said lot or parcel. 
B.  No existing building located on an existing legal lot or parcel of land shall be converted, enlarged or moved unless said building, or addition thereto, shall comply with all of the regulations set forth in this section which are pertinent to this placement on said lot or parcel. 
C.  No new lot shall be created, or any building, or portion thereof, existing on such new lot be used unless said lot and said building location shall comply with all of the regulations set forth in this section which are pertinent to the area and dimensions for new lots and buildings on said lot. 
D.  O zone: 
1.  Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet (see Sections 17.40.093, 17.40.095 and 17.40.097 in the event of lot area, width or depth reduction for highway purposes or public use); 
2.  Yard requirements (see Section 17.28.030 for special provisions concerning yards): 
(See Sections 17.40.093, 17.40.095 and 17.40.097 in the event yard requirements must be reduced for street widening or transit stops.) 
a.  Front yard: 20 feet, 
b.  Interior side yard: 20 feet, 
c.  Street side yard: 20 feet, 
d.  Rear yard*: 20 feet; 
3.  Lot coverage: 
a.  Maximum lot coverage: 10 percent of the lot area; 
4.  Open space: 70 percent of the lot area; 
5.  Landscaping: no landscaping shall be placed in a manner which shades or would ultimately shade any existing solar energy system from the sun on a contiguous lot. 
*EXCEPTION: Solar energy systems are permitted in rear yards and not counted against lot coverage. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.270 - Signs. 
    A person shall not use any sign except as specifically permitted in this section and subject to all regulations and conditions set forth in accordance with Article VI of Chapter 17.32, Director's review. The following signs are permitted in the O zone: 
A.  Address. Street numbers of all buildings shall be prominently located and of sufficient size to be easily read from the street by public safety personnel (i.e., police, fire, ambulance). 
B.  Monument Sign. Twenty-five square feet plus 0.25 square feet for each foot of frontage over 100 feet up to a maximum of 50 square feet. 
C.  Wall Sign. One square foot per linear foot of building frontage. 
D.  Freestanding signs shall be not less than 25 feet from an interior property line and shall be at least 100 feet from any other freestanding sign. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.280 - Fences. 
A.  Purpose. The fence standards promote the positive benefits of fences without negatively impacting the community or endangering public or vehicle safety. Fences can create a sense of privacy, protect children and pets, provide separation from busy streets, and enhance the appearance of property by providing attractive landscape materials. The negative effects of fences can include the creation of street walls that inhibit police and community surveillance, decrease the sense of community, hinder emergency access, lessen solar access, hinder the safe movement of pedestrian and vehicles, and create an unattractive appearance. These standards are intended to promote the positive aspects of fences and to limit the negative ones. 
B.  Type of fences. The standards apply to walls, fences and screens of all types whether open, solid, wood, metal, wire, masonry, or other material. 
C.  Location. Fences may be 6 feet tall at the property line. A fence within 30 feet of a street lot line may not be more than 10 percent sight obscuring. 
D.  Building permits. Building permits are required by Building and Safety Division, for fences 6 feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.290 - Design requirements. 
    The following design requirements shall be met by development in the O zone: 
A.  Existing topography, hydrology, soil, drainage and vegetation conditions shall be retained on undeveloped land in order to retain the visual appeal and function of the undisturbed open space area. No vehicle, equipment or materials will be operated, stored or placed on the undisturbed area. 
B.  All buildings shall be designed to enclose or otherwise screen from view all rooftop mechanical equipment, ducts, tanks, etc., including solar systems. This requirement does not include windpowered turbines used for ventilation. 
C.  Where multistory buildings are to be utilized on lots abutting property in the R zone, such buildings shall be located or oriented in a manner which will minimize the visual intrusion into neighboring single-family property. (This may be accomplished by setting the building back from the abutting property line beyond the distance required by the yard, orienting the building in a manner which will not give a view into the back yard of their neighbors, or by other design consideration.) 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
Article V. - Park (Pk) Zone 

17.20.300 - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of the Pk zone is to provide the means necessary to implement the policies of the City's General Plan regarding parks and the land use designations "O" (open space), as delineated on the general plan map, and to designate zoning for those uses which are park and recreation facilities and thus contribute to the visual and spatial relief from continuous urban development. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.310 - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses, excluding uses that stockpile, commercially compost, process, or handle sludge or biosolid materials, are permitted in the Pk zone: A. Parks, public, and associated buildings and recreation facilities. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.320 - Accessory uses. 
    The following uses are considered as accessory uses to the permitted uses in the Pk zone: 
A.  Accessory buildings or structures customarily used in conjunction with permitted uses, including but not limited to playground equipment, ball fields and seating, etc. 
B.  Solar energy systems, whether mounted on or attached to a building or mounted on the ground. 
C.  Electric Vehicle Charging Station. An electric vehicle charging station (EVCS) shall be permitted as an accessory use within any existing legal single-family or multiple-family residential garage or carport, or within any existing legal commercial parking space in a parking lot or in a parking garage, subject to all applicable city code requirements and the following: 
1.  Electric vehicle charging stations (EVCS) for public use shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The EVCSs shall be located in a manner which will be easily seen by the public for informational and security purposes and shall be illuminated during evening business hours; and 
b.  Be located in desirable and convenient parking locations which will serve as an incentive for the use of electric vehicles; and 
c.  The EVCS pedestals shall be protected as necessary to prevent damage by automobiles; and 
d.  The EVCS pedestals shall be designed to minimize potential damage by vandalism and to be safe for use in inclement weather; and 
e.  Complete instructions and appropriate warnings concerning the use of the EVCS shall be posted on a sign in a prominent location on each station for use by the operator; and 
f.  One standard non-illuminated sign, not to exceed 4 square feet in area and 10 feet in height, may be posted for the purpose of identifying the location of each cluster of EVCSs; and 
g.  The EVCS may be on a timer that limits the use of the station to the normal business hours of the use(s) which it serves to preclude unauthorized use after business hours. 
2.  Electric vehicle charging stations for private use shall: 
a.  Be located in a manner which will not allow public access to the charging station; and 
b.  Comply with subsections C.1.c., d. and e. of this section. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.330 - Temporary uses. 
    The following uses are considered as temporary uses in the Pk zone: 
A.  Building materials, storage of, used in the construction of a building or building project, during the construction and 30 days thereafter, including the contractor's temporary office provided that any lot or parcel of land so used shall be part of the building project, or on property adjoining the construction site. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.340 - Uses subject to director's review and approval. 
    If site plans or other pertinent information for the proposed use are first submitted to and approved by the director in accordance with Article VI of Chapter 17.32, premises in the Pk zone may be used for the following uses: 
A.  Access to property lawfully used for a purpose not permitted in the Pk zone, provided no other practical access to such property is available, and such access will not alter the character of the premises in respect to permitted uses in the Pk zone; 
B.  Carnivals, subject to the provisions of Chapter 9.46; 
C.  Signs, as provided in Section 17.20.260. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010; Ord. No. 999, § 7, 8-26-2014) 
17.20.350 - Uses subject to permits. 
A.  The following uses are permitted in the Pk zone; provided, a conditional use has first been obtained as provided in Article I of Chapter 17.32, and while such permit is in full force and effect in conformity with conditions of such permit for: 
1.  Arboretum; 
2.  Archery range; 
3.  Athletic range; 
4.  Botanical garden; 
5.  Campgrounds, publicly or privately owned or operated, containing overnight camping facilities for tents, travel trailers, camper trucks or other recreational vehicles; 
6.  Fishing and casting ponds, recreational; 
7.  Golf courses, including the customary clubhouse and appurtenant facilities; 
8.  Golf or baseball driving ranges; 
9.  Open spaces as a part of an RPD development, public; 
10.  Parks; 
11.  Picnic grounds; 
12.  Playgrounds; 
13.  Polo grounds; 
14.  Radio and television stations and towers including studios. Existing stations may expand their building floor area up to 50 percent without obtaining a conditional use permit; 
15.  Riding, hiking, bicycle trails but not including trails for motor-driven vehicles; 
16.  Swimming pool, public; 
17.  Utilities, minor, public and private; including telephone repeater stations and microwave stations. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.360 - Height regulations. 
    No building in the Pk zone shall exceed a height of 40 feet. This section does not apply to uses subject to permit which shall be subject to Article I of Chapter 17.32. (See Article XII of Chapter 17.40 for general exceptions.) 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.370 - Exception for solar systems. 
    Solar collectors may exceed the height limit when mounted on the roof of a legal, conforming building. The right to exceed the height limit shall be exercised only in the event that: there is no practical means or location for achieving an efficient placement on the building or site in question; such collectors may exceed the height limit only to the extent necessary to achieve efficient placement; in no case shall such solar collectors (or related equipment) encroach more than 5 feet beyond the limit. Also the placement of a solar collector shall not shade or otherwise diminish the efficiency of existing solar collectors on neighboring property, or preclude such property from sufficient solar access to successfully operate a solar energy system sufficient to serve the household needs of the occupants or the intended use. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.380 - Site plan required. 
    A site plan drawn to scale shall be required of any person seeking to erect new buildings or structures, make additions to any existing buildings or structures, or otherwise improve or develop any lot or portion thereof for a permitted use prior to the issuance of any building permit. The director or his designated representative shall review the site plan for conformance with the provisions of this title. The site plan shall demonstrate conformance with height regulations (Section 17.20.350), property development regulations (Section 17.20.380), sign regulations (Section 17.20.390), off-street parking requirements (Section 17.20.400), design requirements (Section 17.20.410) and any other requirements as established for the Pk zone. In addition to the requirements set forth in the Pk zone, the director may place conditions on the approval of the site plan where he finds that such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. At such time as the site plan complies with the intent of this title, the site plan may be approved by the director or his designated representative. The site plan approval shall be valid for one year from the date of approval. A one-year extension of the approval may be granted by the director or his designated representative. In the event the site plan is denied, the applicant may appeal the decision in accordance with Section 17.36.030. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.390 - Property development regulations. 
A.  No new building shall be erected, constructed, moved onto, or established on an existing legal lot or parcel of land unless said building shall comply with all of the regulations set forth in this section which are pertinent to its placement on said lot or parcel. 
B.  No existing building located on an existing legal lot or parcel of land shall be converted, enlarged or moved unless said building, or addition thereto, shall comply with all of the regulations set forth in this section which are pertinent to this placement on said lot or parcel. 
C.  No new lot shall be created, or any building, or portion thereof, existing on such new lot be used unless said lot and said building location shall comply with all of the regulations set forth in this section which are pertinent to the area and dimensions for new lots and buildings on said lot. 
D.  O zone: 
1.  Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet (see Sections 17.40.093, 17.40.095 and 17.40.097 in the event of lot area, width or depth reduction for highway purposes or public use); 
2.  Yard requirements (see Section 17.28.030 for special provisions concerning yards): 
(See Sections 17.40.093, 17.40.095 and 17.40.097 in the event yard requirements must be reduced for street widening or transit stops.) 
a.  Front yard: 20 feet, 
b.  Interior side yard: 20 feet, 
c.  Street side yard: 20 feet, 
d.  Rear yard*: 20 feet; 
3.  Lot coverage**: 
a.  Maximum lot coverage: 10 percent of the lot area; 
4.  Open space**: 70 percent of the lot area; 
5.  Landscaping: no landscaping shall be placed in a manner which shades or would ultimately shade any existing solar energy system from the sun on a contiguous lot. 
*EXCEPTION: Solar energy systems are permitted in rear yards and not counted against lot coverage. 
**EXCEPTION: Public community or recreation buildings are exempted from lot coverage and open space requirements. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.400 - Signs. 
    A person shall not use any sign except as specifically permitted in this section and subject to all regulations and conditions set forth in accordance with Article VI of Chapter 17.32, Director's review. The following signs are permitted in the Pk zone: 
A.  Address. Street numbers of all buildings shall be prominently located and of sufficient size to be easily read from the street by public safety personnel (i.e., police, fire, ambulance). 
B.  Monument Sign. Twenty-five square feet plus 0.25 square feet for each foot of frontage over 100 feet up to a maximum of 50 square feet. 
C.  Wall Sign. One square foot per linear foot of building frontage. 
D.  Freestanding signs shall be not less than 25 feet from an interior property line and shall be at least 100 feet from any other freestanding sign. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.410 - Off-street parking. 
A.  The automobile parking facilities required by Section 17.12.220 of this title shall be provided and permanently maintained as such unless and until a substitute has been provided which is in full compliance with the provisions of this title. 
B.  Parking in required yards is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.420 - Design requirements. 
    The following design requirements shall be met by development in the Pk zone: 
A.  Existing topography, hydrology, soil, drainage and vegetation conditions shall be retained on undeveloped land in order to retain the visual appeal and function of the undisturbed open space area. No vehicle, equipment or materials will be operated, stored or placed on the undisturbed area. 
B.  All buildings shall be designed to enclose or otherwise screen from view all rooftop mechanical equipment, ducts, tanks, etc., including solar systems. This requirement does not include windpowered turbines used for ventilation. 
C.  A wall of not less than 5 feet nor greater than 6 feet in height measured from the highest ground elevation on either side of the wall (except where specified otherwise in Section 17.28.030C) may be required by the director to be constructed along all or a portion of the perimeter of the premises as necessary to protect adjoining property. 
D.  Where multistory buildings are to be utilized on lots abutting property in the R zone, such buildings shall be located or oriented in a manner which will minimize the visual intrusion into neighboring single-family property. (This may be accomplished by setting the building back from the abutting property line beyond the distance required by the yard, orienting the building in a manner which will not give a view into the back yard of their neighbors, or by other design consideration.) 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
Article VI. - Cemetery (Ce) Zone 

17.20.430 - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of the Cemetery (Ce) zone is to implement the cemetery requirements as set forth in the Lancaster Municipal Code. As used in this title, "cemetery" means a place for the permanent interment of dead human bodies or the cremated remains thereof, including a crematory. It may be either a burial park for earth interments, a mausoleum for vault or crypt interments, a columbarium for cinerary interments, or a combination of one or more thereof. Properties designated with the Cemetery zone shall conform to the requirements of Section 17.20.430 through 17.20.570. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.440 - Uses subject to permits. 
    The following uses may be permitted provided the specified permit has first been obtained, and while such permit is in full force and effect in conformity with the conditions of such permit for: 
A.  Cemeteries, including columbariums, crematoriums and mausoleums, as provided in Sections 17.20.430 through 17.20.570. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.450 - When deemed established. 
A.  A cemetery shall be deemed to be established or maintained or extended where the interment of one or more dead human bodies or cremated remains is made in or upon any property, whether or not the same has been duly and regularly dedicated for cemetery purposes under the laws of the state of California, and which at the date this article takes effect was not included within the boundaries of a legally existing cemetery. 
B.  Any person who makes or causes to be made any interment in or upon such property, and any person having the right of possession of any such property who knowingly permits the interment of a dead body or cremated remains therein or thereupon shall be deemed to have established, or maintained, or extended a cemetery within the meaning of the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.460 - Permit required. 
    A person shall not establish or maintain any cemetery or extend the boundaries of any existing cemetery at any place within the unincorporated territory of the county of Los Angeles without a permit first having been applied for and obtained from the commission. This section does not prevent the maintenance, development and operation within their present boundaries of cemeteries which were legally established on the date this article takes effect. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.470 - Application for permit. 
    Any person desiring to obtain a permit required by this article shall file a written application therefore with the director. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.480 - Verification of application. 
    The president and secretary of the corporation which will be in charge of the operation of the proposed cemetery and the owner of the land to be included therein shall sign the application for a permit required by this article. Such persons shall also verify the application as provided by the Code of Civil Procedure of the state of California for the verification of pleadings in civil actions. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.490 - Contents of application. 
    An application for a permit required by this article shall set forth in separate paragraphs or in exhibits attached thereto the following information: 
A.  A list certified to be correct by affidavit or by statement under penalty of perjury pursuant to Section 2015.5. of the Code of Civil Procedure of names and addresses of: 
1.  All persons owning any part of the property proposed to be used as a cemetery, and 
2.  All persons owning property within a distance of 11/2 miles of said proposed cemetery or extension of an existing cemetery where there are 50 or more buildings used either for residence or business within such distance as shown on the latest available assessment roll of the county of Los Angeles; 
B.  The names and addresses of the officers and directors of the corporation which will be in charge of the operation of the cemetery; 
C.  A map showing the exact location, exterior boundaries and legal description of the property which it is proposed to use for a cemetery and the location of all buildings, whether public or private, located within a distance of 11/2 miles from the exterior boundaries of said premises, and the location and depth of all wells in said area from which domestic or irrigating water is obtained. The map shall also show the location and names of all public highways located within a distance of 11/2 miles from the exterior boundaries of the said premises, and if no public highways are located within said distance then said map shall show the location and at least 1/2 mile of the extent of the 3 public highways having a length of at least 1/2 mile which are located nearest to said premises. The map shall further show the elevation in feet above sea level of the highest and lowest points in the said premises and the width, depth and location of all natural watercourses and artificial drains or conduits for the drainage of storm water located upon the said premises or within 2,000 feet from the exterior boundary thereof in any direction; 
D.  A financial statement of applicant showing the financial ability of applicant to establish, care for, and maintain the proposed cemetery in such a manner as to prevent the same from being a public nuisance; 
E.  A statement setting forth whether the said cemetery is to be established as a perpetual care or nonperpetual care cemetery, and if a perpetual care fund is to be or has been created, the amount then on hand and the method, scheme or plan of continuing and adding to the same in full details sufficient to show that said cemetery will be maintained so as not to become a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.500 - Filing fee. 
    When an application is filed it shall be accompanied by the filing fee required by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.510 - Scheduling of hearings. 
    The commission shall hold 2 public hearings on an application for a cemetery permit. The first such hearing shall be held within 60 days from the date the application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.520 - Notice of hearings. 
    Not less than 20 days prior to the date of a hearing on an application for a cemetery permit, the director shall: 
A.  Cause a copy of such notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county of Los Angeles, the first such publication appearing at least 20 days prior to the date of hearing as follows: 
1.  Ten publications within such period if in a daily newspaper, or 
2.  Three publications if in a weekly newspaper; 
B.  Cause notices of said hearing to be posted conspicuously along the exterior boundary line of said proposed cemetery, or extension of an existing cemetery, not more than 300 feet apart and at each change of direction of the said boundary line, and also in the same manner along both sides of all public highways within 11/2 miles of such exterior boundaries, and in such manner as will reasonably give notice to passersby of the matters contained in such notice. The notices referred to in this subsection shall contain a copy of the notice of hearing, a rough sketch showing the boundaries of the proposed cemetery or extension of an existing cemetery, and all public highways within a distance of 11/2 miles of such exterior boundaries and a statement in black face letters not less than one inch high: "NOTICE OF PROPOSAL TO ESTABLISH CEMETERY"; 
C.  Where there are 50 or more buildings used either for residence or business purposes within a distance of 11/2 miles from such exterior boundaries of said proposed cemetery or extension of an existing cemetery, he shall cause a notice of the said hearing to be mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid, to all persons whose names and addresses appear on the verified lists of property owners required to be submitted by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.530 - Denial of permit. 
    A permit may be denied if it is found that: 
A.  The establishment or maintenance of the proposed cemetery or the extension of an existing cemetery will or may jeopardize or adversely affect the public health, safety, comfort or welfare; or 
B.  Such establishment, maintenance or extension will or may reasonably be expected to be a public nuisance; or 
C.  Such establishment, maintenance or extension will tend to interfere with the free movement of traffic or with the proper protection of the public through interference with the movement of police, ambulance or fire equipment, and thus interfere with the convenience of the public or the protection of lives and property of the public; or 
D.  That the applicant through the proposed perpetual care fund or otherwise cannot demonstrate adequate financial ability to establish and maintain the proposed cemetery so as to prevent the proposed cemetery from becoming a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.540 - Dedication of highways. 
    Before taking final action either the commission or the board of supervisors may require of the applicant any reasonable dedication of public streets or highways through the premises proposed to be used for the proposed cemetery or extension of an existing cemetery so as to prevent the same from jeopardizing the public safety, comfort or welfare, and if the time required by the commission or the board of supervisors for compliance with such conditions having been met, the commission or the board of supervisors may deny the permit. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.550 - Repeated applications. 
    In the event that the commission or the board of supervisors shall have denied its approval of any application heretofore or hereafter made for any permit provided for herein no new or further applications for any such permit shall be made to establish or extend a cemetery upon the same premises, or any portion thereof, as described in such previous applications, until the expiration of one year from and after the date of the denial of such approval. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.560 - Assignment. 
    No permit granted as a result of any such application shall be assignable prior to the actual establishment of such cemetery or extension of any existing cemetery, nor shall such permit be used by any other person than applicant in the establishment of such cemetery or extension of an existing cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.570 - Minor expansion. 
    Where an application is filed requesting a cemetery permit for the expansion of the boundaries of an existing cemetery and the area of such proposed expansion: (1) will not exceed the lesser of 10 percent of the area of the existing cemetery, or 5 acres; and (2) was owned by the cemetery association at the time the existing cemetery was established; and (3) will not extend beyond natural or constructed barriers such as streets and highways, watercourses, drainage channels, and ravines; and (4) no previous expansion has been approved for the existing cemetery utilizing the modified application and notification requirements of this section, the applicant may: 
A.  Substitute a distance of 700 feet in lieu of the 11/2 mile distance for the certified list of names and addresses required to be submitted by subsection A.2. of Section 17.32.460; and 
B.  Substitute a distance of 700 feet in lieu of the 11/2 mile distance for maps required by subsection C of Section 17.32.460; and 
C.  Substitute a distance of 700 feet in lieu of the 11/2 mile distance for posting notices of hearing along public highways as required by subsection B of Section 17.32.490; and 
D.  Where there are 50 or more buildings used either for residence or business purposes within a distance of 11/2 miles from such exterior boundaries of said proposed expansion, the applicant shall cause a notice of the said hearing to be mailed by first class mail postage prepaid, to all persons whose names and addresses appear on the verified lists of owners of property within 700 feet of such expansion, which list is required to be submitted by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.580 - Reduction in boundaries. 
    Where an application is filed requesting a cemetery permit for a reduction in boundaries of an existing cemetery never used the applicant may: 
A.  Substitute a distance of 700 feet for filing and application requirements as provided in the case of minor expansions by subsections A, B, C, and D of Section 17.20.560; and 
B.  Delete the information required by subsections D and E of Section 17.20.480. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
Article VII. - Specific Plan (SP) Zone 

17.20.590 - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of the SP zone is to provide the means necessary to implement the city general plan; whether it is solely the SP designation, or in conjunction with any other general plan land use designation as set forth in the text of the general plan, and as delineated on the general plan map. The specific plan zone is intended to be in accordance with applicable goals, objectives, policies and specific actions set forth by the plan. It is the intent of the SP zone that specific plans be prepared to regulate the use and development of property prior to, or in conjunction with, the review of development and subdivision proposals. It is intended that these specific plans be comprehensive and cover a logical planning area so that development in the SP zone occurs in a coordinated fashion, with adequate public/private services and infrastructure, rather than as a series of isolated individual projects. It is further intended that these specific plans provide the opportunity for unique and creative designs that are not possible under the city's typical development regulations. 
    Where so specified on the general plan map, the land use category shall determine the type of land use permitted and/or the density range for the specific plan. Where the SP zone is specified without a land use designation on the general plan map, the specific plan shall include a comprehensive proposal for development, which may include but is not limited to, a variety of mixed land uses and standards to enhance and protect the physical features of the site and surrounding areas. 
    It shall also be the intent of the SP zone to allow certain individual uses on property where no specific plan has been adopted when such uses will not adversely affect the surrounding area or the city's ability to adopt a future specific plan for the area. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.600 - Prohibition. 
    A person shall not use any premises in the SP zone except as hereafter permitted in this title and subject to all regulations and conditions enumerated in this title. Where a specific plan has been adopted by the city, it shall supersede all regulations contained in this article. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.610 - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted within the SP zone: 
A.  Agricultural crop production, including necessary on-site processing, sales and storage facilities; provided, that no sludge or biosolid material shall be applied to any land as a soil amendment; 
B.  Continued operation of existing uses, including residences, which were legally established prior to the adoption of the SP zone on August 3, 1992. Residences in the C, LI, or HI general plan land use designations may be expanded by a maximum cumulative total of 500 square feet of living area; residences within the UR, MDR or HDR land use designations may be expanded without limitation provided that all applicable property development regulations are met. 
C.  Mobilehome on an existing vacant legal lot, in accordance with the design standards as established in Section 17.08.370, with a general plan land use designation of UR, MDR or HDR. 
D.  Single-family residence on an existing vacant legal lot, including all typical accessory uses and structures, with a general plan land use designation of UR, MDR or HDR. 
E.  Public and quasi-public facilities necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the public, including but not limited to communication facilities, fire stations and utilities. 
F.  Re-use of existing vacant premises with new use consistent with the land use designation, including site or structural improvements necessary to meet current codes. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.620 - Uses subject to director's review and approval. 
    If site plans or other pertinent information for the proposed use are first submitted to and approved by the director in accordance with Article I of Chapter 17.32 and Section 17.20.680, premises in the SP zone may be used for the following uses: 
A.  Establishment of a new use that is not consistent with the underlying land use designation only when: 
1.  The use will occupy an existing developed site that is appropriate for the use; and 
2.  The use will not be detrimental to other uses or property in the surrounding area. 
B.  Expansion of a legally established commercial or industrial use where the use is consistent with the general plan land use designation of C, LI or HI. 
C.  Home occupation subject to the provisions of Section 17.08.320. 
D.  One dwelling unit, in accordance with Section 17.16.060A.7., used for residence by a caretaker and his immediate family, where there is a legally operating use that requires continuous supervision on a site with a general plan land use designation of LI or HI. 
E.  Raising, training, breeding of animals, including all necessary facilities; slaughtering and packaging operations may be allowed only where the underlying land use is HI provided that no sludge or biosolid material shall be applied to any land as a soil amendment. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.630 - Uses subject to conditional use permit. 
    Property within the SP zone may be used for the following uses provided that a conditional use permit has first been obtained in accordance with Article I of Chapter 17.32 and Section 17.20.680: 
A.  Churches, temples, or other places used exclusively for religious worship, including incidental education and social activities on a lot with a general plan land use designation of UR, MDR, HDR or C; 
B.  Day care center; 
C.  Schools, through grade 12 on a site with a general plan land use designation of UR, MDR or HDR; 
D.  Second dwelling unit subject to the requirements of Section 17.08.360 on a lot with a general plan land use designation of UR, MDR or HDR; 
E.  Recreational facilities, including parks; 
F.  Warehousing and mini-storage, including outdoor storage and construction yards subject to screening standards of the corresponding zone on a lot with a general plan land use designation of LI or HI. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.640 - Interpretation. 
    Where a conflict in interpretation occurs regarding application of Section 17.20.600, 17.20.610, 17.20.620 or 17.20.640 to any specific case the director shall determine the interpretation. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.650 - Specific plan required. 
    An applicant seeking to subdivide property, or to develop or use property in an SP zone except as otherwise allowed by this title, shall present a proposal to the Department of Community Development for a specific plan which complies with the specific plan provisions of California Government Code, Article 8, Section 65450 et seq. An application for a specific plan shall be filed with the Department of Community Development on a form prescribed by the director and shall include such information, maps and data as determined necessary by the director to afford a complete analysis of the proposal and to be in conformance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.660 - Fee required. 
    When an application is filed for a specific plan it shall be accompanied by the filing fee established for a zone change by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.670 - Property development regulations. 
    Any development within the SP zone, including establishment or enlargement of uses, buildings or structures, shall comply with the property development regulations of the zoning classification that corresponds to the general plan land use designation on the site. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.680 - Signs. 
    Signs shall be allowed within the SP zone subject to the requirements of the zoning classification that corresponds with the general plan land use designation of the site. Off-premises advertising signs, including billboard relocations, are strictly prohibited in the SP zone. Uses subject to conditional use permit shall be required to prepare a comprehensive sign plan to regulate the placement of signage. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.690 - Findings for director's review and conditional use permit. 
    In approving an application for director's review or conditional use permit, the following findings shall be made in addition to the findings specified elsewhere in this title: 
A.  The proposed use will not adversely affect the ability of the city to adopt a comprehensive specific plan on, or in the vicinity of, the subject property. 
B.  The proposed use will not result in further subdivision of the subject property. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
Article VIII. - Senior Mobilehome Park Overlay (MHP-S) Zone 

17.20.700 - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of the MHP-S overlay zone is to implement the senior mobilehome park requirements as set forth in Section 17.08.305 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. Properties designated with the MHP-S overlay zone shall conform to the requirements of Section 17.08.305 of the Lancaster Municipal Code and related requirements applicable to senior mobilehome parks as set forth in Title 17 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.710 - Prohibition. 
    A person shall not use any premises in the MHP-S zone except as hereafter permitted in this title and subject to all regulations and conditions enumerated in this title. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
17.20.720 - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in the MHP-S zone subject to stated regulations and conditions: 
A.  Senior mobilehome park as defined in Section 17.04.240 and subject to all requirements as set forth in Section 17.08.305. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
Chapter 17.24 - ZONE CHANGES AND ZONE MAP 

17.24.010 - Highways. 
    Whenever the zoning maps, whether added thereto before or after the effective date of this section, show any lot or area within any particular zone, such zone shall extend to the center of every adjoining road, street, alley, parkway, or highway. While such road, street, alley, parkway or highway remains a public highway, street, alley, parkway or road used in a manner similar to a public highway, it may be used for any compatible use. 
    The parking of any commercial vehicle as defined in the Vehicle Code weighing more than 6,000 pounds unladen in any residential zone for more than 2 hours at any one time is not a compatible highway use except for: 
A.  Necessary loading and unloading; 
B.  Vehicles engaged in performing a service activity on the adjacent lot or parcel of land; 
C.  Vehicles used in conjunction with a lawful commercial use on the adjacent lot or parcel of land; 
D.  Vehicles used during the construction of buildings or structures on the adjacent lot or parcel of land; 
E.  Vehicles engaged in construction or maintenance within the street, alley, parkway or highway. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 302) 
17.24.020 - Savings and loan certificates. 
    If any provision of this title requires the filing of any bond as a prerequisite to any particular use of any property, the person making or proposing to make such use may in lieu of such bond deposit with the clerk of the board of supervisors and assign to the county savings and loan certificates or shares equal in amount to the required amount of the bond. Such deposit and assignment shall comply with all of the provisions and conditions of said Article III E of said Ordinance No. 4099. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 305) 
17.24.030 - Satisfaction of final judgment. 
    If any provision of this title requires the filing of any bond as a prerequisite to any particular use of any property, and either requires that such bond include as obligee a person other than, and in addition to the county or that a policy of insurance be filed and no policy of insurance is filed, or that such bond include as obligee a person other than, and in addition to the county with no alternative, a person who deposits and assigns savings and loan certificates or shares in lieu of such bond also shall file a written agreement with the board of supervisors that the county may, and the county may, satisfy, either in whole or in part, from such certificates or shares, any final judgment, the payment of which would have been guaranteed by such bond or policy of insurance. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 305.1) 
17.24.040 - Zone changes and amendments-Authority for. 
    Zone changes and amendments may be initiated to change zones, to alter the boundaries of districts, to impose regulations not previously imposed, and to remove or modify any regulation already imposed, whenever the city council finds that the public convenience, the general welfare, or good zoning practice justifies such action. All such zone changes and amendments shall be made pursuant to the provisions of this and Title 7 of the Government Code. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 306) 
17.24.050 - Zone changes and amendments-Initiation of. 
    Hearings of zone changes or amendments may be initiated: 
A.  If the city council instructs the commission to set the matter for a hearing, report and recommendation; 
B.  Upon the initiative of the commission; or 
C.  In the case of a zone change, upon the filing of a petition as provided in Sections 17.24.060-17.24.090. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 307) 
17.24.060 - Zone change-Petition for. 
    Any person owning or having such other interest in property as specified in subsection B of Section 17.24.070 may file a petition for a change of zone with the director, except that a person may not file, and the director shall not accept a petition which is the same as, or substantially the same as, a petition upon which final action has been taken either by the commission or by the city council within one year prior thereto. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 308) 
17.24.070 - Zone change-Contents of petition. 
    A petition for a change of zone shall contain the following information and such other information as is requested by the director. 
    The director may reject any petition that does not supply the information requested herein: 
A.  Name and address of the applicant; 
B.  Evidence that the applicant: 
1.  Is an owner of all or a portion of the property involved, or 
2.  Has written permission of an owner of all or a portion of the property involved to make such application, or 
3.  Is or will be the plaintiff in an action in eminent domain to acquire the premises involved, or any portion thereof, or 
4.  In the case of a public agency, is negotiating to acquire a portion of the premises involved; 
C.  Location of subject property (address or vicinity); 
D.  Legal description of the property, including a statement of total area involved; 
E.  Zone or zones requested; 
F.  With each petition the applicant shall also file: 
1.  Maps in the number prescribed and drawn to a scale specified by the director, showing the location of all property included in the request for action, the location of all highways, streets, alleys and the location and dimensions of all lots or parcels of land within a distance of 700 feet from the exterior boundaries of the property described in the petition, 
2.  One copy of the said map shall indicate the uses established on every lot or parcel of land shown within the said 700 foot radius, 
3.  A list, certified to be correct by an affidavit or by a statement under penalty of perjury pursuant to Section 2015.5. of the Code of Civil Procedure, of the names and addresses of all persons who are shown on the latest available assessment roll of the county of Los Angeles as owners of the subject property and as owning property within a distance of 500 feet from the exterior boundaries of the property described in the petition. One copy of the map shall indicate the ownership of said lots or parcels of land; 
G.  Indicate the conditions which warrant the change of zone; 
H.  If the change of zone as requested will permit any uses prohibited by the existing zoning, will such change of zone result in a need for a greater water supply for adequate fire protection and what are the existing proposed sources of such an adequate water supply; 
I.  Such other information as the director may require. 
  The accuracy of all information, maps and lists submitted shall be the responsibility of the applicants. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 308.3) 
17.24.075 - Zone change-Existing mobilehome park. 
    Any petition for a change of zone that will result in the closure or conversion of an existing mobilehome park to another use shall comply with the requirements of Section 65863.7 of the Government Code of state of California and Chapter 11.12 of this code. 
(Ord. 879 § 1 (part), 2007) 
17.24.080 - Zone change-Burden of proof. 
    In addition to the information required in the petition by Section 17.24.070, the applicant shall substantiate to the satisfaction of the commission the following facts: 
A.  That modified conditions warrant a revision in the zoning plan as it pertains to the area or district under consideration; and 
B.  That a need for the proposed zone classification exists within such area or district; and 
C.  That the particular property under consideration is a proper location for said zone classification within such area or district; and 
D.  That placement of the proposed zone at such location will be in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare and in conformity with good zoning practice. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 308.5) 
17.24.090 - Zone change-Fee. 
    Each petition for a change of zone shall be accompanied by the filing fee required by resolution of the city council. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 308.7) 
17.24.100 - Zone change-Study of additional area. 
    Where a petition is filed requesting a change of zone the director or the commission may elect to include additional property within the boundaries of the area to be studied when, in his/its opinion, good zoning practice justifies action. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 308.8) 
17.24.110 - Zone changes and amendments-Commission hearing. 
    In all cases where a zone change or amendment is initiated, the commission shall hold a public hearing and shall give notice of such public hearing pursuant to the procedure provided by Section 17.36.020A. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 309) 
17.24.120 - Zone change-Commission findings and decision. 
    In making its recommendation relative to a proposed change of zone the commission shall consider the following principles and standards: 
A.  That modified conditions warrant a revision in the zoning plan as it pertains to the area or district under consideration; and 
B.  That a need for the proposed zone classification exists within such area or district; and 
C.  That the particular property under consideration is a proper location for said zone classification within such area or district; and 
D.  That placement of the proposed zone at such location will be in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare and in conformity with good zoning practice. 
    The commission shall recommend approval or denial where the information submitted by the applicant and/or presented at public hearings substantiates or fails to substantiate such findings to the satisfaction of the commission. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 309.1) 
17.24.130 - Zone change-Water supply. 
    In addition to the principles and standards enumerated in Section 17.24.120, the commission, in determining its recommendation for a change of zone, shall consider whether or not the change of zone under consideration if adopted will result in a need for a greater water supply for adequate fire protection and, if so, what are the existing and proposed sources of such an adequate water supply. The commission may request that the forester and fire warden or county engineer, or both, supply it with all facts, opinions, suggestions and advice which may be material to reaching a decision on any or all matters mentioned in this section. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 309.3) 
17.24.140 - Amendments-Commission findings and decision. 
    In making its recommendation relative to a proposed amendment other than a zone change, the commission may recommend approval where the information presented at public hearing shows that such amendment is necessary to implement the general plan and/or that the public convenience, the general welfare or good zoning practice justifies such action. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 309.5) 
17.24.150 - Zone changes and amendments- Commission recommendation. 
    A recommendation by the commission relative to a zone change or amendment shall be by resolution carried by the affirmative vote of not less than 3 of its members. Such recommendation is final and conclusive and may not be reconsidered by the commission except upon a referral by the city council. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 309.7) 
17.24.160 - Zone changes and amendments- Notice of commission action. 
    The commission shall serve a notice of its action in the manner prescribed by Section 17.36.020C. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 309.9) 
17.24.170 - Zone changes and amendments- Council hearing. 
    After receipt of the commission's recommendation, the city council shall hold a public hearing and shall give notice of such public hearing pursuant to the procedure set forth in Section 17.36.020A, provided, however, that if the planning commission has recommended against the approval of an amendment other than a zone change, the city council shall not be required to take further action. In the case of a change of zone where the commission has recommended denial, the action of the commission shall become final unless an interested party appeals the commission's decision in accordance with Section 17.36.030 to the city council. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 310) 
17.24.180 - Zone changes and amendments- Modification of commission's recommendation. 
    Before changing or modifying a commission recommendation involving a zone change or amendment, the city council shall refer the proposed modification to the commission for report and recommendation. Failure of the commission to report within 40 days after such referral or such longer period of time designated by the city council, shall be deemed to be approved by the commission of the proposed modification. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 310.3) 
17.24.190 - Zone changes and amendments- Notice of council decision. 
    The city council shall serve a notice of its action in the manner prescribed by Section 17.36.020C. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 310.5) 
17.24.200 - Zoning map. 
A.  Title. The zoning map shall be known as the "Zoning Map of the City of Lancaster" hereinafter referred to as the "zoning map." 
B.  Purpose. It shall be the purpose of the zoning map of the city to graphically represent the geographical location and appropriate designation of the zones listed in Section 17.04.100. 
C.  Zone Designations. Zone designations used to identify specific zones on the zoning map shall be in the form of symbols as listed in Section 17.04.100 (i.e., the rural residential zones are represented by the symbols SRR, RR-1 and RR-2.5). 
D.  Zone Boundaries. Unless otherwise specified zone boundaries shall utilize section lines, lot or property lines, right-of-way lines, centerlines of streets, city limit lines, or extensions of such lines. Centerlines of streets shall be the preferred boundary when properties on opposing sides of a street are not within the same zone. 
E.  Lots Located Within More Than One Zone. Where a lot is located in more than one zone, the director shall determine which zone shall apply to the entire lot. 
F.  Establishment of the Zoning Map. The zone designations and boundaries are established as shown on the map(s) entitled "Zoning Map of the City of Lancaster," dated with the effective date of the establishing ordinance and signed by the mayor and the city clerk. 
G.  Zoning Map Changes. Changes to the zoning map shall be consistent with the goals, objectives, policies, classifications, standards and programs of the adopted city general plan and the general plan map. Such changes shall be accomplished by ordinance as specified by Sections 17.24.040-17.24.190. 
Once a change has been approved by the city council, the director shall cause the zoning map to be modified in accordance with the amending ordinance. The number of the case file and the date of adoption shall be endorsed on the margin of the zoning map. 
(Ord. 839 § 1 (Exh. A § 7), 2005; Ord. 651 § 8, 1993; prior zoning ord. §§ 320.000-320.060) 
Chapter 17.28 - YARDS AND HIGHWAY LINES 

17.28.020 - Yards and highway lines. 
A.  Intent and Purpose. In order to provide for adequate open spaces and the admission thereto of light and air, and to provide adequate visibility to the operators of motor and other vehicles along streets, highways and parkways, and at the intersection thereof, the yards provided in Chapters 17.08 through 17.20, and the yards and highway lines provided for in this chapter, are created and established as part of a comprehensive system of yard and highway lines covering the unincorporated territory of the county. 
B.  Prohibition. A person shall not use any building, structure, equipment or obstruction within any yard or highway line except as hereinafter specifically permitted in this title and subject to all regulations and conditions enumerated in this title. 
(Prior zoning ord. §§ 451-451.2) 
17.28.030 - Yards. 
A.  To Exclude Drainage Easements. Where a lot or parcel of land includes a portion of a required drainage channel easement, any required yard which would normally fall within such easement shall be located outside of and abutting the easement within the lot or parcel. 
B.  Projections Permitted in Yards. The following projections are permitted in required yards subject to the provisions of this title and of Ordinance No. 2225 (Building code). Projections specified are permitted only where also authorized by said Building Code. 
1.  Eaves and cantilevered roofs may project a maximum distance of 21/2 feet into any required yard provided: 
a.  That such eaves or cantilevered roofs are not closer than 2 1/2 feet to any lot or highway line; and 
b.  That no portion of such eaves or cantilevered roofs is less than 8 feet above grade; and 
c.  That there are no vertical supports or members within the required yard. 
2.  Fireplace structures, not wider than 8 feet measured in the general direction of the wall of which it is a part, buttresses and wing walls may project a maximum distance of 21/2 feet into any required yard provided: 
a.  That all walls of such structures are of one-hour fire resistant construction; and 
b.  That such structures are not closer than 21/2 feet to any lot or highway line; and 
c.  That such structures shall not be utilized to provide closets or otherwise usable floor area. 
3.  Uncovered porches, platforms, landings and decks, including access stairs thereto, exceeding an average height of one foot which do not extend above the level of the first floor may project a maximum distance of 3 feet into required interior side yards, and a maximum distance of 5 feet into required front, rear and corner side yards provided: 
a.  That such porches, platforms, landings and decks shall not be closer than 2 feet to any lot or highway line; and 
b.  That such porches, platforms, landings and decks are open and unenclosed, provided, however, that an open-work railing not to exceed 31/2 feet in height may be installed. 
4.  Rain conductors, spouts, utility service risers, shutoff valves, water tables, sills, capitals, bases, cornices and belt courses may project a maximum distance of one foot into any required yard. 
5.  Awnings or canopies may project a maximum distance of 21/2 feet into required interior side yard and 5 feet into required front, rear and corner side yard provided: 
a.  That such awnings or canopies are not closer than 21/2 feet to any lot or highway line; and 
b.  That such awnings or canopies have no vertical support within such yard; and 
c.  That such awnings or canopies extend only over the windows or doors to be protected and for not more than one foot on either side thereof. 
6.  Water heaters, water softeners and gas or electric meters, including service conduits and pipes, enclosed or in the open, may project a maximum distance of 21/2 feet into a required interior side or rear yard provided that such structures or equipment are not closer than 21/2 feet to any lot line. Gas meters, if enclosed or adequately screened from view by a structure permitted in the yard, may project a maximum distance of 21/2 feet into a required front or corner side yard provided that such equipment is not closer than 21/2 feet to any lot or highway line. 
7.  Stairways and balconies above the level of the first floor may project a maximum distance of 2 feet into a required interior or corner side yard or 4 feet into a required front or rear yard provided: 
a.  That such stairways and balconies shall not be closer than 3 feet to any lot or highway line; and 
b.  That such stairways and balconies are open and unenclosed; and 
c.  That such stairways and balconies are not covered by a roof or canopy except as otherwise provided by subsection B.5. of this section. 
8.  Wall and window mounted air conditioners, coolers and fans may be used in any required yard provided that such equipment is not closer than 21/2 feet to any lot line. 
C.  Fences and Walls Permitted. Fences and walls may be erected and maintained in required yards subject to the requirements specified herein: 
1.  Front Yards. Fences and walls within a required front yard shall not exceed a height of 31/2 feet. 
2.  Corner Side Yards. Fences and walls within a required corner side yard shall not exceed 31/2 feet in height where closer than 5 feet to the highway line nor exceed 6 feet in height where 5 feet or more from said highway line. 
3.  Interior Side and Rear Yards. Fences and walls within a required interior side or rear yard shall not exceed 6 feet in height, provided, however, that on the street or highway side of a corner lot such fence or wall shall be subject to the same requirements as for a corner side yard. 
4.  Retaining Walls. Retaining walls not to exceed 6 feet in height are permitted in all yards. 
5.  Retaining Walls Topped with Walls or Fences. 
a.  Where a retaining wall protects a cut below the natural grade and is located on a front, side or rear lot line, such retaining wall may be topped by a fence or wall of the same height that would otherwise be permitted at the location if no retaining wall existed. Where such retaining wall contains a fill, the height of the retaining wall built to retain the fill shall be considered as contributing to the permissible height of a fence or wall providing, however, that in any event an open-work non-view-obscuring fence of 31/2 feet may be erected at the top of the retaining wall for safety protection. 
b.  Where a wall or fence is located in the required yard adjacent to a retaining wall containing a fill, such wall or fence shall be set back from said retaining wall a distance of one foot for each one foot in height to a maximum distance of 5 feet, provided, however, that this does not permit a wall or fence in required yards higher than permitted by this section. The area between such wall or fence and said retaining wall shall be landscaped and continuously maintained in good condition. 
6.  Fences and Walls Exempted. Where a fence or wall exceeding the heights specified is required by any law or regulation of the state of California, a fence or wall not exceeding such required height is permitted. 
7.  Measurement of Fence and Wall Height. The height of a fence or wall shall be measured at the highest average ground level within 3 feet of either side of said wall or fence. In order to allow for variation in topography, the height of a required fence or wall may vary an amount not to exceed 6 inches, provided, however, that in no event shall the average height of such fence or wall exceed the maximum height specified. 
8.  Notwithstanding the other provision of this section, the director may permit fences or walls within any required yard on flag lots to a height not to exceed 6 feet pursuant to the provisions of Article VIII of Chapter 17.32. 
D.  Landscaping in Required Yards. Trees, shrubs, flowers and plants may be placed in any required yard provided that all height restrictions applying to fences and walls shall also apply to hedges planted within yards and forming a barrier serving the same purpose as a fence or wall. 
E.  Public Use Exceptions. The commission, without notice of hearing, may grant a modification of yard and setback regulations for public sites unless such modification would be incompatible with adjoining development. 
(Prior zoning ord. §§ 452.8.2, 452.9, § 452.13-452.15) 
17.28.040 - Establishment of highway lines. 
    In all zones highway lines are established parallel to the centerline established by the city engineer for the regional arterial, primary arterial, secondary arterial, and other streets in accordance with the standards set forth in Section 16.20.050 of this code. 
(Ord. 711 § 37, 1995: prior zoning ord. § 467) 
17.28.050 - Highway lines-Corner cutoffs. 
    In all zones on the intersections of parkways, major and secondary highways and streets: 
A.  A person shall not use any building or structure within those triangles formed by the intersections of the highway lines on such parkway, major and secondary highways and streets for a distance of 17 feet from such intersection on each of such lines and a line connecting the end of such lines, except as permitted within a yard by subsection B.1. of Section 17.28.030, and provided that such structures do not constitute a visual obstruction between 31/2 feet and 8 feet above the level of the ground. 
(Ord. 711 § 38, 1995; prior zoning ord. § 468) 
17.28.060 - Streets. 
A.  Exceptions. This section does not apply to the following buildings or structures which, if they comply with all other provisions of this title, may be used without complying with any provision of this section: 
1.  Accessory agricultural buildings where used primarily for agricultural purposes including but not limited to: barns, silos, chicken houses, rabbit hutches and roadside stands; 
2.  Gas measurement, distribution and meter control stations; 
3.  Outdoor advertising; 
4.  Residences, single-family (see Chapter 12.12, Streets, Curbs and Sidewalks, of this code); 
5.  Temporary carnivals and revival meetings; 
6.  Other similar uses which, in the opinion of the commission, will not generate a greater volume of traffic than the uses enumerated in this section. 
B.  Existing Structures. This section does not apply to the use, alteration or enlargement of an existing building or structure or the erection of one or more buildings or structures accessory thereto, or both, on the same lot or parcel of land, if the total value of such alteration, enlargement or construction does not exceed 1/2 of the current market value (as determined by the assessor's records, appraisal or other method acceptable to the director) of all existing buildings or structures on such lot or parcel of land. 
C.  Adequate Streets Adjacent to Structures. Except as otherwise provided in subsections A and B of this section, a building or structure shall not be used on any lot or parcel of land any portion of which abuts upon a street unless said street which abuts such lot or parcel of land has been dedicated and improved as provided in Article II of Chapter 16.20 of this code. 
D.  Dedication Standards. Regional arterial, primary arterial, secondary arterial, and other streets shall be dedicated to the width from centerline as specified in Section 16.20.050 of this code including corner cutoffs as specified by the city engineer or director of public works, except that dedication in any case shall not be required to such an extent as to reduce the area or width of any parcel of land to less than that specified in Section 17.40.080 or 17.40.090. 
E.  Improvements. Before a structure subject to the provisions of this section may be used, curbs, gutters, pavement, sidewalks, and drainage structures shall be constructed at the grade and at the location specified by the city engineer or the director of public works per the typical street cross sections as specified in Section 16.20.050 of this code. Such curbs, gutters, pavement, sidewalks, and drainage structures shall comply with the standards of the city engineer or director of public works. 
F.  Variance to Requirements of This Section. Any person deeming himself aggrieved may apply for a variance from any provision of this section pursuant to Article II of Chapter 17.32 whether he has applied for a modification or not. 
(Ord. 711 § 39, 1995: prior zoning ord. §§ 490.000-490.090) 
Chapter 17.32 - VARIANCES, CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS, NONCONFORMING USES, DIRECTOR'S REVIEW 
Article I. - Conditional Use Permits 

17.32.010 - Purpose of. 
    A conditional use as defined by this title means a use which: 
A.  Because of characteristics peculiar to it; or 
B.  Because of size, technological process or type of equipment; or 
C.  Because of the location with reference to surroundings, street or highway width, traffic generation or other demands upon public facilities, required special consideration relative to placement at specific locations in the zone or zones where classified to insure proper integration with other existing or permitted uses in the same zone or zones. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 501.1) 
17.32.020 - Filing of application. 
    Any person desiring a conditional use permit required by or provided for in this title may file an application with the director except that no application shall be filed or accepted if final action has been taken within one year prior thereto by either the commission or board of supervisors on an application requesting the same, or substantially the same permit. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 501.2) 
17.32.030 - Contents of application. 
    An application for a conditional use permit shall contain the following information: 
A.  Name and address of the applicant and of all persons owning any or all of the property proposed to be used; 
B.  Evidence that the applicant: 
1.  Is the owner of the premises involved, or 
2.  Has written permission of the owner or owners to make such application, or 
3.  Is or will be the plaintiff in an action in eminent domain to acquire the premises involved, or any portion thereof, or 
4.  In the case of a public agency, is negotiating to acquire a portion of the premises involved; 
C.  Location of subject property (address or vicinity); 
D.  Legal description of the property involved; 
E.  The nature of the requested use, indicating the business, occupation or purpose for which such building, structure, or improvement is to be erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, moved, occupied or used; 
F.  Indicate the nature, condition and development of adjacent uses, buildings and structures; and 
G.  Provide a site plan drawn to a scale satisfactory to and in the number of copies prescribed by the director indicating: 
1.  The area and dimensions of proposed site for the requested use, 
2.  The location and dimensions of all structures, yards, walls, fences, parking and loading facilities, landscaping, and other development features; 
H.  Indicate the dimensions and state of improvement of the adjoining streets and highways providing access to the proposed site of the requested use; 
I.  Indicate other permits and approvals secured in compliance with the provisions of other applicable ordinances; 
J.  With each application the applicant shall also file: 
1.  Maps in the number prescribed and drawn to a scale specified by the director, showing the location of all property included in the request, the location of all highways, streets, alleys and the location and dimensions of all lots or parcels of land within a distance of 700 feet from the exterior boundaries of such proposed use, 
2.  One copy of said map shall indicate the uses established on every lot and parcel of land shown within said 700 foot radius, 
3.  A list, certified to be correct by affidavit or by a statement under penalty of perjury pursuant to Section 2015.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure, of the names and addresses of all persons who are shown on the latest available assessment roll of the county of Los Angeles as owners of the subject property and as owning property within a distance of 500 feet from the exterior boundaries of the area actually to be occupied by the use. One copy of said map shall indicate where such ownership are located, 
4.  Proof satisfactory to the director that water will be available in quantities and pressures required by said Ordinance No. 7834, the Water Ordinance, or by a variance granted pursuant to said Ordinance No. 7834. The director may accept as such proof a certificate from the person who is to supply water that he can supply water as required by said Ordinance No. 7834, also stating the amount and pressure, which certificate also shall be signed by the forester and fire warden, or a certificate from the county engineer that such water will be available, 
5.  The director may waive the filing of one or more of the above items; 
K.  Such other information as the director may require. 
  The accuracy of all information, maps and lists submitted shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 501.3) 
17.32.040 - Burden of proof. 
    In addition to the information required in the application by Section 17.32.030, the applicant shall substantiate to the satisfaction of the zoning board and/or the commission the following facts: 
A.  That the requested use at the location proposed will not: 
1.  Adversely affect the health, peace, comfort or welfare of persons residing or working in the surrounding area, or 
2.  Be materially detrimental to the use, enjoyment or valuation of property of other persons located in the vicinity of the site, or 
3.  Jeopardize, endanger or otherwise constitute a menace to the public health, safety or general welfare; and 
B.  That the proposed site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the yards, walls, fences, parking and loading facilities, landscaping and other development features prescribed in this title, or as is otherwise required in order to integrate said use with the uses in the surrounding area; and 
C.  That the proposed site is adequately served: 
1.  By highways or streets of sufficient width and improved as necessary to carry the kind and quantity of traffic such use would generate, and 
2.  By other public or private service facilities as are required. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 501.4) 
17.32.050 - Fees required. 
    When an application is filed, it shall be accompanied by the filing fee required by resolution of the city council. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 501.5) 
17.32.060 - Denial of inadequate application. 
    The zoning board may recommend denial, and the commission may deny, without a public hearing, an application for a conditional use permit if such application does not contain the information required by Sections 17.32.030 and 17.32.040. The commission may permit the applicant to amend such application. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 501.6) 
17.32.070 - Hearing. 
    In all cases where an application for a conditional use permit is filed and the commission does not grant a request for ex parte consideration, the zoning board shall hold a public hearing unless the commission determines to and itself holds a public hearing. In either case, the public hearing shall be held pursuant to the procedure provided in this chapter. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 501.7) 
17.32.080 - Ex parte consideration. 
    Where the commission finds that the use requested, subject to such conditions as it deems necessary, will comply with the findings required by Section 17.32.090, it may grant such permit without a public hearing except that: 
A.  This section does not apply to an application for the following: 
1.  Airports; 
2.  Amusement and entertainment enterprises and concessions, including all structural devices and contrivances designed and operated for patron participation and pleasure; 
3.  Primary or incidental alcohol sales establishments as defined under Chapter 17.42; 
4.  Circus winter quarters; 
5.  Colleges and universities; 
6.  Communication equipment buildings; 
7.  Correctional institutions; 
8.  Day nurseries; 
9.  Earth stations; 
10.  Electrical distribution substations; 
11.  Electric transmission substations; 
12.  Electric generating plants; 
13.  Golf courses including the customary clubhouse and appurtenant facilities; 
14.  Golf driving ranges; 
15.  Guest ranches; 
16.  Heliports; 
17.  Helistops; 
18.  Hospitals; 
19.  Institutions for the aged, private; 
20.  Institutions for children, private; 
21.  Juvenile halls; 
22.  Land reclamation projects; 
23.  Landing strips; 
24.  Mobilehome parks; 
25.  Motor recreational facilities for the driving, testing and racing of automobiles, dune buggies, motorcycles, trail bikes or similar vehicles including appurtenant facilities in conjunction therewith; 
26.  Nudist camps; 
27.  Oil wells; 
28.  Outdoor festivals; 
29.  Parking buildings; 
30.  Public utility service centers; 
31.  Race tracks; 
32.  Radio and television stations and towers; 
33.  Recreation clubs, private; 
34.  Rifle, pistol, skeet or trap ranges; 
35.  Sewage treatment plants. 
(Ord. 896 § 1 (Exh. A § 26), 2008; prior zoning ord. § 501.8) 
17.32.090 - Findings and decision. 
    The zoning board may recommend approval and the commission may approve an application for a conditional use permit where the information submitted by the applicant and/or presented at public hearing substantiates the following findings: 
A.  That the proposed use will not be in substantial conflict with the adopted general plan for the area. Where no general plan has been adopted, this subsection shall not apply; 
B.  That the requested use at the location proposed will not: 
1.  Adversely affect the health, peace, comfort or welfare of persons residing or working in the surrounding area, or 
2.  Be materially detrimental to the use, enjoyment or valuation of property of other persons located in the vicinity of the site, or 
3.  Jeopardize, endanger or otherwise constitute a menace to the public health, safety or general welfare; and 
C.  That the proposed site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the yards, walls, fences, parking and loading facilities, landscaping and other development features prescribed in this title, or as is otherwise required in order to integrate said use with the uses in the surrounding area; and 
D.  That the proposed site is adequately served: 
1.  By highways or streets of sufficient width and improved as necessary to carry the kind and quantity of traffic such use would generate, and 
2.  By other public or private service facilities as are required. 
    The commission shall deny the application where the information submitted by the applicant and/or presented at public hearing fails to substantiate such findings to the satisfaction of the commission. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 501.9) 
17.32.100 - Building bulk provisions. 
    The building bulk provisions prescribed in the various zones shall not apply to uses permitted by conditional use permit. In granting a conditional use permit, the commission shall prescribe the height limit, maximum lot coverage, or floor-area ratio for the use approved. Where the commission fails to specify said height limit, maximum lot coverage, or floor-area ratio, those provisions applicable to principal permitted uses in the specific zone shall be deemed to be so specified. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 501.10) 
17.32.110 - Adequate water supply. 
    If it appears that the use requested will require a greater water supply for adequate fire protection than does either the existing use or any use permitted without a conditional use permit in the same zone and will not comply with the provisions of said Ordinance No. 7834, such facts shall be prima facie evidence that such requested use will adversely affect and be materially detrimental to adjacent uses, buildings and structures and will not comply with the provisions of Section 17.32.090. If the water appeals board grants a variance pursuant to any provision of Article 4 of Chapter 1 of said Ordinance No. 7834, permitting the proposed use with the existing or proposed water supply, this section shall not apply. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 501.11) 
17.32.120 - Conditions. 
    The commission in approving an application for a conditional use permit may impose such conditions as it deems necessary to insure that such use will be in accord with the findings required by Section 17.32.090. Conditions imposed by the commission may involve any pertinent factors affecting the establishment, operation and maintenance of the requested use, including, but not limited to: 
A.  Special yards, open spaces and buffer areas; 
B.  Fences and walls; 
C.  Parking facilities, including vehicular ingress and egress and the surfacing of parking areas and driveways to specified standards; 
D.  Street and highway dedications and improvements including sidewalks, curbs and gutters; 
E.  Water supply and fire protection in accordance with the provisions of Ordinance No. 7834; 
F.  Landscaping and maintenance of grounds; 
G.  Regulation of nuisance factors such as noise, vibrations, smoke, dust, dirt, odors, gases, noxious matter, heat, glare, electromagnetic disturbances and radiation; 
H.  Regulation of operating hours for activities affecting normal neighborhood schedules and functions; 
I.  Regulation of signs including outdoor advertising; 
J.  A specified validation period limiting the time in which development may begin; 
K.  Provisions for a bond or other surety that the proposed conditional use will be removed on or before a specified date; 
L.  A site plan indicating all details and data as prescribed in this title; 
M.  Such other conditions as will make possible the development of the proposed conditional use in an orderly and efficient manner and in general accord with all elements of the general plan and the intent and purpose of this title. 
  The commission may also approve the requested permit contingent upon compliance with applicable provisions of other ordinances. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 501.12) 
17.32.130 - Project grading. 
    A person shall not engage in project grading in any zone if such project grading requires the removal from, or importation to, a lot or parcel land of more than 10,000 cubic yards of dirt, soil, sand, gravel, rock, clay, decomposed granite or other similar material if more than 20 occupied dwelling units in one-family, two-family, or multiple structures, or in occupied mobilehomes within a mobilehome park, or any combination thereof, or if a hospital or accredited public or private school offering instruction required to be taught in the public schools by the Education Code of the state of California are located within a parallel corridor 300 feet wide on each side of and measured from the edge of the existing right-of-way of the streets or highways forming the proposed transport route, and within a distance equal to the extent of such route, or within a distance of 2,640 feet, whichever is less, measured from the proposed point of access to such project unless: 
A.  If not more than 100,000 cubic yards of material is to be moved, such person either: 
1.  Obtains a conditional use permit; or 
2.  Submits a site plan to the director, who approves the plan upon finding that the proposed use will comply with the requirements of this section and Section 17.32.140. The director may approve the plan which approval shall be valid for the time stated by the director. If no time is stated such approval shall be good for one year. If the director or county engineer finds that there is good cause shown, and that the applicant in moving of material pursuant to such approval has not violated this or any other ordinance or statute, he may extend the duration of such approval for not more than one year if the applicant files a request for such extension prior to the expiration of his original approval. Only one extension may be granted. 
B.  Where more than 100,000 cubic yards of material are to be moved, such person obtains a conditional use permit. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 501.13) 
17.32.140 - Conditions for project grading. 
    Project grading subject to the provisions of Section 17.12.130 shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  A grading permit, when required, shall first be obtained as provided in said Ordinance 2225 (Building Code), before the commencement of any project grading. 
B.  The application to the director or for a conditional use permit as the case may be shall contain statements setting forth the following information: 
1.  The names and addresses of all persons owning all or any part of the property from which such material is proposed to be removed from and transported to; 
2.  The names and addresses of the person or persons who will be conducting the operations proposed; 
3.  The ultimate proposed use of the lot or parcel of land; 
4.  Such other information as the director finds necessary in order to determine whether the application should be granted; 
5.  In the case of an application for a conditional use permit the information required by Section 17.32.030. 
C.  The applicant shall submit a map showing in sufficient detail the location of the site from which such material is proposed to be removed, the proposed route over streets and highways, and the location to which such material is to be imported. 
D.  All hauling as approved under this section shall be restricted to a route approved by the road commissioner. 
E.  Compliance shall be made with all applicable requirements of other county departments and other governmental agencies. 
F.  If any condition of this section is violated, or if any law, statute or ordinance is violated, the privileges granted herein shall lapse and such approval shall be suspended. 
G.  Neither the provisions of this section nor the granting of any permit provided for in this title authorizes or legalizes the maintenance of a public or private nuisance. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 501.14) 
17.32.150 - Public construction. 
    A conditional use permit shall not be required pursuant to Section 17.32.130 if such use is in conjunction with: 
A.  Any work of construction or repair by the county or any district of which the board of supervisors of the county is ex officio the governing body; or 
B.  Construction or repair by the county or such district performed by force account; or 
C.  Construction, maintenance or repair of any "state water facilities" as defined in Section 12934 of the State Water Code. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 501.15) 
17.32.160 - Temporary war uses. 
    Premises in any zone may be temporarily used for uses necessary to the prosecution of any war in which the United States may be engaged, if a conditional use permit for such use is granted pursuant to the provisions of this title, and provided: 
A.  That the United States is at war declared by the Congress of the United States and engaged in actual physical hostilities; and 
B.  That such permit shall expire not later than 6 months after the cessation of such physical hostilities. 
    As used in the section, "cessation of physical hostilities" means a date comparable to November 11, 1918, or August 15, 1945. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 501.16) 
17.32.170 - Expiration where not used. 
    A permit issued on or after January 21, 1937, which is not used within the time specified in such permit, or, if no time is specified, within one year after the granting of the permit, becomes null and void and of no effect except: 
A.  Except as provided in Section 17.32.175, an approved conditional use permit shall expire twenty-four (24) months from the date of planning commission or city council approval. Conditional use permits may be granted time extensions prior to the expiration of the project not to exceed three one-year extensions. Any extension granted shall be conditioned to comply with the city's current design guidelines as adopted by the city council, unless the applicant can demonstrate to the planning commission's satisfaction that such compliance will impose an undue hardship on the project. The applicant is required to file for an extension sixty (60) days prior to such expiration date. 
B.  That in the case of a permit for a rock quarry, sand or gravel pit, rock crushing plant, or any apparatus for the manufacture or production of rock, sand, or gravel, or any excavation for the purpose of obtaining clay, decomposed granite or similar material, no time limit shall apply to utilization of such permit if within such year or such other time the property is posted and remains posted with signs not less than 500 feet apart and at each change of direction of the said outer boundary line, in such manner as will reasonably give notice to passersby of the matters contained in such notice, stating, in letters not less than 4 inches in height: "ROCK QUARRY PROPERTY," and stating, in letters not less than one inch in height: "Permission has been granted to use this property at any time for rock quarry, sand, gravel or clay pit or rock crushing plant"; 
C.  That in the case of a permit for a publicly owned use no time limit shall apply to utilization of such permit provided that the public agency: 
1.  Within two years of the date of such approval, either acquires the property involved or commences legal proceedings for its acquisition; and 
2.  Immediately after the acquisition of, or the commencement of legal proceedings for the acquisition of the property, posts such property with signs, having an area of not less than 20 square feet nor more than 40 square feet in area per face indicating the agency and the purpose of which it is to be developed. One such sign shall be placed facing and located within 50 feet of each street, highway or parkway bordering the property. Where the property in question is not bounded by a street, highway or parkway, the agency shall erect one sign facing the street, highway or parkway nearest the property. 
  A conditional use permit shall be considered used within the intent of this section when construction or other development authorized by such permit has commenced that would be prohibited in the zone if no permit had been granted. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 501.17) 
(Ord. No. 924, § 1, 8-25-09; Ord. No. 995, § 2, 12-10-13) 
17.32.175 - Exceptions to expiration dates. 
    A conditional use permit approved in conjunction with a tentative map shall have the same expiration date as the approved tentative map or any extension of the map, unless a specific expiration date is specified in the approval of the conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 995, § 1, 12-10-13) 
17.32.180 - Date of grant where appealed. 
    Where an appeal is filed relative to any conditional use permit, the date of decision by the board of supervisors of such appeal shall be deemed the date of grant in determining said expiration date. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 501.18) 
17.32.190 - Cessation of use. 
    A conditional use permit granted by action of the commission, shall automatically cease to be of any force and effect if the use for which such conditional use permit was granted has ceased or has been suspended for a consecutive period of 2 or more years. This provision shall not apply to permits granted for alcohol sales establishments pursuant to Chapter 17.42, which shall be subject to the requirements of Section 17.42.130. 
(Ord. 896 § 1 (Exh. A § 27), 2008; prior zoning ord. § 501.19) 
17.32.200 - Nuisances. 
    Neither the provisions of this title nor the granting of any permit provided for in this title authorizes or legalizes the maintenance of any public or private nuisance. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 501.20) 
17.32.210 - Effective date. 
    The decision of the commission shall become final and effective 10 working days after the commission's action, provided no appeal of the action taken has been filed with the city clerk pursuant to Section 17.36.030 within said 10 working days. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 501.21) 
17.32.220 - Applicability of regulations in the zone. 
    Unless specifically modified by a conditional use permit, all regulations prescribed in the zone in which such conditional use permit is granted shall apply. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 501.22) 
17.32.230 - Continuing validity. 
    A conditional use permit that is valid and in effect, and was granted pursuant to the provisions of this title, shall adhere to the land and continue to be valid upon change of ownership of the land or any lawfully existing building or structure on said land. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 501.23) 
17.32.240 - Signs. 
    The sign provisions prescribed in residential zones shall not apply to uses granted by conditional use permit. In granting a conditional use permit, the commission may approve signing which it deems appropriate for such use provided, however, that no sign or signs may be authorized that would exceed a sign area of 25 square feet or a total sign area of 50 square feet or a height of 12 feet in residential zones or exceed 100 square feet of sign area or 200 square feet of total sign area in commercial zones, except as otherwise provided in the CPD zone. Where the commission fails to specifically approve such signs, those provisions applicable to principal permitted uses in the specific zone in which the use is located shall be deemed to have been specified. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 501.24) 
Article II. - Variances 

17.32.250 - Purpose of. 
    The variance procedure is established to permit modification of development standards as they apply to particular uses when practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships, or results inconsistent with the general purposes of this title, develop through the strict literal interpretation and enforcement of such provisions. A variance may be granted to permit modification of: 
A.  Building line setbacks, yards, open space and buffer areas; 
B.  Height, lot coverage, density and bulk regulations; 
C.  Off-street parking spaces, maneuvering areas and driveway width, and paving standards; 
D.  Landscaping requirements; 
E.  Wall, fencing and screening requirements; 
F.  Street and highway dedication and improvement standards; 
G.  Lot area, depth, and width requirements; 
H.  Operating conditions such as hours of days of operation, number of employees, and equipment limitations; 
I.  Sign regulations other than outdoor advertising. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 502.1) 
17.32.260 - Filing of application. 
    Any person desiring any permit required by or provided for in this title, may file an application therefor with the director, except that no application shall be filed or accepted if final action has been taken within one year prior thereto by either the commission or board of supervisors on an application requesting the same, or substantially the same permit. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 502.2) 
17.32.270 - Contents of application. 
    An application for a variance shall contain the information required by Section 17.32.030. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 502.3) 
17.32.280 - Burden of proof. 
    In addition to the information required in the application by Section 17.32.270, the applicant shall substantiate to the satisfaction of the zoning board and/or the commission the following facts: 
A.  That there are special circumstances or exceptional characteristics applicable to the property involved, such as size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, which are not generally applicable to other properties in the same vicinity and under identical zoning classification; and 
B.  That such variance is necessary for the preservation of a substantial property right of the applicant such as that possessed by owners of other property in the same vicinity and zone; and 
C.  That the granting of the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or be injurious to other property or improvements in the same vicinity and zone. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 502.4) 
17.32.290 - Filing fees required. 
    When an application is filed it shall be accompanied by the filing fee required by resolution of the city council. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 502.5) 
17.32.300 - Denial of inadequate petition. 
    The zoning board may recommend denial, and the commission may deny, without a public hearing, an application of a variance if such application does not contain the information required by Sections 17.32.270 and 17.32.280. The commission may permit the applicant to amend such application. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 502.6) 
17.32.310 - Hearing. 
    In all cases where an application is filed for a variance the zoning board shall hold a public hearing unless the commission determines to and itself holds a public hearing. In either case the public hearing shall be held pursuant to the procedure provided by Article V of this chapter. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 502.7) 
17.32.320 - Findings and decision. 
    The zoning board may recommend approval and the commission may approve an application for a variance where the information submitted by the applicant and/or presented at public hearing substantiates the following findings: 
A.  That because of special circumstances or exceptional characteristics applicable to the property, the strict application of this title deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning classification; and 
B.  That the adjustment authorized will not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which the property is situated; and 
C.  That strict application of zoning regulations as they apply to such property will result in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships inconsistent with the general purpose of such regulations and standards; and 
D.  That such adjustment will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare, or to the use, enjoyment or valuation of property of other persons located in the vicinity. 
    The commission shall deny the application where the information submitted by the applicant and/or presented at public hearing fails to substantiate such findings to the satisfaction of the commission. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 502.8) 
17.32.330 - Adequate water supply. 
    If it appears that the variance requested will require a greater water supply for adequate fire protection than does either the existing use or any use permitted in the same zone without a variance, and will not comply with the provisions of said Ordinance No. 7834, such facts shall be prima facie evidence that such requested variance will adversely affect and be materially detrimental to adjacent uses, buildings and structures and will not comply with the provisions of Section 17.32.320. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 502.9) 
17.32.340 - Conditions. 
    The commission in approving an application for a variance may impose such conditions as it deems necessary to insure that the adjustment will be in accord with the findings required by Section 17.32.320. Conditions imposed by the commission may involve any pertinent factors affecting the establishment, operation and maintenance of the use for which such variance is requested, including, but not limited to those specified in Section 17.32.360. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 502.10) 
17.32.350 - Expiration where not used. 
    A variance which is not used within the time specified in such variance, or, if no time is specified, within one year after the granting of the variance, becomes null and void and of no effect except: 
A.  That in all cases the commission may extend such time for a period of not to exceed one year, provided an application requesting such extension is filed prior to such expiration date. In the case of a nonprofit corporation organized to provide low-income housing for the poor or elderly, the commission may grant an additional one-year extension provided that an application requesting such extension is filed prior to the expiration of the first such extension. 
B.  That in the case of an exception granted prior to November 23, 1970, for a rock quarry, sand or gravel pit, rock crushing plant, or any apparatus for the manufacture or production of rock, sand or gravel, or any excavation for the purpose of obtaining clay, decomposed granite or similar material, no time limit shall apply to utilization of such exception if within such year or such other time the property is posted and remains posted with signs not less than 500 feet apart and at each change of direction of the said outer boundary line, in such manner as will reasonably give notice to passersby of the matters contained in such notice stating in letters not less than 4 inches in height: "ROCK QUARRY PROPERTY," and stating, in letters not less than one inch in height "Permission has been granted to use this property at any time for rock quarry, sand, gravel or clay pit or rock crushing plant." 
(Prior zoning ord. § 502.11) 
17.32.360 - Date of grant where appealed. 
    Where an appeal is filed relative to any variance, the date of decision by the board of supervisors of such appeal shall be deemed the date of grant in determining said expiration date. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 502.12) 
17.32.370 - Nuisances. 
    Neither the provisions of this title nor the granting of any permit provided for in this title authorizes or legalizes the maintenance of any public or private nuisance. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 502.13) 
17.32.380 - Effective date. 
    The decision of the commission shall become final and effective 10 working days after the commission's action, provided no appeal of the action taken has been filed with the city clerk pursuant to Section 17.36.030 within said 10 working days. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 502.14) 
17.32.390 - Applicability of regulation in the zone. 
    Unless specifically modified by a variance, all regulations prescribed in the zone in which such variance is granted shall apply. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 502.15) 
17.32.400 - Continuing validity. 
    A variance that is valid and in effect, and was granted pursuant to the provisions of this title, shall adhere to the land and continue to be valid upon change of ownership of the land or any lawfully existing building or structure on said land. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 502.16) 
Article III. - Reserved[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 947, § 2, adopted July 13, 2010, amended the Code by repealing former Art. III, §§ 17.32.410-17.32.550, in its entirety. Former Art. III pertained to cemetery permits, and derived from the prior zoning ord., §§ 504.1, 504.3, 504.5, 504.7, 504.9, 504.11, 504.13, 504.15, 504.17, 504.19, 504.21, 504.23, 504.25, 504.27, and 504.29. 

17.32.410-17.32.550 - Reserved. 
Article IV. - Explosives Permits 

17.32.560 - Definition. 
A.  The terms "explosive" and "explosives" whenever used in this title shall mean any substance or combination of substances that is commonly used for the purpose of detonation and which, upon exposure to any external force or condition, is capable of a relatively instantaneous release of gas and heat. These terms shall include, but shall not necessarily be limited to, all of the following: 
1.  Substances determined to be Class A and Class B explosives as classified by the United States Department of Transportation; 
2.  Nitrocarbonitrate substances (blasting agent) as classified by the United States Department of Transportation; 
3.  Any material designated as an explosive by the State Fire Marshal; 
4.  Certain Class C explosives as designated by the United States Department of Transportation when listed in regulations adopted by the State Fire Marshal. 
B.  The terms "explosive" and "explosives" whenever used in this title shall not include the following: 
1.  Small arms ammunition of .75 caliber or less when designated as a Class C explosive by the United States Department of Transportation; 
2.  Fireworks regulated under Part 2 (commencing with Section 12500) of Division 11 of the Health and Safety Code. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 505.1) 
17.32.570 - Permits required. 
    No quantity of explosives other than gunpowder in excess of 100 pounds, or gunpowder in excess of 750 pounds, shall be stored or kept in any place, house or building in the county of Los Angeles without a permit therefor from the commission and unless said explosives are contained in a magazine situated, constructed, operated and maintained in the manner described in Part 1 of Division 11 of the Health and Safety Code. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 505.2) 
17.32.580 - Application for permit. 
    Any person proposing to store or keep any quantity of gunpowder in excess of 750 pounds or any other explosives in excess of 100 pounds in any place, house or building in the unincorporated territory of the county of Los Angeles shall file application for a permit with the director, accompanied by the filing fee as required by resolution of the city council. Such application shall also verify that the applicant has submitted such data as is required by the county forester and fire warden. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 505.3) 
17.32.590 - Temporary storage. 
    If the application is for a permit to store explosives for not more than 3 months and there is no permit in force for that location, the commission may grant the permit without a public hearing provided: 
A.  That the applicant has submitted such data as is required to the county forester and fire warden for approval prior to consideration by the commission; and 
B.  That said county forester and fire warden has indicated his approval in writing stating that such explosives may be safely stored at the proposed location. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 505.5) 
17.32.600 - Hearing required. 
    Unless an application is approved pursuant to Section 17.32.590 the zoning board shall hold a public hearing unless the commission determines to and itself holds a public hearing. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 505.6) 
17.32.610 - Notification of county forester and fire warden. 
    The director shall immediately notify the county forester and fire warden of every application for a permit to keep or store explosives. Where a public hearing is to be held the director shall notify the county forester and fire warden of the time and place thereof. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 505.7) 
17.32.620 - Duties of county forester and fire warden. 
    The county forester and fire warden, within 10 days after receipt of a copy of the application for a permit, shall furnish to the commission a report thereon as to whether or not in his opinion explosives in the amounts and kinds mentioned in the application can be kept at the place proposed without danger of serious injury to persons other than those employed in or about the magazine, or to property other than that of the applicant. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 505.8) 
17.32.630 - Findings and decision. 
    At the time and place fixed for the hearing on the application the zoning board or commission shall hear the same and any protests thereto, and upon the evidence and other matters brought to its attention during hearing, including the report of the county forester and fire warden, may approve such permit where the findings indicate that explosives in the amounts and kinds mentioned in the application can be kept at the place proposed without danger of serious injury to persons other than those employed in or about the magazine, or to property other than that of the applicant. 
    Where no hearing is required, the commission shall make similar findings based upon its investigation or the investigation of its staff, and upon the report of the county forester and fire warden, of the place where it is proposed to keep the explosives. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 505.10) 
17.32.640 - Conditions for approval. 
    The commission shall consider and may impose such conditions as it deems necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare, and to prevent material detriment to the property of other persons located in the vicinity of such proposed use. The commission may also approve the permit contingent upon compliance with applicable provisions of other ordinances. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 505.11) 
17.32.650 - Application of article. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall apply to any explosive in transit in railway cars or other vehicles, or to any explosive awaiting transportation in or delivery from a railway car or other vehicle, or to the transfer of any such explosive from a car of one railway company to a car of a connecting railway company, provided that the car or other vehicle in which said explosive is being transported or is awaiting transportation or delivery, shall be kept locked or guarded; and provided further that the time during which such explosive is kept waiting transportation or delivery shall not exceed 24 hours. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 505.12) 
Article V. - Public Hearing Procedures for Permits, Variances and Nonconforming Uses or Structures Review 

17.32.660 - Initiation of. 
    Hearings on permits, variances or nonconforming uses or structures review may be initiated: 
A.  If the board of supervisors instructs the commission to set the matter for a public hearing in the case of a conditional use permit, (animal permit), variance or nonconforming use or structure review; or 
B.  Upon the initiative of the commission in the case of a conditional use permit, (animal permit), variance or nonconforming use or structure review; or 
C.  Upon the filing of an application. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 507.1) 
17.32.670 - Scheduling of. 
    Upon the filing of an application accompanied by the required fee and/or deposit, or other initiation pursuant to this chapter, the director shall fix a time and place for a public hearing as required by this title. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 507.2) 
17.32.680 - Notice of. 
    Where a public hearing is required by this title, notice of such hearing shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.36.020A. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 507.3) 
17.32.690 - Responsibility for. 
    When a verified application is filed for a permit or variance and a hearing is required by this title, the zoning board shall hold such hearing if the commission does not itself hold the hearing. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 507.4) 
17.32.700 - Findings and recommendations to the commission. 
    When the zoning board is empowered to hold the public hearing, the zoning board shall submit to the commission the action it concludes the commission should take in the form of written recommendations. Such recommendations shall include findings required by this title, together with any additional conditions deemed necessary. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 507.5) 
17.32.710 - Period of decision. 
    The zoning board shall submit its recommendations to the commission within 90 days following the public hearing, provided however that with the mutual agreement of the applicant and the commission, an extension may be granted for a period not to exceed 90 days. Where no recommendation is made within 90 days or within the extension period, it shall be deemed a recommendation for denial by the zoning board based on the finding that the information submitted does not substantiate the requirements of Section 17.32.090. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 507.6) 
17.32.720 - Action on zoning board recommendations. 
    Upon receiving the written recommendations of the zoning board, the commission may: 
A.  Approve and adopt the findings and recommendations of the zoning board; or 
B.  Refer the matter back to the zoning board for further proceedings with or without instructions; or 
C.  Require a transcript of the testimony or summary of the evidence introduced before the zoning board and take such action as in its opinion is indicated by the evidence; or 
D.  Set the matter for a public hearing before itself. Such public hearing shall be held de novo (as if no hearing has been previously held). 
    In reaching its decision, the commission shall not hear or consider any argument or evidence of any kind other than the evidence received from the zoning board, unless it is itself conducting a public hearing on the matter. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 507.7) 
17.32.730 - Period for decision. 
    If the commission takes no action on a recommendation of the zoning board for 30 days after receiving the same, at the expiration of such 30 days the director shall release such recommendation as the final ruling of the commission. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 507.8) 
17.32.740 - Cases considered concurrently. 
    Where an application for a conditional use permit and an application for a variance are concurrently heard and considered, the zoning board and commission shall in making their findings consider each case individually as if separately filed. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 507.9) 
17.32.750 - Notice of action. 
    Notice of the action taken by the commission on an application for a permit or variance shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.36.020C. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 507.10) 
Article VI. - Director's Review 

17.32.760 - Intent and purpose. 
    Director's review is established to facilitate substantiation and corroboration of facts and testimony vital to the administration of this title and is required or may be used for: 
A.  Determination of whether or not a proposed development will properly comply with the provisions and development standards prescribed in this title or as prescribed by the commission or director; 
B.  Indication of compliance, or plans and intentions to comply with the regulations and standards prescribed in this title. 
    Where a site plan is required in an application for a permit, variance, nonconforming use or structure review, said site plan shall be considered a part of said application and shall not require separate approval under the provisions of this article. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 508.1) 
17.32.770 - Authority. 
    The director may: 
A.  Require a site plan review for any use, development of land, structure, building or modification of standards that involves the approval of the director; 
B.  Require such other forms and documents as are necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this title or any conditions that may be specified in granting an approval of the requested use, development or modification; 
C.  Require such supplemental information or material as may be necessary, including revised or corrected copies of any site plan or other document previously presented. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 508.2) 
17.32.780 - Application for. 
    Any application for director's review shall contain the following information and documents as are required by the director and be accompanied by the filing fee required by resolution of the city council: 
A.  Name and address of the applicant and of all persons owning any or all of the property proposed to be used; 
B.  Evidence that the applicant: 
1.  Is the owner of the premises involved, or 
2.  Has written permission of the owner or owners to make such application, or 
3.  Is or will be the plaintiff in an action in eminent domain to acquire the premises involved, or any portion thereof, or 
4.  In the case of a public agency, is negotiating to acquire a portion of the premises involved; 
C.  Location of subject property (address or vicinity); 
D.  Legal description of property; 
E.  Proposed facility or use; 
F.  The use, location and size of all buildings and structures, yards, driveways, access and parking areas, landscaping, walls or fences, and other similar features; 
G.  Such other data including plans, drawings, diagrams or pictures as may be required to determine compliance with the provisions of this title. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 508.3) 
17.32.790 - Findings and decision. 
    The director in acting upon any site plan offered for review as provided in this title shall either approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed use, development or modification as requested in the application and as indicated in the required site plan based on the following principles and standards: 
A.  That the use, development of land and/or application of development standards is in compliance with all applicable provisions of this title; 
B.  That the use, development of land and/or application of development standards, when considered on the basis of the suitability of the site for the particular use or development intended, is so arranged as to avoid traffic congestion, insure the protection of public health, safety and general welfare, prevent adverse effects on neighboring property and is in conformity with good zoning practice; 
C.  That the use, development of land and/or application of development standards is suitable from the standpoint of functional developmental design. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 508.4) 
17.32.800 - Period of decision. 
    If the director takes no action on a site plan within 90 days from the date of filing, it shall constitute a denial of such site plan. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 508.6) 
17.32.810 - Notice of action. 
    The director shall notify the applicant of a request for a site plan approval of the action taken on the application, by first class mail, postage prepaid, or other means deemed appropriate by the commission. Such notification may also be hand delivered to the applicant when appropriate. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 508.7) 
17.32.820 - Appeal. 
    An appeal may be made by the applicant or an interested citizen in the event that he is dissatisfied with the action taken by the director on a site plan. Such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk in accordance with Section 17.36.030. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 508.8) 
Article VII. - Nonconforming Uses and Structures 

17.32.830 - Definition of types. 
    As used in this article the expressions "Type 1, Type 2, Type 3, Type 4 and Type 5 building" are used as defined in Part V, Chapter 17 of said Ordinance No. 2225 (Building Code). 
(Prior zoning ord. § 509.1) 
17.32.840 - Regulation of. 
    The following regulations shall apply to all nonconforming uses: 
A.  Continuation of Nonconforming Uses. A nonconforming use may be continuously maintained provided there is no alteration or addition to any structure nor any enlargement of area, space or volume occupied by or devoted to such use, except as otherwise provided in this title. 
B.  Additions to a Nonconforming Use. This section does not authorize the extension, expansion or enlargement of the area of land or the area within a building or structure devoted to a nonconforming use or permit the addition of land, buildings or structures used in conjunction with such nonconforming use except: 
1.  To the extent required by a subsequently enacted or subsequently adopted law, ordinance or regulation and the director so finds. Such additions as are permitted by this subsection shall not be construed to extend the termination date of the subject nonconforming use; 
2.  Additions may be made to a nonconforming dwelling unit without requiring any additional garage, carport, parking space or driveway paving, provided that such additions neither increase the number of families that can be housed in such structure, nor occupy the only portion of an area which can be used for required garages, carports, parking space or access thereto. Such additions as are permitted by this subsection shall not be construed to extend the termination date of the subject nonconforming use. 
C.  Additions to a Nonconforming Building or Structure. Additions may be made to a nonconforming building or structure which is not in violation of any provisions of this title and is nonconforming only because it does not meet the following standards of development as provided herein: 
1.  Yards provided such addition or expansion is developed pursuant to the yard requirements of this title; 
2.  Building height limits, but not including floor area ratio or maximum lot coverage provisions, provided such addition or expansion is developed pursuant to the height requirements of this title; 
3.  Access and paving, width of access, improvement and landscaping of parking areas, provided such addition or expansion shall be developed pursuant to the parking provisions of the zone in which it is located. Where the amount of parking provided prior to such addition is sufficient to comply with the zone after such expansion the addition shall be deemed to comply with this subsection; 
4.  Such additions as are permitted by this subsection shall not be construed to authorize the modification of any provision of this title nor extend the termination date of the subject nonconforming use. 
D.  Substitution of a Conforming Use in a Structure-Nonconforming Due to Standards Other Than Parking. A use which is not in violation of any provisions of this title and is nonconforming only because it does not meet the requirements of the standards of development, other than automobile parking space requirements, may be changed to a use permitted in the zone. Any such change of use shall not extend the termination date established for the original nonconforming use. 
E.  Substitution of a Conforming Use in a Structure-Nonconforming Due to Parking. A use which is not in violation of any provisions of this title and is a nonconforming use only because it does not meet automobile parking space requirements may be changed to a use permitted in the zone having the same or a lesser parking requirement. Any such change of use shall not extend the termination date established for the original nonconforming use. 
F.  Building and Structures Under Construction. Any building or structure, for which a valid building permit has been issued prior to the operative date of this title or any amendment thereto, may be completed and used in accordance with the provisions of this title, provided: 
1.  That such construction or the proposed use of such building or structure under construction is not in violation of any other ordinance or law at said operative date; and 
2.  That such building or structure is completed within: 
a.  One year from said operative date, if 2 stories or less in height and not more than 70,000 square feet in floor area, except that one additional month shall be permitted for each 15,000 square feet in excess of said 70,000 square feet, 
b.  One and one-half years from said operative date, if 3 to 6 stories in height and not more than 100,000 square feet in floor area, except that one additional month shall be permitted for each 15,000 square feet in excess of said 100,000 square feet, 
c.  Two years from said operative date if 7 stories or more in height and not more than 150,000 square feet in floor area except that one additional month shall be permitted for each 15,000 square feet; 
3.  That such building or structure is completed in accordance with the plans and specifications on which such building permit was issued. 
G.  1. Repair or Restoration of Damaged or Destroyed Residential Buildings in Residential Zones Which are Nonconforming Solely by Virtue of the Property Development Regulations. A residential building in a residential zone which was legally constructed in accordance with the lot dimensions, density, yard or lot coverage requirements in effect at the time of its construction, which is damaged or destroyed, may be repaired or restored to its original number of dwelling units and location on the lot or parcel which it enjoyed prior to the occurrence of such damage or destruction provided that such repair or restoration shall be commenced within one year of the date of damage or destruction and be diligently pursued to completion. 
2.  Repair of Damaged or Partially Destroyed (50% or less) Nonconforming Buildings or Structures Other Than Signs. Any nonconforming building or structure other than signs, or any building or structure containing a nonconforming use, which is damaged or partially destroyed may be restored to the condition in which it was immediately prior to the occurrence of such damage or destruction, provided: 
a.  That the cost of repair or restoration does not exceed 50% of the total replacement cost for the entire building or structure as determined by the current building valuation guide sheet used by the department of building and engineering services to ascertain plan check and building permit fees; and 
b.  That such repair or restoration shall be commenced within one year of the date of damage or partial destruction and be diligently pursued to completion; and 
c.  That repair or restoration shall not extend the termination date of such nonconforming use, building or structure specified in this title. 
H.  Maintenance of Nonconforming Buildings or Structures. When maintenance or routine repairs within any 12 month period exceed 25% of the current market value of an existing building or structure as reflected by the current assessment roll, such building or structure shall be made to conform to the requirements for new buildings or structures as specified by this title. This provision does not apply to additions permitted by this article or to Section 17.40.120. 
I.  Limitation on Additional Development. No new use, building or structure shall be developed on any lot or parcel of land containing a nonconforming use, building or structure unless the following conditions prevail: 
1.  That each existing and proposed use, building or structure, including appurtenant structures, improvements and open space, will be located on a lot or parcel of land having the required area as provided in Article II of Chapter 17.40; and 
2.  That such lot or parcel of land can be divided into smaller lots or parcels of land each of which when considered as a separate lot or parcel of land will contain not less than the required area; and 
3.  That each such lot or parcel of land so divided into smaller lots or parcels of land will comply with the requirements of this title as to the number and location of structures. 
J.  Nonconforming Uses Created by the Adoption and Implementation of the General Plan. A use which was lawfully established in accordance with this title, and any amendments thereto, and other applicable ordinances in effect at the time of its creation, but which due to the adoption of the general plan and subsequent amendments to this title to implement the general plan, no longer complies with those regulations and requirements of the zone in which it is located, shall be subject to the following regulations: 
1.  Such uses may continue to be operated by the owner for a period of 20 years from the date which they became nonconforming. Section 17.32.850B shall not apply. 
2.  Such uses shall be terminated when the use is changed or discontinued under the conditions described in Section 17.32.850A. 
K.  Exemptions for Senior Mobilehome Parks. An existing senior mobilehome park that becomes nonconforming as to the underlying general plan or zoning designation shall be deemed to be a legal and conforming use. Expansion of an existing senior mobilehome park shall not terminate the legal and conforming status of any previously existing structures or uses in the mobilehome park. 
(Ord. 900 § 8, 2008; prior zoning ord. § 509.2) 
17.32.850 - Termination of. 
A.  Termination by Discontinuance. 
1.  Discontinuance of a nonconforming use as indicated herein shall immediately terminate the right to operate such nonconforming use, except when extended as otherwise provided in this title: 
a.  Changing a nonconforming use to a conforming use; 
b.  Discontinuance of a nonconforming use for a consecutive period of one year. 
2.  Discontinuance of the keeping of animals for one year in a zone where the keeping of said animals is not permitted (R, MHP, MDR, HDR) or keeping numbers of animals on a 15,000 square foot lot which exceeds the number permitted for the lot area specified in Article IV of Chapter 17.08 for the keeping of such animals, shall terminate the right to keep same as a nonconforming use. 
B.  Termination by Operation of Law. The following nonconforming uses and structures shall be discontinued and removed from their sites within the time specified in this section, except when extended or revoked as otherwise provided in this title: 
1.  Where the property is unimproved, one year; 
2.  Where the property is unimproved except for structures of a type for which Ordinance No. 2225 does not require a building permit, 3 years; 
3.  Where the property is unimproved except for structures which contain less than 100 square feet of gross floor area, or where such structures have a total market value of $500.00 or less as reflected by the current assessment roll, 3 years; 
4.  Signs as follows: 
a.  Signs as prohibited by Sections 17.12.150B, 17.12.370B, 17.12.660B, 17.12.820B, 17.16.150B and 17.16.360B (except for pole signs and roof signs which shall comply with subsection B.4.c. of this section), 90 days, and 
b.  Outdoor advertising signs and structures in accordance with subsections D and H of Section 17.40.210, and 
c.  All other signs and structures governed by the provisions of the zoning ordinance which were in effect before March 12, 1983, 10 years, 
d.  All other signs and structures governed by the provisions of the zoning ordinance which became effective after March 12, 1983, to the extent the requirements of Business and Professions Code Section 5495 apply, 
e.  Those nonconforming signs within a redevelopment project area, 10 years; 
5.  Where a nonconforming use is carried on in a conforming structure, 5 years except where the provisions of subsection B.3. of this section apply; 
6.  In other cases 20 years from effective date of the ordinance or amendment thereto establishing said nonconforming status, and for such longer time so that the total life of the structure from the date of construction, based on the type of construction as defined by the building code, will be as follows: 
a.  Type IV and Type V buildings (light incombustible frame and wood frame) used as: 
1)  One-family dwellings, 2-family dwellings, 3-family dwellings, apartment houses and other buildings used for residential occupancy, 35 years, 
2)  Stores and factories, 25 years, 
3)  Any other building not herein enumerated, 25 years, 
b.  Type III buildings (heavy timber construction and ordinary masonry) used as: 
1)  One-family dwellings, 2-family dwellings, 3-family dwellings, apartment houses, offices and hotels, 40 years, 
2)  Structures with stores below and residences, offices or a hotel above, 40 years, 
3)  Warehouses, stores and garages, 40 years, 
4)  Factories and industrial buildings, 40 years, 
c.  Type I and Type II buildings (fire resistive) used as: 
1)  One-family dwellings, 2-family dwellings, 3-family dwellings, apartment houses, offices and hotels, 50 years, 
2)  Theaters, warehouses, stores and garages, 50 years, 
3)  Factories and industrial buildings, 50 years. 
(Ord. 651 § 9, 1993; prior zoning ord. § 509.3) 
17.32.860 - Public uses. 
    Any nonconforming publicly owned use, including but not limited to, schools, colleges, parks, libraries, fire stations, sheriff stations and other public sites, may be added to, extended or altered if such additions, extensions or alterations do not extend beyond the boundaries of the original site established prior to the time approval was required. Nothing in this title pertaining to nonconforming structures shall be construed to require the termination, discontinuance or removal of such uses except as provided in Section 17.32.900. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 509.4) 
17.32.870 - Public utilities. 
    Any nonconforming public utility building, structure, equipment or facility necessary for operating purposes, but excluding offices, service centers or yards, may be added to, extended or altered, provided there is no change in use or enlargement of the original site established prior to the time such approval was required. Nothing in this ordinance pertaining to nonconforming structures shall be construed to require the termination, discontinuance or removal of such uses except as provided in Section 17.32.900. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 509.5) 
17.32.880 - Review of amortization schedule or substitution of use. 
A.  Request for Review. An application accompanied by the filing fee required by resolution of the city council may be filed with the commission: 
1.  Requesting extension of the time within which a nonconforming use or structure must be discontinued and removed from its site as specified in subsection B of Section 17.32.850 or subsection A of Section 17.44.100; or 
2.  Requesting substitution of another use permitted in the zone in which the nonconforming use is first permitted where a nonconforming building is vacant despite efforts to insure continuation of a nonconforming use and is so constructed that it may not reasonably be converted to or used for a use permitted in the zone in which it is located. 
The commission may accept such filing either before or after the date of expiration of such nonconforming use. 
B.  Application and Procedure. Except as specifically provided in this section, the application and all procedure relative to notification, public hearing and appeals shall be the same as for a conditional use permit. 
C.  Burden of Proof. In addition to the information required in the application, the applicant shall substantiate to the satisfaction of the zoning board and/or commission, the following facts: 
1.  That the nature of the improvement is such that to require cessation of use would impair the property rights of any person to such an extent as to be an unconstitutional taking of property; and 
2.  That such adjustment will not be materially detrimental to the public health or safety, or to the use, enjoyment or valuation of property of other persons located in the vicinity. 
D.  Findings and Decisions. After a public hearing, the commission shall consider or the zoning board shall consider and recommend to the commission, applications for a nonconforming use and structure review. In making such determination, the commission shall consider the following principles and standards and shall approve such permit where the information submitted by the applicant and/or presented at public hearing substantiates the following findings: 
1.  That the nature of the improvement is such that to require cessation of use would impair the property rights of any person to such an extent as to be an unconstitutional taking of property; and 
2.  That such adjustment will not be materially detrimental to the public health or safety, or to the use, enjoyment or valuation of property of other persons located in the vicinity. 
E.  Conditions. The commission in approving an application for a nonconforming use and structure review may impose conditions it deems necessary to insure that the approval will be in accord with the findings required. Conditions imposed by the commission may involve any pertinent factors affecting the establishment, operation and maintenance of the use requested, including, but not limited to those specified in Section 17.32.120. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 509.6) 
Article VIII. - Revocations or Modifications 

17.32.890 - Grounds for. 
    After a public hearing as provided for in this article, the commission may revoke or modify any nonconforming use or revoke or modify any permit, variance or other approval which has been granted by either the board of supervisors or the commission, pursuant to either the provisions of the ordinance codified in this title or of any ordinance superseded by the ordinance codified in this title on any one or more of the following grounds: 
A.  That such approval was obtained by fraud; 
B.  That the use for which such approval was granted is not being exercised; 
C.  That the use for which such approval was granted has ceased or has been suspended for one year or more. 
  This subsection does not apply to an exception (granted prior to November 23, 1970), or permit for a rock quarry, sand or gravel pit, rock crushing plant, or any apparatus for the manufacture or production of rock, sand or gravel, or any excavation for the purpose of obtaining clay, decomposed granite, or similar material, if from the cessation of use the outer boundaries of the premises have been continuously posted with signs not less than 500 feet apart and at each change of direction of the said outer boundary line, in such manner as will reasonably give notice to passersby of the matters contained in such notice, stating, in letters not less than 4 inches in height: "ROCK QUARRY PROPERTY," and stating, in letters not less than one inch in height: "Permission has been granted to use this property at any time for rock quarry, sand, gravel or clay pit or rock crushing plant"; 
D.  Except in case of a dedicated cemetery that any person making use of or relying upon the permit, variance, or other approval, is violating or has violated any conditions of such permit, variance or other approval, or that the use for which the permit, variance, or other approval was granted is being, or recently has been exercised contrary to the terms or conditions of such approval, or in violation of any statute, ordinance, law or regulation; 
E.  Except in the case of a dedicated cemetery, that the use for which the approval was granted is so exercised as to be detrimental to the public health or safety, or so as to be a nuisance. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 510.1) 
17.32.900 - Additional grounds for nonconforming uses and structures. 
    In addition to the grounds for revocation or modification contained in Section 17.32.890, a nonconforming use or structure may be revoked or modified after a public hearing if the commission finds: 
A.  That the condition of the improvements, if any, on the property are such that to require the property to be used only for those uses permitted in the zone where it is located would not impair the constitutional rights of any person; 
B.  That the nature of the improvements are such that they can be altered so as to be used in conformity with the uses permitted in the zone in which such property is located without impairing the constitutional rights of any person. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 510.2) 
17.32.910 - Initiation of. 
    Hearings on revocations or modifications of permits, variances or nonconforming uses or structures may be initiated: 
A.  If the board of supervisors instructs the commission to set the matter for a public hearing; or 
B.  Upon the initiative of the commission. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 510.3) 
17.32.920 - Notice of public hearing. 
    Notice of a public hearing on a revocation or modification shall be provided as follows: 
A.  To the same persons and in the same manner as required for a public hearing before the commission pursuant to 17.36.020; and 
B.  By such other additional means that the commission deems necessary. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 510.4) 
17.32.930 - Continuance. 
    If for any reason, the testimony of any case set for public hearing cannot be completed on the appointed day, the chairman of such hearing may before adjournment or recess, publicly announce the time and place at which said hearing will be continued and no further notice thereof shall be required. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 510.5) 
17.32.940 - Notice of action. 
    Notice of the action taken by the commission shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.36.020C. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 510.6) 
17.32.950 - Effective date. 
    An order by the commission revoking or modifying a permit, variance, or nonconforming use or structure shall become final and effective 10 working days after the commission's action, provided no appeal of the action taken has been filed with the city clerk pursuant to Section 17.36.030 within said 10 working days. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 510.7) 
Chapter 17.36 - ADMINISTRATION 

17.36.010 - Procedure for application. 
A.  Withdrawal of. An applicant or petitioner for any permit, variance, nonconforming use or structure review, or zone change provided for in this title may withdraw his application at any time before hearing or before ex parte action by the commission by filing with the commission a request in writing signed by all persons who signed the original application or petition, or their successors in interest. 
B.  Filing Fees and Deposits. For the purpose of defraying the expense involved in connection with any application or petition required or authorized by this title the city council shall establish by resolution fees which shall accompany the application or petition at the time of filing with the city. The council may amend such fees at any time as it deems a change to be necessary in accordance with state law. 
C.  Fee Waiver. In those instances where the board of supervisors by resolution determines it in the public interest to accept applications or petitions without filing fee, the director shall accept such applications or petitions subject to the requirements specified in said resolution. 
D.  Deficiencies and Refunds of Fees and Deposits. 
1.  If any application or petition is withdrawn as provided in subsection A of this section prior to publication of notice of hearing or prior to ex parte action by the commission, the county shall refund the filing fee and all deposits, if any. 
2.  In the case of an application for a cemetery permit if the actual cost of publication and posting of notice is more than the amount deposited by the applicant, such applicant shall deposit the deficiency; if less the county shall refund any deposit. 
3.  In all other cases there shall be no refund after the notice of hearing has been published. 
E.  Accounting for Fees and Deposits. The director shall keep a permanent and accurate account of all deposits received, giving the name of the applicant upon whose account the same was deposited, the date and amount thereof, together with the location of the premises to which they relate. 
(Prior zoning ord. §§ 620-623) 
17.36.020 - Public hearings procedure. 
A.  Notice of. No less than 20 days prior to the date of any hearing other than a hearing on an application to grant a cemetery permit, the director shall: 
1.  Cause a copy of a notice of the time and place of such hearing to be published as follows: 
a.  Hearings on general amendments to the ordinance shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the county of Los Angeles; 
b.  Hearings on permits, variances, nonconforming uses or structure review, or zone changes shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the county of Los Angeles available in the community in which the permit or variance is proposed to be established except that, conditional use permits for a rock quarry, sand, gravel, or any excavation for the purpose of obtaining clay, decomposed granite or similar material shall be published in 2 newspapers of general circulation at least one of which is a newspaper available in the community in which such use is proposed to be established. Such publications if made in a daily newspaper, shall be for a period of not less than 5 consecutive publications of such newspaper, and if made in a weekly newspaper, shall be for a period of not less than 2 consecutive publications of such paper the first publication in either case appearing not less than 20 days before the date of the hearing; 
2.  Cause a notice to be mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid, to: 
a.  The applicant and all persons listed in the application or petition as owners of the property under consideration, and 
b.  All persons whose names and addresses appear on the verified lists of property owners required to be submitted by the applicant, and 
c.  Such other persons whose property might in his judgment be affected by such application or permit; 
3.  Cause a notice of the time and place of such hearing to be sent to such public officers, departments, bureaus or agencies who, in the opinion of the director, might be interested, requesting a report thereon; 
4.  If for a revocation, also serve upon every person, if any, in real or apparent charge and control of the premises involved, the record owner, the holder of any mortgage, trust deed or other lien or encumbrance of record, the holder of any lease of record, the record holder of any other estate or interest in or to the premises or any part thereof, written notice of the time and place of such hearing either in the manner required by law for the service of summons, or by registered mail, postage prepaid; 
5.  If the director finds that the publication and mailing required by subsections A.1. and 2. of this section will not give sufficient notice to those persons who may be affected, he also shall post at such locations as he deems best suited to inform such persons, notices of the time and place of such hearing. 
B.  Continuance of. If for any reason, the testimony on any case set for public hearing cannot be completed on the appointed day, the chairman of such hearing may before adjournment or recess, publicly announce the time and place at which said hearing will be continued and no further notice thereof shall be required. 
C.  Notice of Action. The commission or board of supervisors shall serve notice of its action upon: 
1.  The applicant for a permit, variance, nonconforming use or structure review, or zone change, or the person owning and/or operating a use for which the revocation of a permit, variance, or nonconforming use or structure is under consideration as required by law for the service of summons or by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested; and 
2.  The following persons by first class mail, postage prepaid: 
a.  The first 3 protestants testifying or speaking at the public hearing, except at a hearing for the revocation or modification of any permit, variance, or nonconforming use or structure, 
b.  The first 3 persons testifying or speaking at a public hearing in favor of the revocation or modification of any permit, variance, or nonconforming use or structure, 
c.  Any other persons testifying or speaking at a public hearing that request such notification from the chairman at the hearing. 
(Prior zoning ord. §§ 631-633) 
17.36.030 - Appeal to the city council from action of city official, board or commission. 
    Whenever an applicant or an interested citizen of the city desires to appeal to the city council an adverse determination made by a city official, board or commission he shall follow the uniform appeal procedures as outlined in Chapter 2.44 of this code. All inquiries regarding appeals shall be directed to the city clerk's office. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 641) 
Chapter 17.40 - GENERAL REGULATIONS 
Article I. - General Regulations 

17.40.010 - Buildings moved. 
    No building or structure shall be moved from one lot or premises to another unless such building or structure shall thereupon be made to conform to all the provisions of this title relative to buildings or structures hereafter erected upon the lot or premises to which such building or structure shall have been moved, and shall be made to conform to the general character of the existing buildings in the neighborhood or better. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 701.2) 
17.40.020 - Buildings converted or altered. 
    No building or structure existing at the time of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title or any amendment thereof which is designed, arranged, intended for or devoted to a use not permitted in the zone in which such building or structure is located, shall be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, built upon or structurally altered unless the use of such building or structure is changed to a use permitted in the zone in which such building or structure is located. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 701.3) 
17.40.030 - Temporary housing in disaster areas. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, where an existing residence is damaged or destroyed by a major disaster such as fire, flood or earthquake so declared by the Governor of the state of California during the previous 6 months, a mobilehome may be used as a residence on the same lot or parcel of land by the owner and his family for a period not to exceed one year. This section authorizes only the temporary replacement of a damaged or destroyed residence and not an increase in the number of living quarters permitted on the property. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 701.4) 
17.40.040 - Prohibition, general. 
    A person shall not use or cause or permit to be used any building, structure, improvement or premises located in any zone described in this title contrary to the provisions of this title. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 701.5) 
Article II. - Required Area 

17.40.050 - Defined. 
    See definition in Section 17.04.240. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 702.1) 
17.40.060 - Undersized sections. 
    If as a result of the normal division of an undersized section of land, a parcel of land would be created having less than the required area, such parcel of land shall be considered as having the required area provided: 
A.  That in no event shall more parcels be created under this section than would result from the breakdown of a normal section of land in the same zone; and 
B.  That this section shall apply only to parcels of land when division of a normal section would create parcels of land having not less than a minimum gross area of 21/2 acres; and 
C.  That the total reduction of all parcels in a division of an undersized section shall not exceed 10%; and 
D.  That no lot or parcel of land shall be created which contains less than a minimum gross area of 21/4 acres; and 
E.  That the creation of such parcels shall meet all the requirements of Ordinance 4478 entitled "Subdivision Ordinance," adopted March 19, 1945. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 702.2) 
17.40.070 - Required area reduced by public use. 
    If a lot or parcel of land has not less than the required area and after creation of such lot or parcel of land a part thereof is acquired for public use other than for highway purposes, in any manner including dedication, condemnation or purchase, and if the remainder of such lot or parcel has not less than the 80% of the required area, such remainder shall be considered as having the required area. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 702.3) 
17.40.080 - Required area reduced for highway purposes. 
    If a lot or parcel of land has not less than the required area, as defined in Section 17.40.050, and after the creation of such lot or parcel of land a part thereof is acquired for highway purposes exclusively in any manner including dedication, condemnation or purchase, and if the remainder of such lot or parcel has not less than 75% of the required area, then such remainder shall be considered as having the required area, provided the remaining portion of said lot or parcel of land has an area of less than 2,500 square feet, or an area as is otherwise provided herein. The director, without notice or hearing, may approve a reduction of lot area to 75% of the required area where the remaining parcel would have less than 2,500 square feet, but not less than 2,000 square feet, where topographic features, subdivision design or other conditions create an unnecessary hardship or unreasonable limitation making it obviously impractical to comply with the stated minimum. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 702.4) 
17.40.090 - Required width of depth reduced by public use. 
A.  If a lot or parcel of land has not less than the required width and after the creation of such lot or parcel of land a part thereof is acquired for public use in any manner including dedication, condemnation or purchase if the remainder of such lot has a width of not less than 40 feet, such remainder shall be considered as having the required width. 
B.  If a lot or parcel of land has not less than the required depth and after the creation of such lot or parcel of land a part thereof is acquired for public use in any manner including dedication, condemnation or purchase, if the remainder of such lot or parcel has not less than 75% of the required depth, then such remainder shall be considered as having the required depth. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 702.5) 
17.40.093 - Reduction of required yards for street widening. 
    Where the provisions of Section 17.40.070, 17.40.080 or 17.40.090 are applied on a property adjoining any arterial street, the director may reduce the amount of yard required on a 1:1 basis, provided that the yard may not be reduced to less than 10 feet. 
(Ord. 711 § 40, 1995; prior zoning ord. § 702.6) 
17.40.095 - Reduction of required yards to accommodate transit stops. 
    Where the city has deemed it necessary to locate a transit stop within a turnout which requires an additional easement or right-of-way, the director may reduce the amount of yard required on a 1:1 basis, provided that the yard may not be reduced to less than 10 feet. 
(Ord. 711 § 41, 1995; prior zoning ord. § 702.7) 
17.40.097 - Reduction of required yards where widening of an arterial street exceeds city standards. 
    Where the city has deemed it necessary to widen an arterial street in excess of the city standard, the director may reduce the amount of yard required as necessary, provided that the yard may not be reduced to less than 5 feet. 
(Ord. 711 § 42, 1995; prior zoning ord. § 702.8) 
17.40.100 - Contiguous narrow lots. 
    Where, prior to the territory being zoned R-1, R-2, R-A, A-1, A-2 or A-2-H, lots exist not less than 100 feet deep but less than 50 feet wide, if 2 or more such contiguous lots, or one or more such contiguous lots and one or more lots also contiguous thereto which have a depth of not less than 100 feet, have a total frontage of not less than 50 feet, such lots may be treated and considered as one parcel. 
    If such parcel is in the RR, SRR or R zones, 2 single-family residences may be constructed thereon and so used. If such parcel is in zone MDR, 2 single-family dwellings or 2 2-family dwellings or one single-family dwelling and one 2-family dwelling may be constructed thereon and so used. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 702.13) 
17.40.110 - Sale. 
    Where a portion of a lot or parcel of land is sold or transferred and as a result of such sale or transfer one or more parcels are created of such an area that the number and location of the buildings thereon no longer conform to the requirements of this article, then, in the determination of the permissible number and location of any buildings on any other parcel so created by such sale or transfer, the portion sold or transferred and the remainder shall be considered as one parcel. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 702.16) 
17.40.120 - Area or width diminished by public use. 
    Where a building or structure is lawfully located on property acquired for public use (by condemnation, purchase or otherwise) such building or structure may be relocated on the same lot or parcel of land, although such building or structure is existing as nonconforming use or although the area or width regulations of this title or both cannot be complied with. Where any part of such building or structure is acquired for public use, the remainder of such building or structure may be repaired, reconstructed or remodeled, with the same or similar kind of materials as used in the existing buildings. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 702.18) 
17.40.130 - Reduction of lot area or width. 
    Except for a conveyance for public use, a person shall not divide any lot or parcel of land or any portion thereof, if as a result of such division or conveyance the area, depth or width of any lot or parcel of land is so reduced, or a lot or parcel of land is created, which lot or parcel of land has an area, depth or width less than the required minimum lot area, depth or width specified for the zone in which the property is located and except for public use no such reduction shall occur in a residential planned development or commercial planned development, without a new public hearing on the case. If the zone does not specify a minimum lot area, depth, or width then the minimum lot area shall be 5,000 square feet, the minimum lot depth shall be 100 feet, and the minimum lot width shall be 50 feet. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 702.19) 
17.40.140 - Rescission. 
    Any deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell made contrary to the provisions of this article is voidable at the sole option of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, his heirs, personal representative, or trustee in insolvency or bankruptcy within one year after the date of execution of, the deed or conveyance, sale or contract to sell, but the deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell is binding upon any assignee or transferee of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, other than those above enumerated, and upon the grantor, vendor or person contracting to sell, his assignee, heir or devisee. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 702.20) 
Article III. - Flood Damage Prevention 

17.40.150 - Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and methods. 
A.  Statutory Authorization. The Legislature of the state of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560 and 65800 conferred upon local government units authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. 
B.  Findings of Fact. 
1.  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which could result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
2.  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately flood proofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. 
C.  Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed: 
1.  To protect human life and health; 
2.  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
3.  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
4.  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
5.  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
6.  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas; 
7.  To insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
8.  To insure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
D.  Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. In order to accomplish its purpose, this article includes methods and provisions for: 
1.  Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards or which result in damaging increases in erosion flood heights or velocities; 
2.  Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
3.  Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which help accommodate or channel floodwaters; 
4.  Controlling fill, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
5.  Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Prior zoning ord. §§ 705.1-705.1.4) 
17.40.160 - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
    "Alluvial fan" means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone- or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration. 
    "Apex" means the point of highest elevation on an alluvial fan which, on undisturbed fans, is generally the point where the major stream that formed the fan emerges from the mountain front. 
    "Appeal" means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance. 
    "Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO or AH zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to 3 feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of Special Flood Hazard. See "Special flood hazard area." 
    "Backfill" means the placement of fill material within a specified depression, hole or excavation pit below the surrounding adjacent ground level as a means of improving floodwater conveyance or to restore the land to the natural contours existing prior to excavation. 
    "Base flood" means the flood having a 1% chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "100 year flood"). 
    Building. See "Structure." 
    "Critical feature" means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
    "Curvilinear line" means the border on either a flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map that delineates the special flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow), and/or flood-related erosion hazard areas and consists of a curved or contour line that follows the topography. 
    "Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials. 
    "Encroachment" means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
    "Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    "Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    "Fill" means the placement of fill material at a specified location to bring the ground surface up to a desired elevation. 
    "Fill material" can be natural sand, dirt, soil or rock. For the purposes of floodplain management, fill material may include concrete, cement, soil cement, brick or similar material as approved on a case-by-case basis. 
    "Flood," "flooding" or "floodwater" means: 
1.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
a.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; 
b.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or 
c.  Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in subsection 1.b. of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current; and 
2.  The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in subsection 1.a. of this definition. 
    "Flood elevation determination" means a determination by the administrator of the water surface elevations of the base flood; that is, the flood level that has a 1% or greater chance of occurrence in any given year. 
    "Flood elevation study" means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
    "Flood Hazard Boundary Map" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of flood hazards. 
    "Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    "Flood insurance study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    "Floodplain or flood-prone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding"). 
    "Floodplain administrator" means the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
    "Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management regulations. 
    "Floodplain management regulations" means the zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain management regulations). 
    "Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. 
    "Flood protection system" means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed to conform with sound engineering standards. 
    "Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as "regulatory floodway." 
    "Floodway encroachment lines" means the lines marking the limits of floodways on federal, state and local floodplain maps. 
    "Floodway fringe" means the areas of a floodplain on either side of the designated floodway where encroachment may be permitted. 
    "Fraud and victimization," related to Section 17.40.200, Variance procedures, means the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the variance board will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for 50 to 100 years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject, during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
    "Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities. It does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    "Hardship" as related to Section 17.40.200, Variance procedures, means the hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The variance board requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as exceptional hardships. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance. This is so, even if the alternative means are more expensive or complicated than building with a variance, or if they require the property owner to put the parcel to a different use than originally intended, or to build elsewhere. 
    "Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    "Historic structure" means any structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states with approved programs. 
    "Landfill" means a permitted location for the disposal, placement or dumping of garbage, trash, debris, junk or waste material. 
    "Levee" means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    "Levee system" means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices. 
    "Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this title. 
    "Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
    "Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into 2 or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    "Map" means the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for a community issued by the Flood Insurance Administration of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
    "Mean sea level" means that for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
    "Minimum necessary" related to Section 17.40.200, Variances procedures, means the minimum necessary to afford relief to the applicant of a variance with minimum deviation from the requirements of this title. In the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the variance board need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, for example, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only that level that the board believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance. 
    "Mudslide" (i.e., mudflow) describes a condition where there is a river, flow or inundation of liquid mud down a hillside, usually as a result of a dual condition of loss of brush cover and the subsequent accumulation of water on the ground preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained rain. 
    "New construction," for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    "New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    "Obstruction" means and includes but is not limited to any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
    "One hundred year flood" means a flood which has a 1% annual probability of being equalled or exceeded. It is identical to the "base flood" which will be the term used throughout this title. 
    "Principal structure" means a structure used for the principal use of the property as distinguished from an accessory use. 
    "Public safety and nuisances" as related to Section 17.40.200, Variance procedures, means the granting of a variance must not result in additional threats to public safety or create nuisances. This title is intended to help protect the health, safety, well-being and property of the local citizens. This is a long-range community effort made up of a combination of approaches such as adequate drainage systems, warning and evacuation plans, and keeping new property above the flood levels. These long-term goals can only be met if exceptions to the requirements of this title are kept to a bare minimum. 
    "Regulatory floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    "Riverine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
    Sheet Flow Area. See "Area of shallow flooding." 
    "Special flood hazard area (SFHA)" means an area having special flood or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99 or AH. 
    "Start of construction" means and includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    "Structure" means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    "Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    "Substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
2.  Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
    "Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this title which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this title. 
    "Watercourse" means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel, or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
    "Water surface elevation" means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 705.2) 
17.40.170 - General provisions. 
A.  Lands to Which this Article Applies. This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city. 
B.  Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated July 6, 1981, and the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), dated January 6, 1982, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. This Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this article and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this article and which are recommended to the city council by the floodplain administrator. The study and Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) are on file at 44933 North Fern Avenue, Lancaster, California 93534. 
C.  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the term of this article and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
D.  Abrogation and Greater Restriction. The ordinance codified in this article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
E.  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
1.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
2.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
3.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
F.  Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards, or uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city council, any officer or employee thereof, the Federal Insurance Administration of the Federal Emergency Management Agency for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
G.  Severability. This article, and the various parts thereof, are declared to be severable. Should any section of this article be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the article as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Prior zoning ord. §§ 705.3-705.3.7) 
17.40.180 - Administration. 
A.  Establishment of Development Permit. A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 17.40.170B. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the floodplain administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
1.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures. In zone AO, elevation of highest adjacent grade and proposed elevation of lowest floor of all structures; 
2.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure will be flood-proof; 
3.  All appropriate certifications listed in subsection C of this section; and 
4.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
B.  Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The director of public works is appointed to administer, implement and enforce this article by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions. 
C.  Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied; 
a.  All other required state and federal permits have been obtained; 
b.  The site is reasonably safe from flooding; and 
c.  The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this article, "adversely affects" means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point. 
2.  Use of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 17.40.170 B, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer Section 17.40.190. Any such information shall be submitted to the city council for adoption. 
3.  Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or relocated: 
a.  Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to such alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration of the Federal Emergency Management Agency; 
b.  Require that the flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. 
4.  Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed: 
a.  The certification required by Section 17.40.190A.3.a. (floor elevations); 
b.  The certification required by Section 17.40.190A.3.b. (elevations in areas of shallow flooding); 
c.  The certification required by Section 17.40.190A.3.c.3) (elevation or flood-proofing of nonresidential structures); 
d.  The certification required by Section 17.40.190A.3.d.1) or 2) (wet flood proofing standard); 
e.  The certification of elevation required by Section 17.40.190C.2. (subdivision standards); and 
f.  The certification required by Section 17.40.190F.1. (floodway encroachments). 
5.  Make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards, areas of flood-related erosion hazards or areas of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation to the city council. Take action to remedy violations of this article as specified in Section 17.40.170C. 
(Prior zoning ord. §§ 705.4-705.4.3) 
17.40.190 - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
A.  Standard of Construction. In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required: 
1.  Anchoring. 
a.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
b.  All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of subsection D. of this section. 
2.  Construction Materials and Methods. 
a.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
b.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
c.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
d.  Require within zones AH or AO that adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. 
3.  Elevation and Floodproofing. 
a.  New construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation. Nonresidential structures may meet the standards in subsection A.3.c. of this section. Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, or verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification or verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
b.  New construction and substantial improvement in zone AO shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or at least 2 feet if no depth number is specified. Nonresidential structures may meet the standards in subsection A.3.c. of this section. Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, or verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification or verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
c.  Nonresidential construction shall be either elevated to conform with subsection A.3.a. or b. of this section or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities: 
1)  Be floodproof so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
2)  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
3)  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certifications shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
d.  Require, for all new construction and substantial improvements, that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
1)  Either a minimum of 2 openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided, the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade (openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater); or 
2)  Be certified to comply with a local flood proofing standard approved by the Federal Insurance Administration of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
e.  Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in subsection D of this section. 
B.  Standards for Utilities. 
1.  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from systems into flood waters. 
2.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
3.  Other utilities are addressed in subsections A.2. and C.4. of this section. 
C.  Standards for Subdivisions. 
1.  All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazards area and the elevation of the base flood. 
2.  All subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pad(s). If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the final first floor and pad elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator. 
3.  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
4.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
5.  All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
D.  Standards for Manufactured Homes. 
1.  All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map on sites (a) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (b) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (c) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; (d) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood should be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation collapse and lateral movement. 
2.  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map that are not subject to the provisions of subsection D.1. of this section will be elevated so that either: 
a.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or 
b.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
E.  Standards for Recreational Vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map will either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions); or 
3.  Meet the permit requirements of Section 17.40.180 and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in subsection D.1. of this section. 
F.  Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 17.40.170B are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area, due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
1.  Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and other new development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
2.  If subsection F.1. of this section is satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section. 
(Prior zoning ord. §§ 705.5-705.5.6) 
17.40.200 - Variance procedures. 
A.  Nature of Variances. The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. Though these standards vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, in general, a properly issued variance is granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this article would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners. It is the duty of the planning commission to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling, and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this article are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. 
1.  In passing upon such applications, the planning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this article, and: 
a.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
b.  The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
c.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property; 
d.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
e.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
f.  The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
g.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
h.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
i.  The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
j.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and 
k.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, water system, and streets and bridges. 
2.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be give written notice over the signature of a community official that: 
a.  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage; and 
b.  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain board in the office of the Los Angeles County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. 
3.  The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
B.  Conditions for Variances. 
1.  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Sections 17.40.180 and 17.40.190 have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
2.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of "historic structures" (as defined in Section 17.40.160) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
3.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway, if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
4.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the "minimum necessary" (as defined in Section 17.40.160), considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
5.  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional "hardship" (as defined in Section 17.40.160), to the applicant; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create "nuisances" (as defined in Section 17.40.160), cause "fraud or victimization" (as defined in Section 17.40.160) of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
6.  Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of subsections B.1.-5. of this section are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
7.  Upon consideration of the factors of subsection A.3. of this section and the purposes of this article, the planning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
8.  A fee may be charged for the variance process as provided for in Resolution No. 91-174. 
C.  The city clerk shall certify to the passage of the ordinance codified in this article and shall cause it to be posted or published in a manner required by law. 
(Prior zoning ord. §§ 705.6-705.7) 
Article IV. - Signs 

17.40.210 - Off-premises outdoor advertising signs. 
A.  Purposes. The purposes of this section are as follows: 
1.  To preserve and improve the appearance of the city as a place to live, work, trade, do business and visit; protect the city from the blighting influence of excessive off-premises outdoor advertising signage; and thereby preserve and enhance the economic base of the city, and safeguard property values within the city; 
2.  To restrict off-premises outdoor advertising signs so as to avoid increasing the hazards to motorists and pedestrians caused by excessive distracting signage; 
3.  To precisely identify areas and/or zones where the installation of additional off-premises outdoor advertising signs should be prohibited due to the importance of such areas to the environmental and economic development goals and objectives of the city; 
4.  To provide for the relocation of existing legal off-premises outdoor advertising signs so as to minimize the adverse effects of such signs on the city's goals and objectives, in accordance with Section 5412 of the Business and Professions Code of the State of California; 
5.  To remove off-premises outdoor advertising signs from the residential areas of the city, in accordance with Section 5412 of the Business and Professions Code of the State of California; 
6.  To promote the general welfare and temperance of children and minors, and to intend to help reduce the illegal consumption and purchase of tobacco products by children and minors by limiting their exposure to the advertising of tobacco products on certain off-premises signs; 
7.  To promote the general welfare and temperance of children and minors, and to intend to help reduce the illegal consumption and purchase of alcoholic beverages by children and minors by limiting their exposure to the advertising of alcoholic beverages on certain off-premises signs; 
8.  To promote the general welfare and temperance of children and minors, and to intend to help reduce the illegal use or purchase of adult telephone messages by children and minors by limiting their exposure to the advertising of adult telephone messages on certain off-premises signs. 
B.  Definitions. As used in this section, the following words shall have the following respective meanings: 
1.  "Outdoor advertising sign" means a sign, display or device affixed to the ground or attached to or painted or posted onto any part of a building or similar permanent structure used for the display of an advertisement to the general public when viewed from outside of a building or similar enclosed area. 
2.  "Commercial advertisement" means any advertisement which has, as its primary purpose, the promotion of the sale of goods or services by a commercial business or enterprise to the public generally or any significant part thereof. 
3.  "Noncommercial advertisement" means any advertisement other than a commercial advertisement. 
4.  "On-premises advertisement" means any commercial advertisement which pertains solely to goods or services, which are produced or offered for sale on the premises where the advertisement is displayed. 
5.  "Off-premises advertisement" means any commercial advertisement other than an on-premises advertisement. 
6.  "Construct," when used with reference to a sign, means to install, erect or place on the ground or on a building or structure, or to affix, paint or post on or to a building or structure. 
7.  "Relocate," when used with reference to a sign, means to move a sign from one location to another, or to remove a sign from one location and construct a similar sign at another location. 
8.  "Maintenance" means any activity relative to repair, restoration or preservation of an existing sign, display or device intended to keep such sign, display or device in a state similar to that when originally installed or erected. 
9.  "Upgrade" means any activity intended to improve the design quality and aesthetic appeal of an existing sign, display or device by modifying structural elements of, or providing substantial cosmetic enhancements to, such sign, display or device, including the change of the sign from conventional copy to a digital advertising display. 
10.  "Tobacco product" means any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipes, tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco and dipping tobacco. 
11.  "Alcoholic beverage" means any beverage in liquid form that contains not less than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume and is intended for human consumption. 
12.  "Adult telephone messages" means live or recorded telephone messages containing any harmful matter, as defined in Section 313 of the Penal Code of the state of California. 
13.  "School" includes any elementary or secondary school, public or private, attendance at which satisfies the compulsory education laws of the state of California. 
14.  "Public park" means any park, playground or grounds under the control, direction or management of a public entity. 
15.  "Private park" means any park, playground or ground under control, direction or management of a private entity. 
16.  "Church" means a development maintained and used exclusively for religious worship, including customary incidental education and social activities in conjunction therewith. 
17.  "Child care center" means a facility, other than a family day care home, in which less than 24-hour-per-day nonmedical care and supervision is provided for children in a group setting as defined and licensed under the regulations of the state of California. 
18.  "Youth center" means any designated indoor public, private or parochial facility, other than a private residence or a multiple dwelling unit, which contains programs which provide, on a regular basis, activities or services for persons who have not yet reached the age of 18 years, including, but not limited to, community-based programs, after-school programs, weekend programs, violence prevention programs, leadership development programs, vocational programs, substance abuse prevention programs, individual or group counseling, case management, remedial, tutorial, or other educational assistance or enrichment, music, art, dance, and other recreational or cultural activities, physical fitness activities and sports programs. 
19.  "Digital advertising display" (DAD) means a display created by light-emitting diodes, liquid crystal displays, display panels, pixel or sub-pixel technology, or other similar means. 
20.  "Residential structure" means any building that includes a kitchen and at least one bedroom and bathroom that is being occupied and used as a dwelling unit at the time an application for relocation of a billboard is submitted to the city; and for which the city has on file a current and valid certificate of occupancy for the building as a residential occupancy classification. 
C.  Application to Existing Signs. Any off-premises outdoor advertising sign which was constructed in conformance with the requirements of this title as they existed at the time of such construction, but which is not in conformance with the requirements of this section, shall be deemed a legal nonconforming use which must be maintained, and may be upgraded subject to the restrictions and limitations imposed on nonconforming uses by Chapter 17.32. Such signs may be compelled to be removed through eminent domain proceedings subject to the requirements and limitations imposed by Sections 5412 through 5412.4 of the Business and Professions Code of the state of California, the provisions of which, as they may from time to time be amended, are incorporated herein by this reference. 
D.  Fees. The city council may, by resolution, establish fees for any or all of the administrative processes established by this section. 
E.  Director's Review. Relocations of and upgrades to off-premises commercial advertising signs are subject to a director's review as set forth in this section. 
F.  Preclusions of New or Additional Signs. No new or additional off-premises outdoor advertising signs shall be constructed in any zone district or area of the city after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title; provided, however, that upon a finding that the purpose(s) of this section would not be served by the application of this prohibition to a particular area within the city, the city council may by resolution designate such area(s) as exempt from the provisions of this paragraph. 
G.  Amortization in Residential Zones. No off-premises outdoor advertising sign shall be relocated into any residential zone. Such signs located in any residential zone as of February 6, 1985, shall be removed in accordance with the following amortization schedule: 
Fair Market Value of Off-Premises 
Commercial Advertising Sign 
On February 6, 1985 
Before Removal Years Allowed Under $1,999.00 2 $2,000.00 to $3,999.00 3 $4,000.00 to $5,999.00 4 $6,000.00 to $7,999.00 5 $8,000.00 to $9,999.00 6 $10,000.00 and over 7  
H.  Other Location Restrictions. An off-premises commercial advertising sign may be relocated or upgraded provided that: 
1.  It is relocated no closer than 500 feet to a previously constructed off-premises commercial advertising sign located on the same or opposite side of the same street; or 
2.  It is relocated no closer than 200 feet to any a residential structure, school, church or similar place of worship, historical building, cemetery or similar place of interment, private park. 
I.  Size Restrictions. No off-premises commercial advertising sign shall be relocated or upgraded unless it complies with the following restrictions: 
1.  The sign shall not exceed 32 feet in height from ground level. 
2.  The total area of a single sign face shall not exceed 300 square feet. The total area of a double-faced sign shall not exceed 600 square feet. 
3.  The size and height restrictions listed in this section may be modified for a digital advertising display relocation or upgrade as provided in subsection (R). The height restrictions for a relocation or upgrade of a conventional advertising display may be modified as provided in subsection (R)2. 
J.  Visual and Maintenance Standards. No off-premises outdoor advertising sign shall be relocated or upgraded unless it complies with the following requirements. 
1.  The message copy area of the relocated or upgraded sign may be no larger than the message copy area of the original sign or the size restrictions established in subsection (I), whichever is less, unless modified pursuant to subsection (I)3. 
2.  Such sign may be relocated to a new site only if the sign at the new site complies with all setback and yard requirements of the underlying land use zone. 
3.  Such sign may be relocated to a new site only if the sign at the new site is built with no more than one supporting post. 
4.  The sign structure shall be architecturally treated so as to screen the frame, support structures and lighting from public view. A combination of landscaping and other decorative materials can be used to comply with this section. The color and materials of this architectural treatment shall be in conformance with the architectural plan approved pursuant to subsection (K) and subsection (L) and shall be subject to further design review, as may be determined by the development services director. 
5.  Utility lines providing electrical power to a relocated sign shall be underground. 
6.  The sign shall be continuously maintained in an attractive, clean and safe condition. 
7.  Digital advertising displays shall comply with the visual standards contained in subsection (R). 
K.  Director's Review Procedures. Relocation of or upgrade to off-premises outdoor advertising signs is subject to a director's review that shall be conducted upon the development services department's receipt of a complete application, which shall, at a minimum, include the following: 
1.  Elevations. Fully dimensioned and scaled colored elevations of each view (indicating direction as north, east, south, west) of the proposed sign, including height; 
2.  Site Plan. A site plan on which the proposed sign is to be relocated, disclosing the location of the sign in relation to other improvements on the site as well as adjacent properties; 
3.  Context Aerial Map. An aerial map stating the distances between the proposed sign the nearest off-premises commercial advertising sign, residential structure, school, church or similar place of worship, historical building, cemetery or similar place of interment, and private park; 
4.  Visual Simulations. Visual simulations showing photographs of existing sign and photo simulations of proposed sign; 
5.  A description of the proposed architectural treatment of the sign structure, disclosing proposed colors and materials. 
6.  Such other information as the development services department deems appropriate to determine compliance with the provisions of this section. 
L.  Determination of Director's Review. The development services director shall review each application filed under subsection (K) and shall make a decision thereon. If the proposed sign complies with this title and all other requirements of the law, and if the colors and materials of the architectural treatment required by subsection (J) of this section are attractive and suitable for the purpose of providing the required screening, the permit shall be issued based upon application as submitted. If the proposed sign can be brought into such compliance by modifications in the proposal, the permit shall be issued subject to conditions requiring such modifications. Otherwise, the application shall be denied. 
M.  Appeal Procedures. An appeal may be filed in accordance with Section 17.32.820. Such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk in accordance with Section 17.36.030. 
N.  Relocation Agreements. An off-premises outdoor advertising sign may be relocated within or to the C, LI, or HI zones provided an agreement for such relocation between the sign owner and the city is approved by the development services director. The development services director may approve such relocation agreement if the sign will, upon its relocation, comply with the requirements of this section and if, the relocation will promote the purposes of this section. The relocation agreement shall contain such terms and conditions pertaining to the relocation and maintenance of the sign as are consistent with this section and mutually agreeable to the parties thereto. 
O.  Prohibition. 
1.  Tobacco Advertising Prohibited in Certain Areas of the City. No person shall place or cause to be placed any advertisement for cigarettes or other tobacco products on any off-premises outdoor advertising sign within 200 feet of a residential zone, or within 1,000 feet of the premises of any school, park, youth center, child care center or church. 
2.  Alcoholic Beverage Advertising Prohibited in Certain Areas of the City. No person shall place or cause to be placed any advertisement for alcoholic beverages on any off-premises outdoor advertising sign within 200 feet of a residential zone, or within 1,000 feet of the premises of any school, park, youth center, child care center or church. This prohibition shall not apply to outdoor advertising signs located on property adjacent to, and designed to be viewed primarily by, persons traveling on a freeway. 
3.  Advertising Adult Telephone Message Prohibited in Certain Areas of the City. No person shall place or cause to be placed any advertisement for live or recorded telephone messages containing harmful matter, as defined in Section 313 of the Penal Code, on any off-premises outdoor advertising sign within 200 feet of a residential zone, or within 1,000 feet of the premises of any school, park, youth center, child care center, or church. 
P.  Digital Advertising Displays (DAD). The installation of a DAD is permissible in conjunction with the upgrade or relocation of an off-premises outdoor advertising sign subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Modification of Sign Face Size Requirements. Generally, a DAD shall be subject to the same sign face size restrictions as contained in subsection (I). However, given the unique characteristics of DAD's, an applicant may request a modification to the maximum sign face size restrictions under the following conditions: 
a.  The applicant demonstrates, to the satisfaction of the Development Services director, that the larger size is necessary to provide a readable DAD in a cost-effective manner; and 
b.  The maximum sign area for a single-face DAD is 675 square feet, or for a double-face sign is a total of 1,350 square feet (see subsection (P)1.d.); and 
c.  The applicant agrees to remove, or has already removed and agrees to permanently surrender rights to, off-premise outdoor advertising signage with the city that is equal to or greater in square-footage than the excess amount requested beyond the limits established by subsection (I)2. Such signage shall be specifically identified in either the relocation agreement required under subsection (N) or a separate binding agreement between the city and the applicant. 
d.  The maximum size face area listed in subsection (P)1.b. is also allowable for a static display sign face that is the opposite face of a DAD, provided that it is no larger than the DAD. 
2.  Modification of Height Requirements. Generally, a DAD shall be subject to the same height restrictions as contained in subsection (I). Height restrictions may be modified for a DAD upgrade immediately adjacent to the freeway if the applicant demonstrates that compliance with the 32-foot height limit would impair visibility for a portion of the sign face. Increased height shall only be permitted to the extent necessary to allow reasonable view of the sign face. 
3.  No DAD shall depict or simulate any motion or video (e.g. video clips, flashing, etc.) 
4.  The DAD may be programmed to allow changeable messages, provided that any image shall be displayed for a minimum of 6 seconds, and transitions between slides shall not exceed one second. 
5.  Each DAD shall include a photometric sensor that will adjust the intensity of the sign for daytime and nighttime viewing. The nighttime intensity shall be limited to 0.3-foot candles (over ambient levels) as measured at a preset distance as established by the Lewin Report as prepared for the Outdoor Advertising Association of America (OAAA). The city may modify or further restrict the intensity of any DAD display should the lighting create a distraction to drivers or an adverse effect on nearby residential property. 
6.  The city may, as part of an upgrade or relocation that results in the installation of a DAD, require that time be available for the posting of public announcements on the DAD, subject to space availability. 
(Ord. 757 § 1 (Exh. A), 1999; Ord. 756 § 1 (Exh. A), 1999; Ord. 755 § 1 (Exh. A), 1999; Ord. 668 § 1, 1994; prior zoning ord. §§ 707.6-707.6.16) 
(Ord. No. 950, §§ 1, 2, 8-24-2010; Ord. No. 1045, § 3, 7-10-2018 ) 
17.40.220 - Subdivision sales signs. 
    Temporary subdivision sales signs, entry signs and special feature signs shall be accompanied by site plan or other pertinent information and approved by the director in order to be permitted in all zones. 
A.  Subdivision Sales Signs. 
1.  One freestanding subdivision shall be pertained per street frontage. 
2.  Sign Area. The sign face shall not exceed 180 square feet per sign face or 360 square feet in total sign area. 
3.  Height Permitted. Twelve feet measured vertically from ground level at the base of the sign. 
4.  Location. Each sign shall be located on the subdivision and be oriented to read from the street or highway where the sign is permitted. The distance between subdivision signs shall be a minimum of 500 feet. 
5.  Lighting. Subdivision signs may be internally or externally lighted. Continuous or sequential flashing is not allowed. 
6.  Time Limit. Subdivision sales signs shall be maintained only until all the property is disposed of, or for a period of 3 years from the date of issuance of the first building permit. The approved sales sign shall be removed at the end of the 3-year period. The director may extend the permitted time beyond 3 years, if needed by the owner of the property. The owner must make the request in writing. 
7.  Copy. All copy shall relate exclusively to the subdivision being offered for sale. 
B.  Subdivision Entry and Special Feature Signs. 
1.  Such signs are permitted and shall be located within a subdivision to facilitate entry and movement. 
2.  Sign Area. 
a.  Subdivision Entry Signs. The sign face shall not exceed 12 square feet per sign face or 24 feet in total sign area. 
b.  Special Feature Signs. The sign face shall not exceed 6 square feet per sign face or 12 feet in total sign area. 
3.  Height Permitted. 
a.  Subdivision Entry Signs. Shall not exceed a maximum height of 8 feet measured from the base of the sign. 
b.  Special Feature Signs. Shall not exceed 6 square feet in sign area or 12 square feet in total sign area. 
4.  Lighting. Signs shall be unlighted. 
5.  Time Limit. Shall have the same time limit as subdivision sales signs approved for the same tract and shall be removed at the end of such period. 
C.  Subdivision Kiosk Signs. 
1.  Contents of Application. An application for a subdivision kiosk sign shall be filed as a director's review, and shall contain the following information: 
a.  A scale drawing of the proposed sign; 
b.  Proposed location of the sign, including distance from adjacent streets and public sidewalks; 
c.  The proposed colors of the sign. 
2.  Development Standards. All subdivision kiosk signs shall be of a consistent design and shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Height. The overall height of the sign shall not exceed 10 feet, measured from the ground level at the base of the sign. 
b.  Width. The overall width of the sign shall not exceed 6 feet. 
c.  Individual Sign Panels. Individual sign panels shall not exceed one foot in width and 6 feet in length. Copy on sign panels shall be limited to the name of the subdivision and/or builder, and a directional arrow. 
d.  Location. Signs may be located on either public or private property, provided that the appropriate agency or property owner has given their written consent. Signs shall not obscure required line of sight visibility for motorists or pedestrians. 
e.  There shall be no additions, tag signs, streamers, flags, banner devices, display boards, or appurtenances added to the signs as originally approved. Further, no other directional signs shall be used, including but not limited to posters or portable outdoor advertising signs. 
f.  Subdivision directional signs may advertise tracts either within the city limits or within that portion of the county of Los Angeles which is within the city's sphere of influence. 
3.  Approval Process. 
a.  Approval Authority. Application shall be reviewed and approved by the department of community development. 
b.  Building Permit. The applicant shall obtain all necessary construction permits from the department of public works. 
c.  Separate Agreement. The city may, at its discretion, enter into an agreement with a private entity for the purpose of erecting and maintaining subdivision kiosk signs. Such agreement shall be consistent with the provisions of this section, but may also establish other requirements not specifically addressed by this section. 
(Ord. 849 § 1 (Exh. A § 2), 2005; prior zoning ord. § 707.15) 


Article V. - Publicly Visible Art on Private Property 

17.40.230 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases have the meanings set forth below: 
    "Artist" means an individual or team of individual artists whose body of work and professional activities demonstrate serious ongoing commitment to the fine arts. History of professional art exhibitions, auction record, and reputation in the professional art community are some factors that may assist in making a determination that an artist demonstrates such commitment. An applied artist or tradesperson does not constitute an artist as defined herein and for purposes of this chapter. Members of architectural, engineering, design or landscaping firms retained for the design and construction of a development project covered by this chapter shall not be considered artists for the purpose of meeting the requirement to provide public art. 
    "Artwork" or "work of art" means a visual work of art, as distinguished from the performing arts, media art and literary or cultural arts. The works of art may either be permanent or, in some circumstances, temporary, as required by the specific project, and installed in public view. For purposes of this chapter, "artwork" does not include a business-related work, as defined herein. 
    "Business-related work" means a visual representation of which more than twenty (20) percent of the overall image contains lettering or logo that is related to the business or establishment at which the visual representation is located. Business-related works are subject to the applicable sign permitting and approval provisions set forth in title 17 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
    "City" means the City of Lancaster. 
    "Code" means the Lancaster Municipal Code. 
    "Manual" means the art in public places program and manual approved by the city council, and as may be revised from time to time. 
    "Publicly visible art" means any permanent display of a work of visual art that was specifically designed to be located on private property within the city where it would be accessible to public view. The work of art may include, without limitation, murals, mosaics, sculptures, artist-designed landscape features, streetscape features and earthworks. For purposes of this article, temporary displays of artwork on private property are subject to the procedures and guidelines set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 1057 , § 3, 3-26-2019) 
17.40.240 - Art in public places program; manual. 
A.  The city council has approved the art in public places program and the associated manual. The purpose of the program is to provide publicly accessible works of art for the benefit of the city, its citizens and its visitors, and to increase citizens' appreciation of art, improve the quality of life and enhance and identify the Antelope Valley as a unique community for its residents and visitors. 
B.  General guidelines and criteria regarding publicly visible art, the procedure for application, review, approval, and private property owners' responsibilities concerning publicly visible art are set forth in the art in public places manual, as may be revised from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1057 , § 3, 3-26-2019) 
17.40.250 - Public art application fee. 
    A private property owner who wishes to install publicly visible art in the city shall submit an application in accordance with the procedures set forth in the program and manual, and shall tender the requisite fee as established by resolution, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1057 , § 3, 3-26-2019) 
17.40.260 - Violation; nuisance. 
    The city council declares that it is an unlawful for any person to install, erect, maintain or permit the maintenance of publicly visible art in a manner that is in violation of this chapter or the art in public places program and manual. Any such publicly visible art further constitutes a public nuisance subject to abatement in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 8.28 of this Code. The procedures for abatement shall not be exclusive and shall not limit or restrict the city from pursuing any other remedies available at law, or from abating or causing abatement of public nuisances in any other manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1057 , § 3, 3-26-2019) 
Article VI. - Criteria and Standards for Recycling Facilities 

17.40.290 - In general. 
    The following criteria and standards set out in this article shall be applied to each type of recycling facility as appropriate whether the facility is a permitted use or use subject to director's review and approval. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 710.000) 
17.40.300 - Reverse vending machines. 
    Reverse vending machine(s) located completely within a commercial or industrial building need not comply with the following criteria and standards. Reverse vending machines do not require additional parking space for recycling customers. Such machines outside of a building shall comply with the following standards regardless of the zone in which it is located: 
A.  Shall be established in conjunction with a commercial or industrial use or community service facility which is in compliance with this title and city building and fire codes; 
B.  Shall be located within 30 feet of the entrance to the commercial structure on a surfaced site and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation; 
C.  Shall not occupy parking spaces required by the primary use; 
D.  Shall occupy no more than 50 square feet of floor space per installation, including any protective enclosure, and shall be no more than 8 feet in height; 
E.  Shall be constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rust-proof material. The color of the machine shall be compatible with the colors utilized on the site upon which it is located; 
F.  Shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material to be deposited, operating instructions, and the identity and phone number of the operator or responsible person to call if the machine is inoperative; 
G.  Shall have a sign area of a maximum of 4 square feet per machine, exclusive of operating instructions; 
H.  Shall be maintained in a clean, litter-free condition on a daily basis; 
I.  Operating hours shall be at least the operating hours of the primary use; 
J.  Shall be illuminated to ensure comfortable and safe operation if operating hours are between dusk and dawn; 
K.  Failure to comply with any standard shall be grounds for the director to order removal of the machines. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 710.010) 
17.40.310 - Small collection facilities. 
    Small collection facilities shall comply with the following standards: 
A.  Shall be established in conjunction with a commercial or industrial use or community service facility which is in compliance with this title and city building and fire codes; 
B.  Shall be no larger than 500 square feet and occupy a surfaced site; 
C.  Shall be set back at least 10 feet from any street line and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation; 
D.  Shall accept only glass, metals, plastic containers, papers and reusable items. Used motor oil may be accepted with written permission of the Los Angeles County department of health services, hazardous materials control program (213-744-3223); 
E.  Shall use no power-driven processing equipment except for reverse vending machines; 
F.  Shall use containers that are constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof material, the color of the containers shall be compatible with the colors utilized on the site upon which they are located, covered when site is not attended, secured from unauthorized entry or removal of material, and shall be of a capacity sufficient to accommodate materials collected and collection schedule; 
G.  Shall store all recyclable material in containers or in the mobile unit vehicle, and shall not leave materials outside of containers when attendant is not present; 
H.  Shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials, and mobile facilities, at which truck or containers are removed at the end of each collection day, shall be swept at the end of each collection day; 
I.  Shall not exceed noise levels of 60 dBA as measured at the property line of residentially zoned or occupied property, otherwise shall not exceed 70 dBA; 
J.  Attended facilities located within 100 feet of a property zoned or occupied for residential use shall operate only during the hours between 9 a.m. and 7 p.m.; 
K.  Containers for the 24 hour donation of materials shall be at least 50 feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use unless there is a recognized service corridor and acoustical shielding between the containers and the residential use; 
L.  Containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material which may be deposited; the facility shall be clearly marked to identify the name and telephone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation, and display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling enclosure or containers; 
M.  Signs may be provided as follows: 
1.  Recycling facilities may have identification signs with a maximum of 20% per side or 16 square feet, whichever is larger, in addition to informational signs required under subsection L of this section; in the case of a wheeled facility, the side will be measured from the pavement to the top of the container. 
2.  Signs must be consistent with the character of the location. 
3.  Directional signs, bearing no advertising message, may be installed with the approval of the director if necessary to facilitate traffic circulation, or if the facility is not visible from the public right-of-way; 
N.  The facility shall not impair the landscaping required by this title or any permit issued pursuant thereto; 
O.  No additional parking spaces will be required for customers of a small collection facility located at the established parking lot of the primary use. One space will be provided for the attendant, if needed; 
P.  Mobile recycling units shall have an area clearly marked to prohibit other vehicular parking during hours when the mobile unit is scheduled to be present; 
Q.  Occupation of parking spaces by the facility and by the attendant may not reduce available parking spaces below the minimum number required for the primary use unless all of the following conditions exist: 
1.  The facility is located in a convenience zone or a potential convenience zone as designated by the California Department of Conservation. 
2.  A parking study shows that existing parking capacity is not already fully utilized during the time the recycling facility is expected to be on the site. 
  A reduction in available parking spaces in an established parking facility may then be allowed as follows: 
  For a commercial/industrial primary use: 
Number of Available Maximum Parking Spaces Reduction 0-25 0 26-35 2 36-49 3 50-99 4 100+ 5  
  For a community facility primary use: 
  A maximum 5 spaces reduction will be allowed when not in conflict with parking needs of the primary use; 
R.  The following shall be grounds for the director to order the removal of the small collection facility: 
1.  Failure to comply with any standard set forth in this section, 
2.  A parking study shows that existing parking capacity has become fully utilized and the parking occupied by the facility is needed for the customers or clients of the primary use. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 710.020) 
17.40.320 - Large collection facilities. 
    A large collection facility is larger than 500 square feet, or is on a separate property not appurtenant to a primary use, and which may have a permanent building. Large collection facilities shall comply with the following standards: 
A.  Facility does not abut a property zoned or planned for residential use. 
B.  Facility will be screened from the public right-of-way by operating in an enclosed building or: 
1.  Within a surfaced area enclosed by a masonry wall at least 6 feet in height with a 10 foot landscaped strip; 
2.  At least 150 feet from property zoned or planned for residential use; 
3.  Meets all applicable noise standards in this section. 
C.  Setbacks and landscape requirements shall be those provided for the zoning district in which the facility is located. 
D.  All exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers which are covered, secured and maintained in good condition, or may be baled or strapped to pallets. The color of the containers shall be compatible with the colors utilized on the site upon which they are located. Storage containers for flammable material shall be constructed of nonflammable material. Oil storage must be in containers approved by the fire and health departments. No storage, excluding truck trailers, overseas containers or other enclosed containers, will be visible above the height of the wall. 
E.  Site shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials, and will be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis. 
F.  Space will be provided on site for 6 vehicles or the anticipated peak customer load, whichever is higher, to circulate and to deposit recyclable materials, except where the director determines that allowing overflow traffic above 6 vehicles is compatible with surrounding businesses and public safety. 
G.  One parking space will be provided for each commercial vehicle operated by the recycling facility. Parking requirements will be as provided for in the zone. 
H.  Noise levels shall not exceed 60 dBA as measured at the property line of residentially zoned property, or otherwise shall not exceed 70 dBA. 
I.  If the facility is located within 500 feet of property zoned, planned or occupied for residential use, it shall not be in operation between 7 p.m. and 7 a.m. 
J.  Any containers provided for after-hours donation of recyclable materials will be at least 100 feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use, shall be of sturdy, rustproof construction, shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected, and shall be secure from unauthorized entry or removal of materials. 
K.  Donation areas will be kept free of litter and any other undesirable material, and the containers will be clearly marked to identify the type of material that may be deposited; facility shall display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling containers. 
L.  Facility will be clearly marked with the name and phone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation; identification and informational signs will meet the standards of the zone; and directional signs, bearing no advertising message, may be installed with the approval of the director, if necessary, to facilitate traffic circulation or if the facility is not visible from the public right-of-way. 
M.  Power-driven processing, including aluminum foil and can compacting, baling, plastic shredding, or other light processing activities necessary for efficient temporary storage and shipment of material, may be approved at the discretion of the director if noise and other standards are met. 
N.  Failure to comply with any standard set forth in this section shall be grounds for the director to order the closure/removal of the large collection facility. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 710.030) 
17.40.330 - Processing facilities. 
    Light (45,000 square feet or less) and heavy (greater than 45,000 square feet) recycling processing facilities shall comply with the following standards: 
A.  Facility does not abut a property zoned or planned for residential use. 
B.  Processors will operate in a wholly enclosed building except for incidental storage, or: 
1.  Within a surfaced area enclosed on all sides by a masonry wall not less than 8 feet in height and landscaped on all street frontages; 
2.  Located at least 150 feet from property zoned or planned for residential use. 
C.  Power-driven processing shall be permitted, provided all noise level requirements are met. Light processing facilities are limited to baling, briquetting, crushing, compacting, grinding, shredding and sorting of source-separated recyclable materials and repairing of reusable materials. 
D.  A light processing facility shall be no larger than 45,000 square feet and shall have no more than an average of 2 outbound truck shipments of material per day and may not shred, compact or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers. 
E.  A processing facility may accept used motor oil for recycling from the generator in accordance with Section 25250.11 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
F.  Setbacks and landscaping requirements shall be those provided for the zoning district in which the facility is located. 
G.  All exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers or enclosures which are covered, secured and maintained in good condition. Storage containers for flammable material shall be constructed of nonflammable material. Oil storage must be in containers approved by the fire and health departments. No storage, excluding truck trailers and overseas containers, will be visible above the height of the fencing. 
H.  Site shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials, and will be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis and will be secured from unauthorized entry and removal of materials when attendants are not present. 
I.  Space shall be provided on site for the anticipated peak load of customers to circulate, park and deposit recyclable materials. If the facility is open to the public, space will be provided for a minimum of 10 customers or the peak load, whichever is higher, except where the director determines that allowing overflow traffic is compatible with surrounding businesses and public safety. 
J.  One parking space will be provided for each commercial vehicle operated by the processing center. Parking requirements will otherwise be as mandated by the zone in which the facility is located. 
K.  Noise levels shall not exceed 60 dBA as measured at the property line of residentially zoned or occupied property, or otherwise shall not exceed 70 dBA. 
L.  If the facility is located within 500 feet of property zoned or planned for residential use, it shall not be in operation between 7 p.m. and 7 a.m. The facility will be administered by on-site personnel during the hours the facility is open. 
M.  Any containers provided for after-hours donation of recyclable materials will be at least 100 feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use; shall be of sturdy, rustproof construction; shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected; and shall be secure from unauthorized entry or removal of materials. 
N.  Donation areas shall be kept free of litter and any other undesirable material. The containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material that may be deposited. Facility shall display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling containers. 
O.  Sign requirements shall be those provided for the zoning district in which the facility is located. In addition, facility will be clearly marked with the name and phone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation. 
P.  No dust, fumes, smoke, vibration or odor above ambient level may be detectable on neighboring properties. 
Q.  Failure to comply with any standard set forth in this section shall be grounds for the director to order the closure/removal of the processing facility. 
(Ord. 711 § 46, 1995; prior zoning ord. § 710.040) 
Article VII. - Hazardous Waste Facilities 

17.40.340 - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish a uniform conditional use permit application and review process for the location, design and maintenance of hazardous waste facilities, and to ensure protection of the health, safety and welfare of the residents of city. All land use decisions made with regard to an application for a hazardous waste facility project shall be consistent with the approved Los Angeles County hazardous waste management plan. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 711.010) 
17.40.350 - Prohibition. 
    A person shall not use any premises for a hazardous waste facility except as permitted in this article. All hazardous waste facilities are subject to all regulations and conditions enumerated in this article. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 711.020) 
17.40.360 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following are defined. Additional definitions contained in Health and Safety Code Sections 25100 et seq. are incorporated herein by reference. 
    "Hazardous waste" is defined in the Health and Safety Code Section 25117. 
    "Hazardous waste facility" or "facility" is defined in Health and Safety Code Section 25117.1. Unless expressly provided otherwise, "hazardous waste facility" includes a "specified hazardous waste facility." 
    "Hazardous waste facility project" is defined in Health and Safety Code Section 25199.1(b). Unless expressly provided otherwise, "hazardous waste facility project" includes a "specified hazardous waste facility project." 
    "Land use decision" means any discretionary decision of the city council or planning commission concerning a hazardous waste facility project. 
    "Local assessment committee" or "LAC" means a 7-member public body appointed by the city council to represent the interests of the community in the hazardous waste facility project review process. The LAC shall be established and administered in accordance with Health and Safety Code Section 25199.7. 
    "Specified hazardous waste facility" is defined in Health and Safety Code Section 25199.1(m). 
    "Specified hazardous waste facility project" is defined in Health and Safety Code Section 25199.1(n). 
(Prior zoning ord. § 711.030) 
17.40.370 - Procedures. 
    The following procedures are established for all land use decisions relating to any hazardous waste facility project. All hazardous waste facility projects shall require a conditional use permit as set forth in Article I of Chapter 17.32. The planning commission shall act to recommend approval subject to conditions or denial of the conditional use permit to the city council. The city council shall act to approve subject to conditions or deny the conditional use permit. 
A.  Specified Hazardous Waste Facility Projects. In addition to the procedures set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 25199 et seq., Public Resources Code Section 21000 et seq., and Government Code Section 65920 et seq., applicants for specified hazardous waste facility projects shall comply with the following requirements. 
1.  Applicants shall submit to the director of community development (hereinafter referred to as the director) the application required by Section 17.40.380. 
2.  In addition to the application contents required pursuant to section 17.40.380, all applications shall contain a proposed public education/participation program to be employed during the land use decision making process. Such plan shall be mutually agreeable to the project proponent and the director. 
3.  A local assessment committee (LAC) shall be formed. In addition to its duties under Section 25199.7(d) of the California State Health and Safety Code, the LAC shall review the application and the environmental documentation, to solicit public comments on the application and recommend conditions to be attached to the conditional use permit. The person or entity preparing the documents required by the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) shall not be the same person or entity which acts as a consultant to the LAC. 
B.  Hazardous Waste Facility Projects. In addition to the procedures set forth in Public Resources Section 21000 et seq. and Government Code Section 65920 et seq., applicants for hazardous waste facility projects (which are not specified hazardous waste facility projects) shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Applicants shall submit to the director the application required by Section 17.40.380. 
2.  At the request of the applicant, the director shall, within 90 days after the application has been deemed complete, issue an initial written determination on whether the project is consistent with the general plan, applicable provisions of this title, and has met the local environmental guidelines of the city for implementing CEQA. This determination will not prohibit the city council from making a different determination. 
3.  A public hearing upon the application shall be set before the planning commission as soon as the director has determined that the application complies with all requirements of this title and all requirements by the city of Lancaster with regard to the CEQA have been met. 
4.  Not later than one month prior to any public hearing, the applicant shall provide the director with 3 sets of mailing labels indicating all property owners of record (as shown on the latest county equalized assessment roll), residents, businesses, and tenants within a 2,000 foot radius of the boundary of the lot or lots on which the proposed hazardous waste facility will be located. 
5.  A LAC need not be formed for all proposed on-site facilities. The director shall have 30 working days to make a determination that an application is complete for filing purposes. At the discretion of the city council and upon the recommendation of the director, a LAC may be formed for a proposed on-site storage or recycling facility which does not include an incinerator, or for any on-site facility for which an environmental impact report is not required. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 711.040) 
17.40.380 - Contents of applications. 
    Every application for a hazardous waste facility project shall be filed with the director and accompanied by a deposit in the amount set forth in Section 17.40.440. The application shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
A.  Name(s), address(es) and telephone number(s) of the applicant(s); 
B.  Evidence that the applicant is the owner of the premises involved or that the applicant has the written permission of the owner to make such application; 
C.  Complete project narrative, demonstrating the need for siting the proposed hazardous waste facility in the specific location identified; 
D.  A project analysis, plot plan, and development plan drawn to scale in sufficient detail to clearly illustrate the following: 
1.  Physical dimensions of the property and structures, both existing and proposed, 
2.  Site plan, indicating the initial project proposal and the ultimate land use layout and utilization of property, 
3.  Location of existing and proposed structures, 
4.  Setbacks and landscaping, 
5.  Parking and circulation, 
6.  Ingress and egress, 
7.  Drainage patterns, 
8.  Storage and processing areas, 
9.  The distance to the nearest residences, to properties designated in the general plan for residential use, to proposed or presently zoned residential areas, and to immobile populations, 
10.  The distance from the project property line to the nearest adjacent structures, and a description and location of such structures, 
11.  Topographic description of the property and surrounding area within 2,000 feet of the boundary of the lot or lots on which the proposed facility will be located, 
12.  Proximity of site to the 100-year floodplain boundary as established by FIRM or FEMA, 
13.  Distance to all ground water supplies, dry washes, and rivers and aquifers, 
14.  Proximity to pumping water wells or well fields, whether operational or not, 
15.  Existing and proposed utilities which service or will be required to service the facility; 
E.  An analysis of visual, noise and any olfactory impacts associated with the project and recommended mitigation measures; 
F.  Identification of all wastewater, treated and untreated, generated by the proposed facility, and the method and place of final discharge; 
G.  An analysis of all anticipated air quality impacts associated with the project and proposed mitigation measures to ensure no degradation of air quality occurs in the area; 
H.  Identification of any rare or endangered species of plant or animals within the project site and surrounding area and recommended impact mitigation measures; 
I.  Identification of the amounts (in tons), sources and types of hazardous wastes to be treated, stored or disposed of at the proposed facility, the ultimate disposition of the wastes, and anticipated life of the facility. This information shall be based on an actual survey of the industries to be served by the facility and thereby be representative of the wastes that will be processed at the facility; 
J.  A risk assessment, including health and environmental risks, which analyzes in detail all possibilities and probabilities of accidents or spills involving hazardous materials or wastes to be used or stored at the site, transportation-related accidents from the point of origin to the facility, and other probabilities requested by either the director, the planning commission or the city council. Such analyses shall specify mitigation measures to reduce the identified risks. The risk assessment shall also identify the most probable routes for transporting hazardous waste to the facility, and identify provisions for automatic facility shutdown and resumption of facility operations in the event of adverse meteorological conditions, fire, flood, earthquake or other geologic or natural phenomena. The risk assessment conducted shall include information required under the Los Angeles County hazardous waste management plan and the standards for the use analysis shall be based on standards generally applied on a statewide and regional basis, by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, State Department of Health Services, and South Coast Air Quality Management District; 
K.  The monitoring program required by Section 17.40.400. The monitoring program shall also include any monitoring requirements imposed by other permitting agencies including but not limited to, the South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD), Lahontan Regional Water Quality Control Board and the State Department of Health Services; 
L.  A water consumption report for the project and proposed mitigation measures for water conservation to the city and to the local water purveyor; 
M.  An emergency response plan as approved by the emergency preparedness coordinator which contains, at a minimum, the following information: 
1.  That the proposed plan is consistent with any and all applicable county and regional emergency response plans and all city, county, state and federal regulatory requirements regarding emergency response procedures, 
2.  Detailed procedures to be employed at the time of emergency for each and every type of chemical substance and emergency, including contingency procedures, 
3.  Anticipated impacts on local fire, police and medical services, 
4.  Names, home and business addresses, and home and business telephone numbers of all management personnel at the facility, and a detailed description of uncontrolled release and emergency situation reporting procedures; 
N.  A completed city environmental assessment questionnaire; 
O.  A land use map which depicts land uses within 2,000 feet of the boundary of the lot or lots on which the proposed facility will be located; 
P.  A title report completed within 60 days of the date of facility application submittal; 
Q.  Financial statements for the applicant including proposed means for financing the development of the facility, and anticipated costs and revenues associated with operation of the facility; 
R.  Detailed information regarding how the applicant will meet state pollution liability insurance and state requirements for funding closure and post closure; 
S.  Vicinity map which indicates, at a minimum, proximity of the facility to schools, parks, residences, hospitals, and other immobile populations, community facilities, and to properties designated by the general plan for residential use; 
T.  A seismic and geological evaluation of the site must be conducted by a certified geologist/ seismologist which shall confirm, at a minimum, the following information: 
1.  The proximity to earthquake fault zones, 
2.  Whether or not active faults or lineaments which would suggest the presence of faults are located within 2,000 feet of the proposed site, 
3.  A preliminary geological study of the property and surrounding area including a soils analysis location and description of known aquifers, regardless of the potability of those aquifers, 
4.  Information as to whether ground subsidence and liquefaction have occurred or whether they may occur at the proposed site; 
U.  Documentation of how the proposed facility will serve the needs of local producers of hazardous waste, including household hazardous waste. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 711.050) 
17.40.390 - Development standards and locational criteria for hazardous waste facilities. 
    All hazardous waste facilities shall comply with the following standards and locational criteria: 
A.  Facilities shall be located in areas designated on the general plan land use map as heavy industrial, and shall only be permitted in the HI zone. 
B.  No facility shall be permitted within 2,000 feet of residential zoned sites, hospital sites, school sites or sites planned for immobile populations unless the applicant proves through a risk analysis that a 2,000 foot buffer zone is not required to protect public health and safety. A separation greater than 2,000 feet may be required if determined necessary by a risk assessment. 
C.  The site on which the facility is located shall be of adequate size and shape to accommodate yards, walls, parking, loading and storage, landscaping and other development requirements prescribed by this title. As a condition of the conditional use permit the proposed use would be required to interface appropriately with surrounding uses. 
D.  All setbacks shall be landscaped. The minimum setbacks shall be 20 feet for front and street side yards. Landscape plans shall be subject to approval by the director. 
E.  All hazardous waste facilities shall erect a minimum 8-foot high decorative block wall that shall not exceed 15 feet in height. The wall shall be set back at least 20 feet from the property line when located on street or highway frontage. The area between the wall and the sidewalk shall be fully landscaped. The decorative block wall shall be erected along the perimeters of the side and rear property line. 
F.  No facility shall be placed within 200 feet of any known active earthquake fault or lineation suggesting the presence of a fault. The facility must be designed in such a manner to ensure structural integrity should a seismic event occur of up to 8.3 on the Richter Scale. If it is demonstrated that ground subsidence and/or liquefaction has occurred or may occur on the site, the proposed facility shall be engineered and designed to ensure structural stability in such an event. 
G.  No facility shall be constructed in any area identified as being within a 100 year floodplain boundary established by FIRM or FEMA unless it is designed, constructed, operated and maintained to prevent inundation. 
H.  No facility shall be placed within 500 feet of a dry wash or river, aqueduct, reservoir, supply well, or aquifer recharge area or within any area known or suspected on basis of a geological study to be supplying recharge to an aquifer unless design features are incorporated to avoid any potential for water contamination. 
I.  Facilities generating wastewater shall be located in areas with adequate sewer capacity and treatment capability to accommodate the expected wastewater discharge. 
J.  All facilities shall avoid locating in areas of potential rapid geologic change, or areas with high rate of subsidence and areas subject to liquefaction unless containment structures are designed, constructed and maintained in a manner acceptable to the director of public works and/or the city engineer so as to preclude failure as a result of such changes. 
K.  All facilities shall locate in areas posing minimal threats to the contamination of drinking water supplies contained in reservoirs and aqueducts. 
L.  All facilities shall be prohibited in areas of recreation, cultural or aesthetic value, as determined by the director. 
M.  All facilities shall locate in areas where fire departments are able to quickly respond to hazardous materials accidents and where demonstrated emergency response times are deemed acceptable by the local fire department official. In addition, hazardous materials accident response services at the facility may be required based on the type of wastes handled or the location of the facility. 
N.  All facilities shall be located so that distance traveled on city streets is kept to a minimum, and any routes to and from state or interstate highways to or from the facility are used primarily by trucks, and the number of nonindustrial structures (homes, hospitals, schools, etc.) along such routes is minimal. As part of conditional use permit approval, the city may impose limitations on the use of access routes to and from the facility by vehicles containing hazardous waste. This may include specifying the number and size of vehicles used and the hours of travel. 
O.  All facilities shall comply with the provisions of the CEQA. 
P.  Any modifications of the types and quantities of hazardous wastes to be managed at the proposed facility or significant modifications to the processes employed at the facility which were not considered in the original facility approval by the city, shall be presented to the director in writing. The proposed modifications may, at the discretion of the director, result in the approval of minor modifications to the process, or require revision of the facility's conditional use permit through a public hearing both before the planning commission and the city council, or may require a new application for the facility and a new conditional use permit. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 711.060) 
17.40.400 - Monitoring program. 
    All applications for hazardous waste facility projects shall include for approval a monitoring program that complies with the following requirements: 
A.  For the purpose of ensuring compliance with all standards, conditions and other requirements, the city or its designated representative may enter the premises on which a hazardous waste facility permit has been granted. 
B.  A provision for a periodic general review by the planning commission and/or city council of the applicant's compliance with the facility's conditional use permit, with provisions for modifying the existing conditions or adding new conditions, as appropriate. 
C.  The owner or operator of a hazardous waste facility shall file a written quarterly report with the city, and to the Los Angeles County Department of Public Works. This report shall include, but not be limited to, the amount (in tons), type and disposition of all wastes processed by the facility. The report shall also include copies of all manifests showing the delivery and types of hazardous wastes and include a map showing the exact location by coordinates and elevation of the quantities and types of materials placed in repositories or otherwise stored or disposed of on site. The report shall also include information on hazardous waste releases to the air, water or soil, spills and injuries to facility personnel. 
D.  The owner or operator of a hazardous waste facility shall immediately send copies of all complaints relating to the facility and/or the operation of the facility and copies of all inspection reports made by other local, state or federal agencies to the director who shall distribute copies to the Director of Public Works. 
E.  The emergency response plan shall be updated annually, and all management personnel at the facility shall sign the plan acknowledging familiarity with the plan. The updated plan shall be distributed to all local emergency response agencies which includes, but is not limited to, the Los Angeles County sheriff's department, the Los Angeles County fire department, and to the emergency response staff for the city of Lancaster, the Los Angeles County health department and the Los Angeles County public works department. 
F.  Immediate notification to the city of any unauthorized release to the air, water or soil from any facility. 
G.  Payment of all monitoring costs. Such costs shall include but are not limited to preparation and administration of a CEQA mitigation monitoring program for the facility and administration of the monitoring program provided for in this section. 
H.  The LAC may recommend to the city council that a separate body act as a "standing committee" to serve during the period in which facility is in operation to promote ongoing communication between the owner/operator and the community, and to monitor adherence to the requirements of this article. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 711.070) 
17.40.410 - General conditions. 
A.  Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director that the applicant has met all of the financial responsibility requirements imposed by the state of California Department of Health Services, the city and any other state or federal agency. 
B.  The applicant agrees to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the city, the director, the planning commission, and the city council, and all officers, employees and agents of the city against and from all claims, actions or liabilities relating to the land use decision or arising out of its implementation at the facility location. 
C.  All costs of compliance with this article shall be borne by the facility owner/operator. 
D.  The city may employ any and all methods permitted by law to enforce this article. 
E.  The owner/operator shall keep all equipment, buildings and the site in an orderly condition and in good repair and shall employ technological advances as may be required by the state of California Department of Health Services, the South Coast Air Quality Management District, the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, and any other agency required by law. 
F.  The city council may impose, as necessary, conditions and standards other than those presented, in order to achieve the purposes of this article and to protect the environment and the public health, safety or general welfare. 
G.  All studies, including the risk assessment, shall be made by a third party agreement administered through the city of Lancaster. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 711.080) 
17.40.420 - Duration of land use decision. 
A.  The duration of the land use decision will be determined at the time of conditional use permit approval but shall not exceed 10 years. 
B.  The conditional use permit may be renewed for an additional time period not to exceed 10 years, upon the submission of a new application in accordance with Section 17.40.380 and payment of processing and review costs as set forth in Section 17.40.440. 
C.  If the applicant fails to commence operation of the facility within 2 years of the date of the land use decision, the conditional use permit shall expire. 
D.  A comprehensive review of the facility will be required after every 5 years. 
E.  Failure to comply with the conditions contained in the conditional use permit, to conduct the mitigation required by CEQA or failure to comply with the provisions of this article will be considered grounds for permit review and possible revocation at the discretion of the city council. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 711.090) 
17.40.430 - Costs. 
    The applicant will pay all costs related to city processing and review of the facility application; the preparation, review and administration of all documentation and programs prepared pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA); and all activities of the local assessment committee (LAC) related to the facility application review and processing. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 711.100) 
17.40.440 - Deposit. 
    An initial deposit amount to cover the costs set forth in Section 17.40.430 shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 711.110) 
17.40.450 - Variances. 
    No variance shall be granted to the requirements or conditions set forth in this article. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 711.120) 
17.40.460 - Findings. 
    The following findings shall be made in writing prior to the city council making a land use decision which will permit the development of a hazardous waste facility project: 
A.  The proposed project is consistent with the city general plan and this title. 
B.  The project will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare. 
C.  The proposed facility is or will be served by roads and all other necessary public and private service facilities and utilities of adequate capacity to serve the proposed use. The circulation features serving the proposed facility are adequate in width and location, and are improved and located in such a manner as to provide for the safe transport of hazardous wastes to the proposed facility. 
D.  The project has met or exceeded each requirement of this article. 
E.  All environmental impacts identified in any environmental document prepared as part of the process to comply with the California Environmental Quality Act and this article are insignificant, have been mitigated, or are acceptable due to a statement of overriding considerations, and the mitigation measures (if any) will be monitored under a mitigation monitoring program. 
F.  All the findings set forth in Article I of Chapter 17.32 have been met. Health risk and environmental risk assessments have been conducted for the proposed facility based on well-defined and credible assumptions detailing the results of a "worst-case" scenario as well as all other possible or probable accidents or spills at the proposed facility, which address both the potential threat to public health, safety and the environment posed by the proposed facility. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 711.130) 
17.40.470 - Severability. 
    If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this article is, for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. The city council declares that it would have passed the ordinance codified in this article and each section, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, sentences, clauses or phrases may be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 711.140) 
Article VIII. - Mobilehome Use by a Caretaker 

17.40.480 - Description and purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide regulations for the location, design and use of mobilehomes for caretaker purposes. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 713.110) 
17.40.490 - Permit and application procedures. 
A.  Upon the issuance of a conditional use permit and subject to all conditions imposed thereby and to the following regulations, a mobilehome may be used as a caretaker residence in the C, CBD, CPD, H, MPD, LI, MI, HI and BP zones, when the planning commission finds the granting of such conditional use permit will not adversely affect properties in the vicinity and will not be contrary to the public interest. 
B.  Application. An application for a conditional use permit for a caretaker mobilehome shall include such materials as deemed necessary by the director to enable a complete analysis and appraisal of the proposal. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 713.120) 
17.40.500 - Permitted uses. 
    Permitted uses shall be limited to a one-family mobilehome for use by a caretaker and his immediate family on each legal parcel for which a conditional use permit is granted. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 713.121) 
17.40.510 - Accessory uses. 
    Accessory uses are limited to awnings, cabanas, ramadas, storage sheds or cabinets, fences or windbreaks, carports and porches. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 713.122) 
17.40.520 - Use and development standards. 
A.  Density. 
1.  A caretaker mobilehome and any accessory structures shall be included in calculating lot coverage by buildings in all commercial and manufacturing zones. 
B.  Location. 
1.  The placement of the mobilehome shall be at a location where the erection of residential structures is otherwise permitted by this title. 
C.  Time Limitation. 
1.  Any caretaker mobilehome shall be removed from the site prior to the end of 5 years from the date of the conditional use permit approval unless a lesser time period is specified by the commission. 
D.  Automobile Parking. A garage is not required for a caretaker's mobilehome. 
E.  Other Regulations. 
1.  Approval of a conditional use permit for a mobilehome for use by a caretaker shall not relieve the applicant and his successors in interest from complying with all other applicable statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 713.150) 
17.40.530 - Review for compliance. 
    Within one year subsequent to the granting of a conditional use permit for a mobilehome caretaker residence, and thereafter as needed, the director shall inspect such caretaker residence to insure compliance with all conditions of approval imposed by the planning commission. Failure of the applicant to comply with said conditions shall provide grounds for initiation of permit revocation procedures by the planning commission. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 713.160) 
Article IX. - Trailer Parks 

17.40.540 - Recreational trailer parks. 
    Every conditional use permit for a recreational trailer park in the C zone shall be subject to the following conditions. All of the following conditions shall be deemed to be conditions of every conditional use permit granted for a recreational trailer park whether or not such conditions are set forth in the conditional use permit. The commission in granting the conditional use permit may impose additional conditions but may not change or modify any of the following conditions except as provided by Article II of Chapter 17.32. 
A.  Area. The recreational trailer park shall have an area of not less than 5 acres. 
B.  Density. The density of the recreational trailer park shall not exceed 30 lots per acre. 
C.  Minimum Lot Size. No recreational vehicle lot shall have an average area of less than 1,000 square feet. 
D.  Signs. Signs shall be in accordance with the requirements of the C zone or as specified by the planning commission. 
E.  Duration of Occupancy. Occupancy by any one occupant and party shall be limited to 90 consecutive days within any 6-month period. 
F.  Prohibitions. 
1.  No permanent residency shall be permitted within the recreational trailer park except for a caretaker, manager or employees responsible for maintaining and/or operating the property, as permitted by the zone and authorized by the commission as a part of the conditional use permit approval. 
2.  A recreational trailer park shall have no dwelling units except that of a caretaker, manager or employees responsible for maintaining and/or operating the property, as permitted by the zone and authorized by the commission as a part of the conditional use permit approval. 
3.  Facilities within the recreational trailer park shall be used only by the occupants of the park except where otherwise authorized by the commission as part of the conditional use permit approval. 
4.  Recreational vehicle lots shall not be used for any commercial activity by the occupants. 
5.  There shall be no principal commercial uses within the recreational trailer park except as permitted by the zone and authorized by the commission as part of the conditional use permit approval. This provision does not prohibit accessory uses where authorized by the commission as part of said conditional use permit approval, including, but not limited to, areas for the storage of unoccupied recreational vehicles. 
G.  Other Regulations. Approval of a conditional use permit for a recreational trailer park shall not relieve the applicant and his successors in interest from complying with all other applicable statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 713.2) 
17.40.550 - Travel trailer parks. 
    Every conditional use permit for a travel trailer park in the C zone shall be subject to the following conditions. All of the following conditions shall be deemed to be conditions of every conditional use permit granted for a travel trailer park whether or not such conditions are set forth in the conditional use permit. The commission in granting the conditional use permit may impose additional conditions but may not change or modify any of the following conditions except as provided by Article II of Chapter 17.32. 
A.  Density. The density of the travel trailer park shall not exceed 30 lots per acre. 
B.  Minimum Lot Size. No travel trailer lot shall have an average area of less than 1,000 square feet. 
C.  Location Within Mobilehome Parks. Where a travel trailer is located within a mobilehome park, it shall be a separate designated section of the mobilehome park and shall be so designated. 
D.  Signs. Signs shall be in accordance with the requirements of the C zone or as specified by the planning commission. 
E.  Duration of Occupancy. Occupancy by any one occupant and party shall be limited to 90 consecutive days in any 6-month period. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 713.3) 
Article X. - Commercial Coaches as Temporary Offices 

17.40.560 - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this article shall be to establish standards for the use and placement of commercial coaches as temporary offices in the city. These provisions do not apply to temporary construction offices. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 716.010) 
17.40.570 - Applicability. 
    These specific standards are applicable for commercial coaches as temporary offices in all zones where they are allowed. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 716.030) 
17.40.580 - Standards. 
    When commercial coaches are used as temporary offices, they shall be reviewed by the director and shall meet the following standards: 
A.  Commercial coach offices shall not be moved onto the site until building, electrical and plumbing permits have been obtained. 
B.  The commercial coach shall have been manufactured after November 23, 1970, and have been issued an insignia of approval by the California Department of Housing and Community Development. 
C.  The commercial coach shall not have been altered in violation of applicable codes. 
D.  All commercial coach offices shall be skirted or recessed into the ground. 
E.  All commercial coach offices shall be connected to water, approved sewerage system and other utilities. EXCEPTION: Temporary subdivision sales offices are not required to connect to a water and sewerage system, however, such offices shall be provided with temporary sanitary facilities. The offices and any temporary sanitary facilities shall be removed upon completion of the model home(s) which are used as a sales office for the project or after a period of one year whichever occurs first unless such office is connected to the water and sewerage system. Such offices shall not be eligible for any extensions as provided under subsection K of this section. 
F.  The commercial coach office shall be placed to comply with any yard requirements of the zone in which it is located. 
G.  The required amount of improved parking spaces shall be provided. 
H.  A handicap access ramp shall be provided to all commercial coach offices. 
I.  No accessory structures shall be allowed. 
J.  A moving permit shall be obtained from the city if the commercial coach is moved within the city or from the county if it is moved from the county into the city. 
K.  A time limit of 2 years shall be placed on each commercial coach as a temporary office. One extension of up to one year may be granted by the director. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 716.040) 
Article XI. - Wind Energy Conversion Systems 

17.40.590 - Purpose and intent. 
    In view of the rising costs of fossil fuels and thus electricity, the urgent need for alternative energy resources is a vital concern to the residents of the city. Harnessing the wind's energy is becoming an attractive energy alternative. In consideration of public health, safety and welfare, the eventual construction and siting of wind energy conversion systems, hereafter referred to as WECS, shall meet the standards established in this article. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 717.010) 
17.40.600 - Applicability. 
    These specific standards are applicable for all wind energy conversion systems in zones in which they are allowed, or allowed subject to the granting of a conditional use permit. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 717.020) 
17.40.610 - Standards. 
    The following standards shall apply to all wind energy conversion systems: 
A.  Automatic Overspeed Control. Any WECS shall have an automatic overspeed control which shall be designed to protect the system from sustaining structural failure, such as thrown blades and the overturning or breaking of towers due to an uncontrolled condition brought on by abnormally high winds. 
B.  Manual Shutdown. The WECS shall have a manually operable method that assures WECS shutdown. Acceptable methods include mechanical or hydraulic brakes or tail-vane deflection systems which turn the rotor out of the wind. (Shutdown is defined to mean a safe condition for WECS which is not its power-producing mode but either protects the WECS from unusual circumstances or protects those working on the machine.) 
C.  Blade Height. The minimum distance between the ground and any protruding blades utilized on a WECS shall be 15 feet for horizontal axis WECS and 10 feet for any vertical axis WECS as measured to the lowest point of blade travel/motion. 
D.  Tower Safety. WECS towers and supporting structures shall be designed and constructed in accordance with accepted engineering standards and applicable city building codes and shall be approved by the city engineer as to safety and suitability. 
1.  Tower heights of not more than 65 feet shall be allowed on parcels between one and 5 acres and tower heights of not more than 80 feet shall be allowed on parcels of 5 acres or more, provided that the application includes evidence that the proposed height does not exceed the height recommended by the manufacturer or distributor of the system. 
2.  Roof-Mounted WECS. Devices or towers mounted on buildings may require strengthening of the existing structure to bear the additional weight and stress created by the WECS for which a building permit shall be obtained. 
3.  Ground-Mounted WECS. Ground-mounted WECS shall not be permitted in required front or side yards (setbacks). WECS in rear yards shall not be counted against lot coverage. 
E.  Tower Access. Climbing access to the ground-mounted WECS tower shall be limited in one of the following ways: 
1.  By means of a fence or wall not less than 6 feet in height with locking gates enclosing the yard where the tower is located; 
2.  By means of a fence or wall not less than 6 feet in height with a locking gate around the base of the tower; or 
3.  By limiting tower climbing apparatus to no lower than 12 feet from the ground for horizontal axis WECS and 10 feet for vertical axis WECS. 
F.  Decibel levels for the WECS shall not exceed 60 decibels (dBA) as measured at the closest neighboring inhabited dwelling, except during short-term events such as utility outages and severe wind storms. 
G.  Electro-Magnetic Interference. The WECS shall not cause radio and/or television broadcasting or reception interference to the surrounding area. 
H.  Setbacks. If the structural design is approved by the city engineer as to the safety and stability, the WECS shall not be erected nearer to any lot line than the tower height. 
I.  Guy Wires. For towers which require guy wires, anchor points for guy wires shall be located within property lines and not on or across any above ground electric transmission or distribution line. 
J.  Electrical Safety. The electrical box or any hazardous components of the WECS within ground reach shall be securely locked. 
K.  Signs. At least one sign shall be posted at the base of the tower warning of electrical shock or high voltage. 
(Ord. 804 (part), 2002; Prior zoning ord. § 717.030) 
17.40.620 - Required conditions. 
    Required conditions of approval for the permit shall include but not be limited to the following: 
A.  Required permits shall be obtained from building and engineering services prior to installation of the WECS. 
B.  Every WECS shall be insured for an amount sufficient to protect neighboring property owners in the event of mechanical or structural failures. 
C.  For utility interconnected WECS, Southern California Edison (SCE) shall be notified in writing of any proposed connection and SCE shall give written approval to such interconnection prior to installation. 
D.  Documentation shall be provided from the WECS manufacturer or a recognized testing facility indicating that the system will operate safely in Lancaster, California, atmospheric conditions. Suitable documentation attesting to the ability of the WECS to meet the standards of this section will be determined by the city engineer. Documentation considered suitable includes but is not limited to WECS and tower assembly designs bearing the stamp of a California registered civil or mechanical and electrical engineer attesting to the WECS compliance with the standards of this section. 
E.  Any WECS which ceases to be operable for a period of 60 days shall be removed within 6 months of the date it became inoperable. 
F.  Any WECS not in compliance with subsection D of this section is subject to a setback from all occupied buildings a distance at least equal to that shown in Figure 1 based on the WECS rotor diameter. 
G.  Notice of an application for installation of a WECS shall be provided to property owners within 300 feet of the property on which the system is to be located. 
H.  The system shall comply with all applicable Federal Aviation Administration requirements, including Subpart B (commencing with Section 77.11) of Part 77 of Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations regarding installations close to airports, and the State Aeronautics Act ((Part 1 (commencing with Section 21001) of Division 9 of the Public Utilities Code)). 
I.  The application shall include a line drawing of the electrical components of the system in sufficient detail to allow for a determination that the manner of installation conforms to the National Electric Code. 
(Ord. 804 (part), 2002; Prior zoning ord. § 717.040) 
Article XII. - Exceptions to Height Regulations 

17.40.630 - In general. 
    Structures such as chimneys, domes, elevator shaft housing, spires, steeples, towers, and similar objects not used for human occupancy are not subject to the height limitations of this title. However, this section does not apply to signs or wind energy conversion systems. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 718.000) 
Article XIII. - Wireless Telecommunication Facilities 

17.40.640 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The purpose and intent of this article shall be to establish standards for the placement and use of wireless telecommunication facilities in all zones in which they are allowed. These requirements provide incentives for well designed and well placed communication facilities by simplifying and shortening the review process, where warranted, while at the same time protecting the public interest. 
B.  The desired city priority for the placement of wireless telecommunication facilities is first, the construction of a stealth or co-located facility in the applicable zone. Second most desirable method is the construction of a co-located facility including locating facilities on existing city-owned property. The third, construction of a nonstealth wireless telecommunication facilities within the height limit, and the least desired wireless telecommunication facilities is the construction of a new major facility requiring a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 753 § 1 (Exh. A § 10 (part)), 1999) 
17.40.650 - Applicability. 
    These standards are applicable to all wireless telecommunication facilities in all zones where they are allowed. These standards do not apply to personal or noncommercial radio or television antennas, which shall be subject to the specific requirements for the zone in which they are located shall apply. 
(Ord. 753 § 1 (Exh. A § 10 (part)), 1999) 
17.40.660 - Submittal requirements. 
A.  Due to the sensitive nature of some of the required submittal information, any document submitted by the applicant marked confidential shall be placed on file with the city clerk's department and not be made public information. Prior to review, every wireless telecommunication facilities request must be accompanied by the following: 
1.  A site plan showing the locations of existing structures, parking facilities, landscaping and other relevant information on-site as well as the location of adjacent buildings and structures within a distance equal to the height of the proposed facility measured from the base of the support structure; 
2.  Elevations showing the height of the proposed facility, cabinetry or equipment buildings supporting the facility, and the height of other structures on-site; 
3.  Property owner's authorization for establishment of a wireless telecommunication facilities. Include a copy of the lease agreement with a statement regarding liability for future removal of the structure, if applicable; 
4.  Proof of Federal Communications Commission licensing; 
5.  A map or narrative of other facilities proposed or existing to support the proposed facility. 
B.  Prior to review, major wireless telecommunication facilities (including stealth and co-located facilities) must be accompanied by the following: 
1.  Photos of the site taken from a minimum of four directions with an emphasis on the worst case scenario as seen from the most visually sensitive adjacent use or street right-of-way. 
2.  A siting statement describing the method used to determine the height and location of the facility. Describe how other alternative sites would not be feasible. 
3.  A co-location statement, which is a written statement indicating that the applicant will accept collocation of other wireless telecommunication facilities at the proposed location in good faith and that an exclusive lease agreement will not be signed between the owner of the property and the wireless telecommunication facilities provider. 
4.  Proof of Public Utilities Commission license for the applicant to provide service in this area. 
(Ord. 753 § 1 (Exh. A § 10 (part)), 1999) 
17.40.670 - Design standards. 
    The following standards shall apply to all wireless telecommunication facilities: 
A.  Proof of Federal Communications Commission and Federal Aviation Administration approvals shall be provided prior to building permit issuance. 
B.  Where possible, wireless telecommunication facilities shall be integrated into the design of the existing buildings on-site. 
C.  Wireless telecommunication facilities, including equipment buildings and cabinetry shall be treated to match existing buildings on-site. 
D.  Wireless telecommunication facilities shall be painted with a nonreflective finish in a color to be determined by the approving authority which best matches the background environment color. Primarily, colors shall be light blue where the predominant background for the structure is above the horizon and beige where the background is the mountains or desert. 
E.  Lighting, other than required safety lights, is prohibited. 
F.  Anti-climbing devices are required. 
G.  Signage or advertising of any kind on the facility is prohibited. 
H.  Any required parking or landscaping displaced by the construction of a wireless telecommunication facilities shall be replaced on-site or additional review for off-site parking shall be required. Landscape plans shall be submitted according to Ordinance 629, as necessary. 
I.  Wireless telecommunication facilities shall not be placed where they will cause interference with the operation of other wireless telecommunication facilities, wind energy conversion systems or solar power systems. 
J.  The director of community development or the planning commission, as appropriate, can require additional design criteria or other information as deemed necessary to integrate the proposed wireless telecommunication facilities with the surrounding area. 
(Ord. 753 § 1 (Exh. A § 10 (part)), 1999) 
17.40.671 - Design standards for mini and minor facilities. 
    The following standards shall apply to mini and minor wireless telecommunications facilities: 
A.  Ground mounted wireless telecommunications facilities and support equipment shall be screened from public view by vegetation or another acceptable material subject to director's discretion. 
B.  Setbacks of the underlying zone of the subject site for mini and minor wireless telecommunications facilities shall apply. 
C.  Operation of a backup generator shall be limited to power outages and for testing and maintenance purposes only. 
(Ord. 753 § 1 (Exh. A § 10 (part)), 1999) 
17.40.672 - Design standards for major facilities. 
    The following standards shall apply to every major wireless telecommunications facilities: 
A.  Construction and maintenance of the wireless telecommunications facility shall not impact surrounding streets or adjacent properties. 
B.  Storage of mobile or immobile equipment not directly supporting the facility on-site is prohibited unless repairs to the facility are being made. 
C.  Operation of a backup generator shall be limited to power outages and for testing and maintenance purposes only. 
(Ord. 753 § 1 (Exh. A § 10 (part)), 1999) 
17.40.680 - Co-located and stealth facilities. 
A.  Co-located wire telecommunications facilities shall not require a significant change to the existing support structure, or increase the overall height of the existing facility. Any changes to the site shall be in compliance with the city Municipal Code. 
B.  A proposed stealth wireless telecommunications facility is unrecognizable as a wireless telecommunication facility, through enclosure within a building or structure, integration with building architecture, or camouflage features consistent with the surrounding area. 
(Ord. 753 § 1 (Exh. A § 10 (part)), 1999) 
17.40.681 - Abandonment. 
    Any wireless telecommunication facilities not in operation for a consecutive period of 6 months shall be deemed abandoned and must be removed from the site within 12 months from the date of nonuse. If the owner of the wireless telecommunications facility does not respond to a request for removal of the structure within 30 days of receipt of the notice, the property owner will be notified to remove the structure. If the property owner does not comply with the request within 30 days, the city may remove the structure and lien the property. 
(Ord. 753 § 1 (Exh. A § 10 (part)), 1999) 
Article XIV. - Co-Located Small Wind Energy Systems 

17.40.690 - Co-located Small Wind Energy Systems (CSWES). 
A.  Purpose and Intent. It is the purpose and intent of this section to promote the safe, effective and efficient construction and use of CSWES on commercial and industrial lots within the city limits of the City of Lancaster. These regulations are intended to assure that CSWES are designed and located in a manner that minimizes visual, noise, and safety impacts on the surrounding community. 
B.  Applicability. These specific standards are applicable for all co-located small wind energy systems in commercial and industrial zones allowed subject to approval of a director's review in accordance with Article VI of Chapter 17.32. 
C.  Definitions. The following are definitions of specialized terms and phrases used in this section. Definitions of general terms and phrases are located in Chapter 17.04 Section 17.04.240 (Definitions). 
1.  "Co-located small wind energy system (CSWES)" shall mean a wind energy conversion system that is located on a pole with site lighting below the turbine, which has a rated capacity of 8kW or less. 
2.  "Temporary meteorological tower (met tower)" shall mean a temporary structure which includes the tower, base plate, anchors, guy cables and hardware, anemometers, (wind speed indicators), wind direction vanes, booms to hold equipment anemometers and vanes, data logger, instrument wiring, and any telemetry devices that are used to monitor or transmit wind speed and wind flow characteristics over a period of time for either instantaneous wind information or to characterize the wind resource at any given location. 
3.  "Co-located wind energy system height" shall mean the vertical distance from ground level to the tip of the wind generator blade when it is at its highest point. 
D.  Restriction on Use of Electricity Generated by CSWES. A CSWES shall be used exclusively to supply electrical power for on-site consumption. Electrical power generated by the CSWES exceeding on-site consumption may be used by the utility company in exchange for a reduction in the cost of electrical power supplied by that company to the parcel for on-site use, as long as no net revenue is produced by such excess electrical power. CSWES, as allowed pursuant to this section shall not be used for commercial production or profit. 
E.  Property Development Regulations. A CSWES shall be subject to all applicable regulations of the commercial and industrial zones in which it is proposed, except that the following standards shall take precedence over the regulations of the commercial and industrial zones to the extent that installation of co-located small wind energy systems (CSWES) where permitted by a director's review application, shall be constructed in the following manner: 
1.  Minimum development/parcel size: Developments of a minimum of twenty (20) acres or more with parking lot light fixtures at a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet in height. 
2.  Setbacks: Co-located small wind energy systems shall meet the following setbacks: 
a.  A distance equal to the tower height from any abutting private properties that are not part of the development. 
b.  A distance equal to the tower height from any overhead utility lines, unless written permission is granted by the affected utility. 
c.  A distance equal to one hundred fifty (150) feet from any property that is residentially used or designated. 
3.  Noise: Co-located small wind energy systems shall meet the following criteria with respect to noise: 
a.  A site-specific noise study or the manufacturer's engineered sound studies shall be submitted for review to verify that the noise level will comply with the noise element of the general plan. 
b.  On-site noise levels for each unit shall not exceed 70 decibels (dBA) except during short-term events, such as utility outages and severe windstorms. 
c.  Noise levels at the property line of the development site shall not exceed 70 decibels, if the adjacent use is a commercial or industrial use, and shall not exceed 65 decibels, if the adjacent use is residential. 
4.  Aesthetics: Co-located small wind energy systems shall meet the following criteria with respect to aesthetics: 
a.  All proposed replacement poles for a CSWES system shall be of the same design, shape and color as the remaining light poles throughout the parking lot. 
b.  The wind turbine housing and the blades of the CSWES system shall not be brightly colored. The turbine housing should be white, sky colored, or should coordinate with the color palette approved for the project buildings, subject to the approval of the planning director. 
c.  The physical size of the turbine shall not extend beyond thirty-six (36) inches from the center of the pole. 
d.  The maximum diameter of the blades shall not exceed sixteen (16) feet. 
e.  All electrical transmission lines from the tower shall be installed underground. 
5.  Access: 
a.  All ground mounted electrical and control equipment shall be labeled and secured to prevent unauthorized access. 
b.  The pole shall be designed and installed so as to not provide step bolts or a ladder. 
6.  Lighting: 
a.  A co-located small wind energy system (CSWES) shall not be illuminated unless such lighting is required by the Federal Aviation Administration. A light temporarily used to inspect a turbine, tower and associated equipment is permissible, providing said light is only used for inspection purposes and not left on for an extended period of time. 
b.  The height of the light fixture on the structure itself shall not be altered from its original height as previously permitted or as permitted by the reviewing authority when co-locating a CSWES in a parking lot. 
7.  Height: Co-located small wind energy systems shall meet the following criteria with respect to height: 
a.  The maximum CSWES height shall be sixty (60) feet at the highest point with one (1) of the blades at its highest vertical point. 
b.  The maximum height of the center of the turbine shall not exceed fifty-three (53) feet. 
c.  The maximum diameter of the blades from the lowest point to the highest point shall not exceed sixteen (16) feet. 
8.  Temporary meteorological (met) towers shall be permitted under the same standards as those for a CSWES facility. Approval for a temporary met tower shall be valid for a maximum of thirty (30) days. 
9.  Signs: All signs, other than the manufacturer's or installer's identification, and appropriate warning signs, shall be prohibited. 
10.  Building Permit: Applicable building permits shall be required for a CSWES. 
11.  FAA Height Restrictions: The system shall comply with all applicable Federal Aviation Administration requirements, including but not limited to Subpart B (commencing with Section 77.11) of Part 77 of Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations regarding installations close to airports. These regulations apply to any installation within 20,000 feet of an airport and exceeding specific heights based on specific FAA and airport parameters. 
12.  Abandoned/Inoperative CSWES: Any CSWES deemed to be abandoned or inoperative for a period of six (6) months, shall constitute a public nuisance pursuant to Chapter 8.28 of the Lancaster Municipal Code. The property owner shall abate such nuisance in accordance with Section 8.28.050, of the Lancaster Municipal Code. The city shall retain the right to abate such nuisance in accordance with the procedures and requirements of Chapter 8.28. 
F.  The planning director may require additional design criteria or other information as deemed necessary to integrate the proposed CSWES with the surrounding area. 
(Ord. No. 941, § 2, 2-9-2010) 

Chapter 17.42 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENTS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1015, § 1, adopted December 13, 2016, repealed ch. 17.42, §§ 17.42.010-17.42.160, in its entirety; and enacted a new ch. 17.42 to read as set out herein. Former ch. 17.42 pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Ord. 896 § 1 (Exh. A § 29 (part)), adopted 2008; Ord. No. 1007, §§ 2-4, adopted October 13, 2015. 

17.42.010 - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of adopting regulations for the sale of alcoholic beverages is to ensure that such sales will not adversely affect surrounding residents, businesses, and institutions; and to ensure that any such use operates in a manner compatible with existing and future adjacent uses. 
    This chapter alone does not allow or permit alcoholic beverage establishments, but only applies to such establishments where otherwise allowed or permitted within an involved applicable land use zoning district. This chapter does not authorize the operation of alcoholic beverage establishments in any land use district where they are not otherwise allowed or permitted by the applicable involved zoning district's regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1015, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
17.42.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following words or terms shall be defined as follows: 
    "Alcoholic beverage" means a fermented or distilled beverage including alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume which is fit for beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted with other substances, and sale of which require a license from the state ABC. 
    "Alcoholic beverage control (ABC)" means the California State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. 
    "Alcoholic beverage establishment" means any or all of the following: a bona fide restaurant, an incidental off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment, an incidental on-sale alcoholic beverage establishment, a primary off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment, and a primary on-sale beverage establishment. 
    "Bona fide restaurant" means a business enterprise which is conducted, or proposed to be conducted, in compliance with the following requirements: 
1.  The issuance by ABC of a Type 41 or a Type 47 license; 
2.  A kitchen and a dining area that constitute permanent and identifiable portions of the business premises where meals are prepared by the establishment for consumption on the premises during all hours the establishment is open for business; 
3.  A printed menu which is made available to patrons by a server for the purpose of ordering meals; 
4.  Not less than 51% of the business enterprise is derived from the sale of food and non-alcoholic beverages; 
5.  At least one full-time cook is engaged by the business enterprise to prepare meals for patrons on the premises during the permissible hours of operation; 
6.  There shall be no drinking contests or other similar activities. 
Fast food restaurants, billiard or pool halls, nightclubs, and adult-oriented businesses are not considered bona fide restaurants. 
    "Convenience market" means any business establishment of less than 10,000 square feet not connected with a petroleum products service-station, and which is characterized by retail sales of food products and household items, and which devote a minimum of 15% of overall sales floor area to display and sale of fresh meat and produce. Convenience markets shall be prohibited from selling spirits (ABC License Type 21). 
    "Enforcing officer" includes any city public safety officer, city community services officer, county sheriff's deputy, and any other public officer or employee designated by the city manager to issue administrative citations in accordance with Section 17.42.160. 
    "Entertainment" means any form of entertainment, whether live, televised audio or video taped, including, but not limited to, any type of performance for the purpose of amusing the audience, such as: dancing, singing, playing a musical instrument or acting. 
    "Existing deemed approved alcoholic beverage establishment" means any establishment lawfully engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages for on- or off-sale consumption which is in existence prior to the effective date of this chapter, retains the same type of alcoholic beverage license and continues to legally operate without substantial change in the mode or character of operation. 
    "Fast food restaurant" means a restaurant whose business is primarily related to take-out food. Customers typically order food from a menu board. A fast food restaurant may also have a drive-through window. 
    "Grocery store" means any business establishment selling food products, household merchandise, and/or drugs to the public which has a floor area of more than 10,000 square feet. 
    "Incidental alcoholic beverage establishments" means incidental off-sale alcoholic beverage establishments and incidental on-sale alcoholic beverage establishments. Wineries and incidental uses allowed under a Type 02 liquor license issued by state ABC shall not be considered incidental alcoholic beverage establishments. 
    "Incidental off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment" [means those establishments that both: (1) sell, serve or give away alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises; and (2) utilize no more than the square footage provided in the table below for the sale and display of alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises. This definition shall not include sales establishments operated as an incidental use to a winery under a Type 02 liquor license issued by state ABC.] 
Size of Outlets Maximum square footage of sales floor area for the sale and display of alcoholic beverages 0 to 100,000 gross square feet of total sales floor area Up to 5% or 2,500 square feet, whichever is less Greater than 100,000 gross square feet of total sales floor area Up to 5% or 7,500 square feet, whichever is less  
    "Incidental on-sale alcoholic beverage establishment" means those establishments that both: (1) sell, serve or give away alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises; and (2) utilize 10% or less of the gross floor area for the sale, display and storage of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. Without limitation, this definition includes a hotel that maintains only a Type 70 alcoholic beverage license, and a hospital which maintains only a Type 63 alcoholic beverage license. For purposes of this article, a bona fide restaurant shall not be considered an incidental on-sale alcoholic beverage establishment. This definition shall not include wine tasting rooms operated as an incidental use to a winery under a Type 02 liquor license issued by the state ABC. 
    "Liquor store" means a retail or wholesale establishment which has obtained an alcoholic beverage control license Type 21 (off-sale general) to engage in the sale or sealed or containerized alcoholic beverages wherein the sale of alcoholic beverages constitutes 51% or more of the establishment's gross financial receipts. This definition shall not include sales establishments incidental to a winery operated under a Type 02 liquor license issued by state ABC. 
    "Mini-mart" means a retail establishment which contains less than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area utilized in whole or in part for the sale of a variety of items including groceries, delicatessen items, staples, dairy products, pre-packaged food, soft drinks, sundry items, and/or alcoholic beverages, and may include the sale of gasoline or other petroleum products. "Mini-mart" is distinguished from a "convenience market" in that it does not devote at least 10% of its overall floor area to the display and sale of fresh meat and produce. Any mini-mart that sells alcoholic beverages shall be deemed a primary alcoholic beverage establishment. 
    "Mixed-use development" means a building or combination of buildings intentionally designed as a single development to accommodate a combination of residential and commercial uses. 
    "Mixed-use district" means any physical location designated by the city of Lancaster general plan or zoning map as a mixed-use district. 
    "Nightclub" means a place of entertainment, typically open at night, usually serving food and/or alcoholic beverages, which may have a floor show and/or offer live or recorded entertainment or music and/or space for dancing. 
    "Operator" means any person who has an ownership interest, in any manner, in an alcoholic beverage establishment, including, without limitation, a corporation and each of its officers, directors and stockholders; a partnership and each of its partners; a limited liability company and each of its managing members. 
    "Owner" means and includes any person with a recorded ownership interest in, or a right of possession, control or use of the premises on which an alcoholic beverage establishment is located, including all persons shown as owners on the last equalized assessment roll of the county assessor's office. Owners include property managers and persons with powers of attorney, executors of estates, trustees, or who are court appointed administrators, conservators, guardians or receivers. 
    "Planning commission" means the planning commission of the city of Lancaster. 
    "Primary off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment" means any business establishment which is making application for or which has obtained a liquor license from ABC authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises in original, unopened containers, and which exceeds the amount of floor area devoted to alcoholic beverage sales area as defined under "incidental off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment." For the purposes of this chapter, liquor stores and mini-markets shall be deemed primary off-sale alcoholic beverage establishments. This definition shall not include wineries and incidental uses operated under a Type 02 liquor license issued by state ABC. 
    "Primary on-sale alcoholic beverage establishment" means any business establishment which is making application for or which has obtained a liquor license from ABC authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. Such liquor licenses include, but are not limited to, Type 41 (on-sale beer and wine for bona fide public eating place), Type 42 (on-sale beer and wine for public premises), Type 47 (on-sale general for bona fide public eating place), Type 48 (on-sale general for public premises), Type 50 (on-sale general for club), Type 51 (club), and Type 52 (veteran's club). For the purposes of this chapter, bona fide restaurants, nightclubs, bars, and banquet facilities, which sell alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption, shall be deemed primary on-sale alcoholic beverages establishments. This definition shall not include wineries and incidental uses operated under a Type 02 liquor license issued by state ABC. 
    "Responsible person" means an operator of an alcoholic beverage establishment, an operator's on-site manager(s), an operator's employees and/or a property owner, as defined herein. 
    "Sales floor area" means the calculation of area for the sale and display of specified products, including but not limited to alcoholic beverages, fresh meat and fresh produce. The calculation of sales floor area percentage shall be based on the gross floor area of the premises, including any warehousing or storage areas and shall include actual product display areas and reasonable public access aisles within or adjacent to said display area. 
    "Substantial change in mode or character of operation" means and includes, but is not limited to, the following situations: 
1.  The alcoholic beverage establishment has changed, or proposes to change, its type of retail liquor license with the department of alcoholic beverage control; 
2.  An alcoholic beverage establishment increases floor area by more than 20%; 
3.  An alcoholic beverage establishment changes from an "incidental off-sale" or an "incidental on-sale" establishment to a "primary off-sale" or a "primary on-sale" establishment; 
4.  The alcoholic beverage establishment proposes to reinstate alcohol sales after the retail liquor license has been revoked or suspended for a period greater than 90 days by the department of alcoholic beverage control; or 
5.  The establishment is a bona fide restaurant with a Type 41 or Type 47 license that adds entertainment, except for non-amplified solo or similar entertainment on an occasional basis, which does not occupy more than 50 square feet or substantially change the character of the restaurant operation. 
    "Supermarket" means any business establishment selling food products, household merchandise, and/or drugs to the public, which has a floor area of more than 10,000 square feet. 
    "Winery" means an establishment operating under a Type 02 liquor license issued by state ABC for the production of wine. "Winery" includes incidental tasting, sales, and dining associated with the overall establishment and allowed under the Type 02 license. 
(Ord. No. 1015, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
17.42.030 - Conditional use permit required. 
    On or after the effective date of this chapter, no place where alcoholic beverages are sold, served, or given away as a normal course of business for on-sale or off-sale consumption, shall be established without first obtaining a conditional use permit from the city. No existing deemed approved alcoholic beverage establishment shall substantially change its mode or character of operation as such term is defined by this chapter, without first obtaining a conditional use permit. 
    Issuance of a conditional use permit shall be in accordance with the requirements set forth in Chapter 17.32 and the requirements of this chapter (except for wineries approved pursuant to Section 17.08.070(EE)). The planning commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove an application for a conditional use permit for alcoholic beverage establishments. Following a public hearing at which all parties may present testimony, the planning commission shall state findings of fact, which serve as the basis of its decision, and record the decision in writing. 
    A copy of the conditions of approval for the conditional use permit must be kept on the premises of the establishment, and be presented to city or county sheriff's personnel upon request. 
(Ord. No. 1015, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
17.42.040 - Conditional use permit-Distance requirements. 
A.  New alcoholic beverage establishments shall adhere to the distance requirements as specified below: 
Primary Alcoholic Beverage Establishments 
Type of 
Establishment On-Sale Off-Sale Bona 
Fide 
Restaurant Religious Assembly 300' 300' -0- Public/Private School (K-12) 1,000' 1,000' -0- Day Care Center 300' 300' -0- Residential Use or Residentially Designated Property 300' 300' -0- Existing Primary Alcoholic Beverage Establishment 500' 500' -0- Public Park 500' 500' -0- Hospital 500' 500' -0-  
Incidental Alcoholic Beverage Establishments 
Type of Establishment On-Sale Off-Sale Religious Assembly 300' -0- Public/Private School (K-12) 500' -0- Day Care Center 500' -0- Residential Use or Residentially Designated Property 300' -0- Existing Primary Alcoholic Beverage Establishment 300' -0- Public Park 500' -0- Hospital 500' -0-  
B.  Measurement of Distance. The distance requirement shall be measured in a straight line from the closest property line to the closest property line. 
C.  Request for Waiver. An applicant for an alcoholic beverage establishment may request, in conjunction with the conditional use permit, a waiver of the distance requirements. In considering such request, the planning commission may approve a waiver if it makes the following findings: 
1.  The alcoholic beverage establishment will serve a specific community need; 
2.  The distance waiver approved for the alcoholic beverage establishment is not expected to result in an adverse effect on adjacent property, uses or residents. 
D.  Exceptions to Distance Requirements. The distance requirements shall not be applicable to an alcoholic beverage establishment located within a mixed use development or a mixed use district. 
(Ord. No. 1015, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
17.42.050 - Conditional use permit-Findings. 
    In order to approve a conditional use permit for an alcoholic beverage establishment, the planning commission, or city council on appeal, shall find that the proposed use is consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter. In addition, the planning commission, or the city council on appeal, shall make the following findings as well as the findings required by Section 17.32.090: 
A.  That the proposed use will be located within a zone which permits alcoholic beverages to be sold, served, or given away for on-sale or off-sale consumption, as the case may be, upon obtaining a conditional use permit; 
B.  That the proposed use will not adversely affect nearby residents and facilities primarily devoted to use by children, families, and the general public, after giving consideration to the distance or proximity of the proposed alcoholic beverage establishment to residential districts, schools (public or private), day care centers, public parks, playgrounds and other recreational facilities, churches or other places of religious worship, hospitals, clinics or other health care facilities; and 
C.  That the proposed use serves the public convenience and necessity based upon all factors outlined in Section 17.42.060. 
(Ord. No. 1015, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
17.42.060 - Conditional use permit-Factors regarding public convenience or necessity. 
    In deciding whether to issue the conditional use permit, the planning commission, or the city council on appeal, shall consider whether the public convenience or necessity is being served and make findings to justify such conclusion based upon review and consideration or relevant factors, which shall include, but not limited to, the following: 
A.  The extent to which the issuance of the conditional use permit would duplicate services and, therefore, contribute to an over-concentration of alcoholic beverage establishment; 
B.  The extent to which alcohol sales are related to the function of the proposed use, and the possibility of the use operating in a viable manner without alcohol sales; 
C.  The ability of the proposed establishment to serve a niche in the market not filled by other alcoholic beverage establishment in the area; 
D.  The convenience of purchasing alcoholic beverages in conjunction with other specialty food sales or services; 
E.  The aesthetic character and ambiance of the proposed establishment; 
F.  The manner in which the proposed establishment is to be conducted (special or unique features), including the extent to which the establishment will provide an adequate and well trained staff; 
G.  The manner in which the proposed establishment complements the established or proposed businesses in a specific area; 
H.  The extent to which the proposed establishment, location and/or operator has a history of law enforcement problems; 
I.  The crime rate in the reporting district and adjacent reporting districts as compared to other areas in the city; and 
J.  The number of alcohol-related law enforcement calls for service, crimes or arrests in the reporting district and in adjacent districts. 
(Ord. No. 1015, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
17.42.070 - Conditions of approval for on-sale alcoholic beverage establishments. 
    Establishments engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption shall be operated in a manner which does not interfere with the normal use of adjacent properties. In addition to those conditions which the planning commission, or the city council on appeal, may otherwise impose, all conditional use permits for on-sale beverage establishments shall be subject to the following conditions of approval: 
A.  The exterior of the premises shall be kept free of litter. 
B.  Graffiti shall be removed from the site within 72 hours. 
C.  Alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted to be consumed in the parking area or other exterior areas of the premises, except for designated outdoor areas approved as part of the application. 
D.  Exterior lighting of the parking area shall be kept at an intensity of between one and 2 foot-candles, so as to provide adequate lighting for patrons while not disturbing surrounding residential or commercial areas. Light sources shall be screened from the adjacent properties and from the sky. 
E.  Adequate security measures shall be provided as specified by the planning commission including, but not limited to, retaining trained staff and security personnel and providing security devices, such as surveillance or burglar alarm systems. 
F.  Hours of operation, including deliveries to the proposed establishment, shall be compatible with the need and character of the surrounding neighborhood. In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, the planning commission may limit the hours of operation. 
G.  All employees who serve or sell alcoholic beverages shall successfully complete a responsible beverage service training program that meets the requirements of the state ABC within 90 days of hire. Records of such training shall be maintained on the premises and made available to city or county sheriff's personnel upon request. 
H.  Noise levels at the property line of any sensitive use as listed in Section 17.24.040 adjoining the site of the alcoholic beverage establishment shall not exceed 65 dBA. 
I.  The management of any establishment selling alcohol shall take necessary steps to assure the orderly conduct of employees, patrons and visitors on the premises, and to assure timely response to concerns of neighbors and local officials about problems related to alcohol sales and service at the establishment. 
J.  The owner of the establishment shall maintain all required permits and/or licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages in good standing. 
K.  The establishment shall conspicuously post an interior sign stating: 
"We ID everyone under 30 years of age for alcohol sales." 
The language of such sign shall be English, as well as the predominant language of the establishment's clientele. 
(Ord. No. 1015, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
17.42.080 - Conditions of approval for off-sale alcoholic beverage establishments. 
    Establishments engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption shall operate in a manner which does not interfere with the normal use of adjacent properties. In addition to those conditions which the planning commission, or the city council on appeal, may otherwise impose, all conditional use permits for off-sale alcoholic beverage establishment shall be subjected to the following mandatory conditions of approval: 
A.  The exterior of the premises shall be kept free of litter. 
B.  Graffiti shall be removed from the site within 72 hours. 
C.  The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises shall be prohibited and appropriate posting of signs stating that drinking on the premises is prohibited by law shall be posted both inside and outside the establishment. The premises shall include the establishment proper and/or the appurtenant common area if located in a commercial center. 
D.  Exterior lighting of the parking area shall be kept at an intensity of between one and 2 foot-candles, so as to provide adequate lighting for patrons while not disturbing surrounding residential or commercial areas. Light sources shall be screened from the adjacent properties and from the sky. 
E.  Adequate security measures shall be provided as specified by the planning commission including, but not limited to, retaining trained staff and security personnel and providing security devices, such as surveillance or burglar alarm systems. 
F.  Hours of operation, including deliveries to the proposed establishment, shall be compatible with the need and character of the surrounding neighborhood. In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, the planning commission may limit the hours or operation. 
G.  All employees who serve or sell alcoholic beverages shall successfully complete a responsible beverage service training program that meets the requirements of the California Department of Alcohol Beverage Control within 90 days of hire. Records of such training shall be maintained on the premises and made available to the city or the county sheriff's department personnel upon request. 
H.  Noise levels at the property line of any sensitive use as listed in Section 17.42.040 adjoining the site of the alcoholic beverage establishment shall not exceed 65 dBA. 
I.  Exterior public telephones that permit incoming calls may not be located on the premises. 
J.  The operation of video or any other electronic games may be prohibited in conjunction with the sale of alcoholic beverages, and will be considered on a case by case basis. 
K.  The planning commission may restrict alcoholic beverages sales by container size and type where such restriction is determined to be necessary for the reasonable protection of public health and safety. 
L.  No beer or wine shall be displayed within 5 feet of the cash register or the front door unless it is in a permanently affixed cooler. 
M.  No sale of alcoholic beverages shall be made from a drive-through or walk-up window. 
N.  No display or sale of beer or wine shall be made from an ice tub. 
O.  No self-illuminated or "in-motion" advertising for beer or wine shall be located on buildings or windows, or be visible from outside the building. 
P.  If the establishment also engages in the sale of motor vehicle fuel, no advertisement of alcoholic beverages shall be displayed at motor fuel islands. 
(Ord. No. 1015, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
17.42.090 - Exceptions-Specific plan areas. 
    The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to areas of the city for which a specific plan has been adopted pursuant to Section 65450 of the Government Code of the state of California if the adopted specific plan contains regulations regarding alcoholic beverage establishments. 
(Ord. No. 1015, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
17.42.100 - Existing deemed approved establishments selling alcoholic beverages. 
    Any establishment lawfully existing prior to the effective date of this chapter and licensed by the state for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for on-sale or off-sale consumption shall be considered to have a "deemed approved" status and shall only be required to obtain a conditional use permit for a "substantial change in mode or character of operation" as described in Section 17.42.020, or for a revocation or expiration of "deemed approved" status as set forth in Section 17.42.130. The distance requirements set forth in Section 17.42.040 shall not apply to any existing deemed approved alcoholic beverage establishment. 
(Ord. No. 1015, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
17.42.110 - Performance standards; public nuisance. 
A.  The operator of an alcoholic beverage establishment, whether operating with a "deemed approved" status or pursuant to a conditional use permit, shall use and maintain the premises and conduct the business in a manner that comports with all applicable local, state and federal law, including but not limited to, the California Business & Professions Code, the Lancaster Property Maintenance ordinance (codified at Chapter 8.28), and the Lancaster Zoning ordinance (codified at Title 13). Lawful property maintenance and business operations shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  The premises shall be maintained without the presence of garbage, junk, trash, debris or other miscellaneous items in exterior areas except in approved trash collection containers/enclosures. 
2.  The premises, including any surface of a structure, sidewalk, curb, ground surface, vehicle, tree, shrub, rock or other tangible item that is visible from publicly or privately owned real or personal property, shall be maintained free of graffiti. All graffiti shall be removed within 72 hours from the operator's first observation of graffiti or receipt of verbal or written notification of such graffiti by any enforcing officer as defined in this chapter. 
3.  The premises shall be maintained with all signage required by applicable state and local law, including but not limited to signs prohibiting loitering, public drinking and/or the presence of open alcoholic beverage containers on the premises. 
4.  The establishment shall be maintained in such a manner that signs, refrigerator cases, promotional displays, equipment and/or any other items do not obstruct the view of the interior of the establishment from the parking lot and public street or other right-of-way. 
5.  The premises shall be maintained without the presence of exterior public telephones. Any existing public telephone shall be removed within 30 calendar days from the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
6.  The operator of the establishment shall maintain a current and valid city business license and shall conduct business in full accordance with any and all conditions imposed thereon. 
7.  The operator shall not sell, furnish, give or permit the sale, furnishing or giving of an alcoholic beverage to an obviously intoxicated person or to a habitual or common drunkard. 
8.  The operator shall not sell, furnish, give or permit the sale, furnishing or giving of an alcoholic beverage to any person under 21 years of age, or knowingly allow such person to consume alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
9.  The operator shall not cause, allow or permit nuisance and other unlawful activities on the premises, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Loitering; 
b.  Drinking alcoholic beverages and/or possessing open alcoholic beverage containers in exterior portions of the premises, other than in a designated patio or other area approved by the department of alcoholic beverage control and/or the city in conjunction with an on-sale establishment; 
c.  Littering; 
d.  Creating excessive noise; 
e.  Disturbing the peace; 
f.  Engaging in illegal drug activity or prostitution; 
g.  Trafficking in stolen goods; 
h.  Harassing passersby or business patrons; 
i.  Panhandling; 
j.  Engaging in acts of vandalism; 
k.  Otherwise engaging in conduct that is unlawful and/or constitutes a nuisance. 
10.  The operator shall take all reasonable steps to ensure the conditions and activities on the property on which the alcoholic beverage establishment is located do not constitute a public nuisance. For purposes of this chapter, "reasonable steps" includes, without limitation, the following: 
a.  Requesting those persons engaging in conduct that constitutes a nuisance to cease that conduct, unless the operator has reasonable cause to believe such request may jeopardize his or her personal safety. 
b.  Calling the city's law enforcement and/or public safety personnel if the operator's attempts to abate the nuisance conduct have been unavailing or if the operator has reasonable cause to believe such attempts may jeopardize his or her personal safety. 
c.  Timely undertaking actions to address conditions that facilitate loitering and other nuisance activity on the premises, such as removing furniture from areas adjacent to the entry of the establishment, prohibiting persons from using any portion of the premises for the installation and/or operation of a temporary business or other use, and/or other preventive actions. 
B.  The city council finds and declares that it is unlawful and a public nuisance for a person to use or maintain, or to permit the use or maintenance of, property on which an alcoholic beverage establishment is located, or to conduct the business or permit the business to be conducted in a manner that is contrary to the requirements set forth in this Section 17.42.110, any city or state permits, licenses and/or approvals, and/or all other applicable sections of this Code, state or federal law or regulation, or that otherwise poses a threat to public health, safety and welfare. 
C.  An operator shall be deemed responsible for the act or omission of any on-site manager and/or employee who uses or maintains, or permits the use or maintenance of, property on which an alcoholic beverage establishment is located, or who conducts the business or permit the business to be conducted, in violation of this chapter. 
D.  Upon the sale or transfer of ownership of an alcoholic beverage establishment to a bona fide third party, previous findings of public nuisance uses, conditions and activities before such sale or transfer of ownership shall not be imputed to the new owner, unless the city determines that the sale or transfer of ownership is not to a bona fide third party. 
(Ord. No. 1015, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
17.42.120 - Conditional use permit: Expiration, modification, revocation. 
A.  A conditional use permit for an alcoholic beverage establishment shall lapse if the use is discontinued for 90 consecutive days, or if the establishment's alcoholic beverage control license has been revoked or transferred to another location. 
B.  A conditional use permit is subject to modification at any time if the planning commission makes a determination that changed circumstances or unanticipated effects concerning the operation of the business establishment necessitate that conditions be added, amended or deleted. The planning commission shall set a public hearing to consider such modification of said conditional use permit in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Code. A decision of the planning commission pursuant to this section shall be appealable to the city council in accordance with Chapter 17.36. The planning commission's decision shall be final and binding if an appeal is not timely filed. 
C.  A conditional use permit for an alcoholic beverage establishment is subject to revocation if the operator has used or maintained, or permitted the use or maintenance of, the premises on which the establishment is located and/or has operated or permitted the operation of the business in violation of any condition imposed pursuant to the conditional use permit, or in violation of the performance standards set forth in Section 17.42.110, or otherwise in a manner that constitutes a public nuisance and/or a threat to public health, safety and welfare. The planning commission shall set a public hearing to consider such revocation of said conditional use permit in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Code. A decision of the planning commission pursuant to this section shall be appealable to the city council in accordance with Chapter 17.36. The planning commission's decision shall be final and binding if an appeal is not timely filed. 
1.  An administrative citation issued pursuant to Section 17.42.160 that has been deemed final and binding may be used as prima facie evidence of unlawful public nuisance activities and/or conditions in any subsequent revocation proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 1015, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
17.42.130 - Deemed approved status: Expiration, revocation. 
A.  The "deemed approved" status of an alcoholic beverage establishment shall expire if the use is discontinued for 90 consecutive days. 
B.  The "deemed approved" status of an alcoholic beverage establishment is subject to revocation if the operator has used or maintained, or permitted the use or maintenance of, the premises on which the establishment is located and/or has operated or permitted the operation of the business in violation of the performance standards set forth in Section 17.42.110 or otherwise in a manner that constitutes a public nuisance and/or a threat to public health, safety and welfare. The planning commission shall set a public hearing to consider such revocation of said deemed approved status in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Code. A decision of the planning commission decision pursuant to this section shall be appealable to the city council in accordance with Chapter 17.36. The planning commission's decision shall be final and binding if an appeal is not timely filed. 
1.  An administrative citation issued pursuant to Section 17.42.160 that has been deemed final and binding may be used as prima facie evidence of unlawful public nuisance activities and/or conditions in any subsequent revocation proceeding. 
C.  An alcoholic beverage establishment whose "deemed approved" status has expired or been revoked shall be prohibited from engaging in the sales of alcoholic beverages without first obtaining a conditional use permit. In the event the planning commission or city council makes the determination that a conditional use permit shall be granted, said alcoholic beverage establishment shall be subject to the conditions of approval set forth in Sections 17.42.070 and 17.42.080, including, but not limited to, the establishment of minimum single sizes of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 1015, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
17.42.140 - Temporary alcohol sales. 
    Any event sponsor or applicant that anticipates a temporary event with alcohol sales shall obtain a temporary use permit. The application is to be filed with the planning department at least 60 days in advance of the event. 
    The event sponsor is the entity determined by the city to be liable for protecting public health and safety of event participants (those who attend the event), of event operators (those who create and execute the event), and of all others affected by the actions of event participants and event operators. 
A.  The planning director shall review and approve requests for temporary alcohol sales through a director's review application. 
B.  Conditions for a director's review for a temporary sales: 
1.  The applicant shall obtain property owner's authorization. 
2.  The applicant shall obtain a business license and any other permits applicable for the event. 
3.  The applicant shall submit a site plan showing the event, location of parking area(s), lighting (if any), and areas that alcohol is to be sold. 
4.  The applicant shall have control over points of access to the location where alcoholic beverages are dispensed and consumed. 
5.  The applicant shall have control and containment of individuals who consume alcoholic beverages. 
6.  The county sheriff's department shall review the application to determine the number of deputies required for security of the event based on the type and size of the event. 
7.  All alcoholic beverage servers shall have in their possession proof of completing "responsible beverage service" training from the state ABC. 
8.  A temporary alcoholic beverage control license is required for the duration of this event. A copy of the temporary license is to be submitted to the planning director prior to the start of the event. 
9.  The applicant shall specify the hours of operation of the event and the hours of sale of alcoholic beverages. 
10.  The applicant shall provide liability insurance in the amount determined by the city attorney based on the size and type of the event naming the city as additionally insured. 
11.  The site shall be restored to the original condition. Site shall be free of debris, all trash receptacles removed, temporary fencing removed, and all disturbed asphalt shall be restored to the original condition. Disturbed landscape areas are also to be restored to the original condition. The applicant shall be financially responsible for any damage to the parking lot surface and landscape areas resulting from the event. 
12.  The planning director may require a cash deposit to ensure compliance with the conditions of approval. 
13.  The planning director may impose any additional conditions determined necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
C.  Approval of a special event permit pursuant to Chapter 9.40 shall be deemed as compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1015, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
17.42.150 - Violation, penalty, remedies. 
A.  Violations of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable in the manner provided in Section 1.12.020A. 
B.  In addition to or in lieu of prosecution in a criminal action, the city attorney may initiate civil proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoinment of any public nuisance as set forth in this chapter, in any manner provided by law, and shall take such other steps, and shall apply to such other court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such alcoholic beverage establishments, and restrain and enjoin any person from using property contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  In addition to or in lieu of any administrative, civil or criminal remedies set forth in this chapter, the administrative citation provisions of Section 17.42.160 may be utilized to abate or cause the abatement of uses, conditions and/or activities that constitute a nuisance pursuant to Section 17.42.110. 
D.  The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 1015, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
17.42.160 - Administrative citations. 
A.  Any enforcing officer may issue an administrative citation to a responsible person when the officer has determined, through personal observation or after undertaking standard law enforcement investigatory actions, that the person has used or maintained, or permitted the use or maintenance or property on which an alcoholic beverage establishment is located, and/or who has operation or permitted the operation of the business, in a manner that constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to Section 17.42.110. An officer shall not issue an administrative citation to a responsible person when the officer has determined, based on the totality of the circumstances, that said person has taken all reasonable steps to attempt to prevent the nuisance. 
1.  A responsible person who is present at the property at the time an officer determines the existence of a public nuisance shall be deemed to have actual or constructive knowledge of such nuisance. 
2.  An owner of the property on which the alcoholic beverage establishment is located, who is not also an operator of the business, may be deemed by an enforcing officer to have actual or constructive knowledge of the nuisance use, condition or activity: 
a.  If such person has previously been given verbal warning and/or an administrative citation or other written notice concerning the violations; or 
b.  Based on the totality of the circumstances as determined by the enforcing officer. 
B.  Within 5 days after issuance of a citation, an officer shall submit a copy of the citation and a written statement of facts to the city manager. Alternatively, the officer may elect to submit the written statement of facts to the city manager, who may then issue the citation. 
C.  An administrative citation may be personally given to the responsible person, or the responsible person may be served by first class mail to an address which is either: 
a.  Indicated on any form of identification presented to the officer, or 
b.  Discovered by the officer during the course of his or her standard law enforcement investigatory actions. 
The date a citation is placed in a U.S. Postal Service mail receptacle shall be the date of service. A declaration of service shall be made by the person mailing the administrative citation showing the date and manner of service by mail and reciting the name and address of the citation addressee. Failure of any responsible person to receive an administrative citation by mail shall not invalidate any citation issued pursuant to this chapter. 
D.  The citation shall be in a city-approved format, and shall include the following information: 
1.  The date, location and approximate time of the condition and/or activity that constituted a public nuisance pursuant to Section 17.42.110; 
2.  A brief description of the condition and/or activity that constituted a public nuisance; 
3.  A statement describing the right to appeal the citation; 
4.  A statement advising that the fine shall be paid to the city within 30 days from the date of the administrative citation, procedure for payment, and the consequences of failure to pay. 
E.  The penalty amounts of administrative citations issued pursuant to this chapter shall be as follows: 
1.  For the first administrative citation, the penalty shall be $500.00; 
2.  For the second and any subsequent administrative citation, the penalty shall be $1,000.00. 
F.  The failure of any person to pay a penalty assessed by administrative citation within the time specified on the citation constitutes a debt to the city, which may be collected in accordance with Chapter 1.16 or in any other manner allowable by law. 
(Ord. No. 1015, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
17.42.170 - Right of appeal from an administrative citation. 
A.  A person who has been issued an administrative citation pursuant to this chapter may contest the citation by filing a written appeal on a city-approved form with the city manager within 10 calendar days from the date of the citation. The basis for the appeal must be specified in detail on the appeal form. There shall be no filing fee for the appeal, however, a deposit in the amount of the citation must be paid at the time the appeal is filed. If the citation is dismissed as a result of the appeal hearing, the deposit shall be returned to the appellant within 30 days from the date of the written appeal decision. 
B.  Failure of the city manager to receive a timely appeal constitutes a waiver of the right to contest a citation; in this event, the citation is final and binding. 
C.  As soon as practicable after a timely appeal is filed, the city manager shall fix a date, time and place for a hearing. The hearing shall be conducted by an independent and impartial hearing officer. Written notice of the time and place for the hearing shall be served by first class mail, at the return address indicated on the appeal form, at least 10 calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. 
D.  An appellant may request, in writing, that the city manager reschedule the hearing if the request is made at least 24 hours prior to the hearing. The city manager shall grant one continuance of the hearing date. 
E.  Failure of an appellant to appear at the scheduled hearing shall constitute the appellant's waiver of the right to appeal and a forfeiture of the citation amount deposited at the time the appeal was filed. 
F.  Appeal hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. The city bears the burden of proof to establish, by a preponderance of evidence, that the appellant is a responsible person who used or maintained, or permitted the use or maintenance, of property on which an alcoholic beverage establishment is located, and/or who operated, or permitted the operation of, the business, in a manner that constituted a public nuisance. The officer issuing the administrative citation and/or submitting the written statement of facts shall not be required to appear at the hearing. The hearing officer shall accept testimony by declaration under penalty of perjury relating to the condition or activity that was the grounds for the issuance of the citation, as set forth in the issuing officer's statement of facts, and shall consider any other relevant evidence concerning the condition or activity that was the grounds for the issuance of the citation that the city manager may present at the hearing. The hearing officer shall also take the testimony of the appellant, and/or his or her witnesses, and will consider any other credible relevant rebuttal evidence the appellant may wish to present. The appellant may represent himself or herself or be represented by anyone of his or her choice, including counsel, at his or her sole expense. The appellant may bring an interpreter to the hearing at his or her sole expense. 
G.  The hearing officer shall make findings based on the record of the hearing, and shall prepare a written decision, based on those findings, to either uphold or dismiss the citation. A copy of the written decision shall be served on the appellant by first class mail within 10 days after the hearing. If the citation is dismissed, the city shall refund the amount of the citation deposit to the appellant within 30 days from the date of the decision. 
H.  The decision of the hearing officer is final and conclusive, subject only to review by the superior court in accordance with the time limits set forth in Government Code Section 53069.4 and/or Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
(Ord. No. 1015, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
17.42.180 - Severability. 
    If any part or provision of this chapter is found to be invalid or unenforceable by a court of law, such invalidity shall not affect any other part or provision herein, and all remaining provisions of this chapter will be valid and enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 1015, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
Chapter 17.43 - COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, adopted December 11, 2018, repealed and reenacted chapter 17.43 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, chapter 17.43 pertained to medical cannabis cultivation facilities, and derived from Ord. No. 1019, § 2, adopted February 28, 2017. 

17.43.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to regulate all "commercial cannabis activity" in the city, as that term is defined in Section 26001(k) of the Business and Professions Code, to the extent authorized by state law and in a manner designed to minimize negative impacts on the city and neighboring uses, and promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of residents and businesses within the city. The purpose of this chapter is also to align the city's regulation of commercial cannabis activity with applicable state law and to regulate the types of commercial cannabis activity permitted under state law. This chapter is enacted specifically in response to the state laws that permit commercial cannabis activity and the objective of this chapter is to minimize its negative impacts. 
B.  This chapter is further adopted and established pursuant to the specific authority granted to the city in Section 7 of Article XI of the California Constitution and Division 10 of the Business and Professions Code. This chapter, together with chapter 5.56 and all other applicable law, shall govern all commercial cannabis activity that occurs within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018) 
17.43.020 - Relationship to other laws. 
    In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any other applicable state or local law, the more restrictive provision shall control. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018) 
17.43.030 - Definitions. 
A.  The following terms shall be defined as follows: 
    "Adult-use" or "adult-use cannabis" means cannabis or cannabis product that is used or intended to be used by adults who are over twenty-one (21) years of age and who do not possess a physician's recommendation for medicinal cannabis. 
    "Applicant" means a person applying for a city commercial cannabis license. 
    "Cannabis" means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salts, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtain from cannabis. For the purpose of this chapter, "cannabis" does not mean industrial hemp as that term is defined by Section 81000 of the California Food and Agricultural Code or Section 11018.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
    "Cannabis concentrate" means cannabis that has undergone a process to concentrate one or more active cannabinoids, thereby increasing the product's potency. Resin from granular trichomes from a cannabis plant is a concentrate for purposes of this chapter. 
    "Cannabis cultivation facility" means a facility wherein cannabis is propagated, planted, grown, harvested, dried, cured, graded, labeled, tagged for tracking or trimmed, or that does all or any combination of those activities. 
    "Cannabis dispensary" or "dispensary" means any business, office, store, or other retail "storefront" component of any cannabis cooperative or collective that dispenses, distributes, exchanges, sells or provides cannabis. 
    "Cannabis distribution facility" means any facility or location, not associated with a primary or tenant license, where the primary purpose is the procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and cannabis products between entities. 
    "Cannabis facility" means collectively any cannabis cultivation facility and/or manufacturing facility, as those terms are defined in this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, "cannabis facility" and "facility" may be used interchangeably. 
    "Cannabis manufacturing facility" means a facility where the production of cannabis concentrate, or preparation, propagation, compounding and/or packaging of manufactured cannabis is conducted, either directly or indirectly or by extraction methods, independently by means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis. 
    "Cannabis product," means cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients. 
    "Canopy" means the total combined indoor area for all locations on a property where cannabis is being cultivated, as measured by the horizontal extent of the plant or combination of plants at the widest point and measured in a straight line. This does not include aisles or walkways. 
    "Cultivation" means any activity involving the propagation, planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis. 
    "Delivery" means the commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products from a dispensary to a purchaser. "Delivery" also includes the use by a cannabis facility of any technology platform owned and controlled by the cannabis facility, that enables purchasers to arrange for or facilitate the commercial transfer by a licensed dispensary of cannabis or cannabis products. 
    "Distribution" means the procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and cannabis products between licensed cannabis business entities. 
    "Edible cannabis product" means manufactured cannabis that is intended to be used, in whole or in part, for human consumption, including, but not limited to, chewing gum, but excluding products set forth in Division 15 (commencing with Section 32501) of the Food and Agricultural Code. An edible cannabis product is not considered food as defined by Section 109935 of the Health and Safety Code or a drug as defined by Section 109925 of the Health and Safety Code. 
    "Good cause" for purposes of denying, revoking or refusing to renew or reinstate a primary or tenant license includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
1.  The licensee or applicant has violated any of the terms, conditions or provisions of this chapter, of state law, of any regulations and/or rules promulgated pursuant to state law, any applicable local rules and/or regulations, or any special terms or conditions placed upon its conditional use permit, state license, and/or primary or tenant license; 
2.  The licensed premises have been operated in a manner that adversely affects the public health, safety or welfare or the safety of the immediate neighborhood in which the establishment is located, causes adverse economic impacts, increased crime, increased incidence of communicable disease, decreased property values and/or an increase in the number of transients in the area; 
3.  The licensee or applicant has knowingly made false statements, misrepresentations or material omissions on an application form, renewal form, or any other document submitted to the city; 
4.  Issuance of the license would impair the health, safety or welfare of the public, cause negative impacts to property values, impair the city's ability to prevent crime associated with cannabis, and/or impair the city's ability to ensure that cannabis grown remains secure and does not find its way to minors or illicit markets. 
5.  The applicant or licensee's criminal history does not indicate that the applicant or licensee is of good moral character; or the applicant or licensee has been convicted of an offense that is substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of the business or profession for which the application is made. In determining which offenses are substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of the business or profession for which the application is made, the city may consider, without limitation, the factors as set forth in Section 26057 of the Business and Professions Code; 
6.  The licensee or applicant is employing or being financed in whole or in part by any person whose criminal history indicates that person is not of good moral character; 
7.  The applicant or licensee has failed or refused to allow city officials to inspect security recordings, activity logs, or business records, of the licensed premises; 
8.  The licensee has failed to adequately reconcile its inventory, such that shortages in its cannabis and/or cannabis product cannot be accounted for in the paper and/or electronic inventory tracking system(s); 
9.  The applicant or licensee is owned by, has an officer or director who is, or is employing or financed in whole or in part by, a licensed physician making recommendations for medical cannabis; 
10.  The applicant or licensee has had a primary or tenant license revoked or has had more than one suspension on its primary or tenant license by the city; or 
11.  The applicant or licensee operated a cannabis business in violation of this chapter, chapter 5.56, or any other applicable state or local law. 
    "Legal parcel" means a parcel of land for which one legal title exists. Where contiguous legal parcels are under common ownership or control, such legal parcels may at the option of the property owner be counted as a single parcel for purposes of this chapter. 
    "Licensee" means a person who has been issued a state license, primary license and a conditional use permit pursuant to this chapter. 
    "Manufacturer" means a person that conducts the production, preparation, propagation, or compounding of manufactured cannabis or cannabis products either directly or indirectly or by extraction methods, or independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis at a fixed location that packages or repackages cannabis or cannabis products or labels or relabels its container. 
    "Medicinal cannabis" or "medicinal cannabis product" means cannabis or a cannabis product, respectively, intended to be sold for use pursuant to the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Section 11362.5 of the Health and Safety Code) by a medicinal cannabis patient in California who possesses a physician's recommendation. For purposes of this chapter, "medicinal" and "medical" may be used interchangeably. 
    "Multi-section cannabis facility" means a cannabis cultivation and/or manufacturing facility that consists of multiple cannabis cultivation and/or manufacturing suites rented or leased to one or more persons other than the primary licensee, each of whom holds a tenant license and who operates subject to the primary license and the conditional use permit. 
    "Person," as used in this chapter, means and includes any individual, partnership or any kind, corporation, limited liability company, association, joint venture or other organization or entity, however formed. 
    "Primary license" means a cannabis regulatory permit issued by the city pursuant to this chapter, which is held by a person who will operate a cannabis facility or a multi-section cannabis facility. 
    "State law(s)" shall mean and include California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 (Compassionate Use Act of 1996); California Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.7 through 11362.83 (Medical Cannabis Program Act); California Business and Professions Code Sections 26000 through 26231.2 (Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act ("MAUCRSA")), and all other applicable laws of the state of California. 
    "State license," "license," or "registration" means a state license issued pursuant to MAUCRSA. 
    "State licensing authority" shall mean the Bureau of Cannabis Control within the California Department of Consumer Affairs, the California Department of Public Health, the California Department of Food and Agriculture, or any other state agency responsible for the issuance, renewal, or reinstatement of a license issued under MAUCRSA or the agency authorized to take disciplinary action against such license. 
    "Tenant" means a person who rents or leases a suite from a primary licensee at a multi-section cannabis facility. 
    "Tenant license" means a cannabis regulatory permit issued by the city pursuant to this chapter to a person who rents or leases a suite from a primary licensee. 
    "Testing laboratory" has the same meaning as that term is defined by Section 26001(as) of the Business and Professions Code and shall mean a laboratory, facility or entity that offers or performs tests of cannabis or cannabis products and that is both of the following: 
1.  Accredited by an accrediting body that is independent from all other persons involved in commercial cannabis activity in the state; 
2.  Licensed by the bureau of cannabis control. 
B.  Words and phrases not specifically defined in this Code shall have the meaning ascribed to them as defined in the following sources: 
1.  The Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5); 
2.  The Medical Cannabis Program Act (California Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.7 through 11362.83); and 
3.  The Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (California Business and Professions Code Sections 26000 through 26231.2) as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018) 
17.43.040 - Permissible cannabis commercial activity; number of permissible facilities. 
A.  Subject to this chapter, chapter 5.56 and all other applicable state and local laws and regulations, a person may operate an indoor cannabis cultivation and/or manufacturing facility within the city. 
B.  A Primary or tenant licensee may engage in distribution of cannabis and/or cannabis products, provided such distribution is solely for purposes of procuring, selling and/or transporting cannabis and/or cannabis product for said licensee's facility. 
C.  The maximum number of primary licenses issued by the city may be limited by resolution of the city council. Such limitation may be based on number of primary licenses, the aggregate area of cannabis facilities, or any other measure determined by the city council. 
D.  Testing laboratories, accredited and licensed as required pursuant to MAUCRSA, may be operated within the city. Notwithstanding any provision of state laws or regulations, testing laboratories in the city shall only test cannabis and cannabis products. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018) 
17.43.045 - Prohibited commercial cannabis activity. 
    Within the city, it shall be unlawful to operate a cannabis distribution facility, cannabis dispensary, cannabis delivery business or outdoor cannabis cultivation facility. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018) 
17.43.050 - Cannabis facilities conditionally permitted. 
    Cannabis facilities, as defined herein, shall be conditionally permitted within the city, subject to the requirements of this chapter, chapter 5.56 and all other applicable state and local laws. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018) 
17.43.060 - Primary license and conditional use permit required to operate. 
A.  Cannabis facilities shall only be permitted to operate in the city following application, investigation, verification, notice and public hearing, approval and issuance of both a primary license issued by the city in accordance with the criteria and procedures set forth in chapter 5.56 and a conditional use permit issued in accordance with the criteria and procedures set forth in this chapter and any policies, procedures and/or regulations promulgated by the city manager to implement the provisions of this chapter and chapter 5.56. No land use entitlement, permit (including building permit) approval, site plan, certificate of occupancy, zoning clearance, or other land use authorization for a cannabis cultivation facility shall be granted, permitted or valid unless a conditional use permit is first obtained and issued under this chapter. 
B.  All persons who are engaged in or who are attempting to engage in cannabis commercial activity shall do so only in strict compliance with the terms, conditions, limitations and restrictions of chapter 5.56, this chapter and all other applicable state and local laws and regulations. 
C.  The city manager is authorized to make policies and procedures consistent with this chapter concerning the applications, the application process, the information required of applicants, the application procedures and the administration and procedures to be used and followed in the application and hearing process. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018) 
17.43.070 - Conditional use permit application process; cannabis license agreement requirement. 
A.  Prior to initiating operations and as a continuing requisite to operating a cannabis facility, the applicant shall obtain a conditional use permit under the terms and conditions set forth in this chapter. The applicant shall file an application for a conditional use permit with the city's development services department on the official form supplied by the city and shall pay the applicable application fee as established by resolution of the city council, as may be amended from time to time. The provisions of chapter 17.32 that govern conditional use permits generally shall apply to conditional use permits applied for and/or issued under this chapter; provided, however, that to the extent of any conflict or inconsistency between chapter 17.32 and this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
B.  An application for a conditional use permit shall include at least the following information: 
1.  Environmental plan. An environmental plan indicating how cultivation and/or manufacturing will be conducted in accordance with state and local laws related to hazardous material disposal, land conversion, grading, electricity usage, water usage, and agricultural discharges. 
2.  Emergency response plan. An emergency response plan which complies with this Code and California Fire Code Section 401, and sets out standard operating procedures to be followed by all individuals in case of a fire, chemical release, chemical spill, or other emergency. 
3.  Primary license. Proof that the applicant has been provisionally approved for a primary license for the proposed licensed premises, or a statement that the applicant is applying for a primary license for the proposed licensed premises concurrently with the conditional use permit application. 
4.  Context aerial map. An aerial map stating the distances between the proposed cannabis facility and the nearest school, park and church. 
5.  Address of cannabis facility. The address of the location of the proposed cannabis facility. 
6.  Site plan and floor plan. A site plan and floor plan of the proposed cannabis facility denoting all uses of areas of the cannabis facility, including any and all storage, employee areas, exterior lighting, restrooms, security cameras, areas of ingress and egress, signage, limited access areas, and restricted access areas. 
7.  Interior improvements. Plans and specifications for the interior of the proposed licensed premises if the building to be occupied is in existence at the time of the application. If the building is not in existence or alteration to the building is required at the time of the application, the applicant shall file a plot plan and a detailed sketch for the interior and shall further submit an architect's drawing of the building to be constructed or renovated. 
8.  Owner and manager information. The name and address of any person who is an owner, a manager and person responsible for the day-to-day operations of the proposed cannabis facility. The application shall also contain a statement as to whether any individual included in this list has been convicted of a crime or crimes, the nature of such offense(s), and the sentence(s) received for such conviction(s). 
9.  Property owner information and acknowledgement. The name and address of the person that owns the real property upon which the proposed cannabis facility is to be operated. In the event the applicant does not legally own the property, the application must be accompanied by a notarized acknowledgement from the person who owns the property that a cannabis facility will be operated on his or her property. 
10.  Operating plan. An operating plan for the proposed cannabis facility that includes at least the following information: 
a.  A description of the design of the proposed licensed premises evidencing that the design conforms to applicable city laws. 
b.  A detailed description of the type of cultivation processes to be utilized, including, without limitation, all nutrients, chemicals and other materials. 
c.  A specific description of the types of manufacturing products, activities, extraction and/or infusion methods, packaging, specific equipment to be utilized, whether and which volatile solvents will be used, and what percentage of the facility will be used for such activity. 
d.  A description of the source of power (electric utility company, solar, diesel generators), the size of the electrical service or system, and the total demand to be placed on the system by all proposed uses on-site. 
e.  Verification of all water sources used by the proposed cannabis facility and verification that the proposed cannabis facility does not and will not utilize water that has been or is illegally diverted from any stream, creek, or river. 
f.  Evidence of compliance with all applicable environmental laws and regulations, including, without limitation, those pertaining to air and water quality. 
g.  Any additional document(s) or information reasonably requested by the city. 
11.  Security plan. A security plan that, to the satisfaction of the city, addresses how the applicant intends to comply with and implement all requirements of this chapter, chapter 5.56 (including, but not limited to, subsection 5.56.070(5)) and the MAUCRSA, including, but not limited to, a description of how the security measures are sufficient to ensure the safety of on-site managers and employees, protect the proposed licensed premises from diversion and theft, and ensure that all buildings where cannabis is cultivated or stored and/or where cannabis products are manufactured, packaged and stored are secured sufficiently to prevent unauthorized entry, and not less than the following requirements: 
a.  A diagram indicating all areas to be covered by the 24-hour security cameras which shall include, but are not limited to, all limited and restricted access areas, all areas of ingress and egress, the public areas, storage areas, all doors and windows, and any other areas as required by this chapter and the MAUCRSA. 
b.  An explanation of the methods the cannabis facility will undertake to ensure cannabis and cannabis products are under secure control of the cannabis facility's staff at all times. 
12.  Odor filtration system. Verification that the proposed cannabis facility will be equipped with an odor filtration system that meets the following requirements: 
a.  A cannabis facility shall install or provide a sufficient odor absorbing ventilation and exhaust system so that odor generated inside the cannabis facility that is distinctive to its operation is not detected or detectable outside the cannabis facility, anywhere on adjacent property or public rights-of-way, on or about any exterior or interior common area walkways, hallways, breeze-ways, foyers, lobby areas, or any other areas available for common use by tenants or the visiting public, or within any other unit located within the same building as the cannabis facility. 
b.  For enforcement purposes, the standard for determining what constitutes an unlawful odor under this subsection shall be whether such an odor would be deemed offensive to a reasonable individual on an ongoing or periodic basis and personally detectable by city staff or law enforcement personnel. 
13.  Declaration. A statement in writing by the applicant that he or she certifies under penalty of perjury that all the information contained in the application is true and correct. 
14.  Acknowledgement. Authorization for the city to seek verification of the information contained within the application. 
15.  Any such additional and further information as is deemed necessary by the city to administer this section or this chapter. 
C.  The city staff shall review, verify and investigate all information on the application and prepare a report for the planning commission incorporating the findings of such investigation and verification, including, but not limited to, the suitability of the proposed location, and the applicant's compliance with the requirements of this chapter, chapter 5.56 and all other applicable state and local laws and regulations. The applicant shall be solely responsible for the cost of any environmental report, study or other document determined by the city to be necessary in order to process the application. Upon the city's demand, the applicant shall deposit with the city the estimated cost of the environmental report, study or other document determined by the city to be required by applicable law. 
D.  An application for a conditional use permit shall be accompanied by a cannabis license agreement completed and executed by the applicant. The city's approval of the cannabis license agreement shall be a condition precedent to the effectiveness of a conditional use permit under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018) 
17.43.080 - Grounds for denial of conditional use permit. 
A.  The planning commission shall not hold a public hearing on or approve any application for a conditional use permit to operate a cannabis facility unless the city has provisionally approved applicant's primary license pursuant to chapter 5.56. 
B.  In addition to the findings set forth in section 17.32.090 of this Code, a conditional use permit shall only be granted subject to certain conditions to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the neighborhood or community, subject to the following findings: 
1.  The cannabis facility as well as all operations as conducted therein, fully comply with all applicable environmental, building, electrical, zoning and fire codes, accessibility requirements of the Americans with Disability Act, and all other applicable city and state laws and regulations; and 
2.  The cannabis facility complies with and meets all operating criteria required pursuant to state laws, chapter 5.56 of this Code, any other applicable provisions of this Code, and any specific, additional operating procedures and measures as may be imposed as conditions of approval in the conditional use permit. 
C.  Following the public hearing, the planning commission shall deny an application for a conditional use permit upon making any of the following findings, which shall be made part of the record of the meeting/public hearing: 
1.  The findings required by section 17.32.090 or subsection A. for the granting of a conditional use permit cannot be made; or 
2.  Good cause, as defined in this chapter. 
D.  Based on the information set forth in the application, the staff report presented by city staff and testimony presented at the public hearing, the planning commission may impose reasonable terms and conditions on a proposed cannabis facility in addition to those specified in and required to be included in every conditional use permit granted under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018) 
17.43.090 - Transfer of ownership interest to a new owner, modification of licensed premises and other material changes. 
    In addition to any requirements in chapter 5.56 of this Code, the following requirements for transfer of ownership to a new owner, or modification of a cannabis facility apply. 
A.  Change of ownership interest to a new owner. A conditional use permit approved in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership interest in the cannabis facility in the same area, configuration, and manner as it was originally approved in compliance with this chapter. Notwithstanding anything in this Code to the contrary, a new owner of a facility may not commence operations at the premises until the transfer of ownership interest to a new owner has been approved by the city and the new owner has been issued a primary license. 
B.  Modification of licensed premises. A cannabis facility shall not make physical change, alteration, or modification that materially changes the facility from the plans approved by the city and/or planning commission without paying the fee established by resolution of the city council and obtaining the prior written approval of the city and/or planning commission. Material changes shall comply with all current building and safety codes as determined by the fire chief and building official. Material changes include, but are not limited to: a decrease in the number of security cameras, the relocation of any security camera included in the security plan approved pursuant to section 17.43.070, an increase or decrease in the total square footage of the licensed premises or the addition, sealing off, or relocation of a wall, common entryway, doorway, or other means of public ingress and/or egress. The city may deny a requested material modification if, in its sole discretion, it determines that such modification poses or has the likelihood of posing a hazard to public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018) 
17.43.100 - Appeals. 
    Any decision regarding the planning commission's approval, conditional approval, denial, or revocation of a conditional use permit for a cannabis facility may be appealed to the city council in accordance with the provisions of chapter 2.44 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018) 
17.43.110 - Permitted zones, distance requirements and other conditions for approval. 
A.  Distance requirements. 
1.  No cannabis facility shall be located: 
a.  Within six hundred (600) feet of a religious assembly; 
b.  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of a public or private school, college or university (excluding trade schools); 
c.  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of a day care center; 
d.  Within six hundred (600) feet of a residential use or residentially designated property; 
e.  Within six hundred (600) feet of a public park. 
2.  An applicant for a conditional use permit pursuant to this chapter may request, in conjunction with the conditional use permit, a waiver of the foregoing distance requirements. In considering such request, the planning commission may approve a waiver if it makes the following findings: 
a.  The cannabis facility will serve a specific community need; and 
b.  The distance waiver approved for the facility is not expected to result in an adverse effect on adjacent property, uses or residents. 
3.  Subject to the distance and other requirements of this chapter, a cannabis facility may only be located on a property within the light industrial (LI) zone, heavy industrial (HI) zone, or any adopted specific plan that permits industrial uses, and following the application for and granting of a conditional use permit in accordance with this chapter. In addition to the other required findings, the planning commission shall also consider whether approval of the proposed facility will violate the minimum requirements set forth in this section. 
4.  All cultivation/manufacture of cannabis shall occur in an enclosed locked structure that shall not exceed twenty-two thousand (22,000) square feet of canopy area. 
5.  A cannabis facility shall not exceed the square footage authorized pursuant to the conditional use permit. 
6.  From a public right-of-way, there should be no exterior evidence of the cannabis facility except for any signage authorized by this chapter. 
7.  All cannabis facilities shall comply with the city's exterior lighting standards. 
8.  All doors and windows on cannabis facilities shall be appropriately secured and all cannabis securely stored in compliance with the security plan approved pursuant to section 17.43.070. 
B.  Any cannabis facility established or operating in the city in violation of the ban established by Ordinance No. 1012, shall not be considered a lawful or permitted nonconforming use. Further, any such unlawfully established cannabis facility shall constitute a public nuisance subject to abatement by the city. 
C.  All distances specified in this section shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or topography, from the nearest point of the building or structure in which the cannabis facility is, or will be located, to the following locations. 
1.  Setbacks from schools, parks, churches and, shall be measured to the nearest property line of the parcel where such use is located. 
2.  If the cannabis facility is, or will be located, in a multi-unit building, the distances shall be measured from the nearest point of the unit in which the facility is or will be located. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018) 
17.43.120 - Confidentiality of information. 
A.  The city's review of information submitted or maintained pursuant to this chapter shall preserve the confidentiality of all information about applicants, licensees, owners, employees, volunteers, medical cannabis patients or primary caregivers to the maximum extent consistent with state and local law. The city shall incur no liability for the inadvertent or negligent disclosure of such information. Disclosure of any applicant or licensee information to the city for purposes of this chapter shall not be deemed a waiver of confidentiality. 
B.  The city shall treat all financial information provided pursuant to this chapter as financial data in accordance with the California Public Records Act (California Government Code Section 6254(n)). 
C.  Notwithstanding Section 56.10 of the California Civil Code, neither a cannabis facility, nor a city official, shall disclose, the names, addresses, or social security numbers of medical cannabis patients, their medical conditions, or the names of their primary caregivers, sooner than the tenth (10th) day after which the medical cannabis patient whose records are sought to be disclosed has been contacted. 
D.  To the extent permitted by law, recordings from security cameras, as well as operating plans and security plans required by this chapter shall be confidential and shall not be subject to public inspection or disclosure except to city employees. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018) 
17.43.130 - Limitations on city's liability. 
    To the fullest extent permitted by law, the city shall not assume any liability whatsoever, with respect to approving any primary license pursuant to this chapter or the operation of any cannabis facility approved pursuant to this chapter. As a condition of approval a primary license as provided in this chapter, the applicant or its legal representative shall: 
A.  Execute an agreement indemnifying the city from any claims, damages, etc., associated with the operation of the facility; 
B.  Maintain insurance in the amounts and of the types that are acceptable to the city manager or designee, with such additional insured endorsements as may be required by the city; 
C.  Agree to defend, at its sole expense and with counsel of the city's choice, any action against the city, its agents, officers, and/or employees related to the approval of a primary license; and 
D.  Agree to reimburse the city for any court costs and attorney fees that the city may be required to pay as a result of any legal challenge related to the city's approval of a primary license. 
E.  Expressly acknowledge in writing that (i) the city incurs no liability whatsoever as a result of the city's issuance of a primary license pursuant to this chapter 5.56, a conditional use permit pursuant to this chapter and/or approval of the security plan required by this chapter, (ii) the applicant is aware that the cultivation of cannabis and/or manufacture of cannabis products may violate federal law, including, without limitation, the Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. § 801 et seq., and the applicant assumes all liability for such violation. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018) 
17.43.140 - Inspections. 
A.  Recordings made by security cameras at any cannabis facility shall be made immediately available to the city's public safety department, the city manager, the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department or their designee upon verbal request for enforcement and/or criminal investigation purposes. 
B.  The city manager, or his or her designee, law enforcement officers, city development services department personnel and city public safety personnel and compliance inspectors shall have the right to enter all cannabis facilities from time to time unannounced for the purpose of making reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance with this chapter and chapter 5.56. Such inspections shall be limited to observing the licensed premises for purposes of determining whether the facility is being operated or maintained in compliance with this Code, state law, and other applicable laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018) 
17.43.150 - Violations and enforcement. 
A.  Operation of a cannabis cultivation facility in non-compliance with any conditions of approval or the provisions of this chapter, chapter 5.56 or any other applicable state or local law or regulation shall constitute a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof any violation shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day a violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
B.  The city may issue an administrative citation for each violation of this chapter pursuant to the procedures set forth in chapter 9.48; provided, however, that notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 9.48.060(E), the penalty amounts of administrative citations issued for violations of this chapter shall be as follows, which city council may periodically adjust by resolution: 
1.  For the first administrative citation, the penalty shall be ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00); 
2.  For the second and any subsequent administrative citation, the penalty shall be twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00). 
C.  In lieu of or in addition to the foregoing, the city may collect any and all abatement and related administrative costs pursuant to the provisions of section 8.28.210. 
D.  The remedies provided herein are not to be construed as exclusive remedies, and in the event of violation or non-compliance, the city may pursue any proceedings or remedies otherwise provided by law. Any administrative citation issued pursuant to this chapter shall not prejudice or adversely affect any other civil, administrative or criminal action that may be brought to correct or abate any unlawful nuisance condition or use caused by a licensee, permittee or cannabis facility. A civil or criminal action may be brought concurrently with any other process regarding the same violation. 
E.  Applicants and licensees shall cooperate with employees and investigators of the city who are conducting inspections or investigations of or pertaining to the enforcement of laws and regulations related to this chapter. No applicant or licensee shall by any means interfere with, obstruct or impede the city's development services department, public safety department, city manager, law enforcement, or other city official from exercising their duties under the provisions of this chapter and all rules promulgated pursuant to it. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018) 
17.43.160 - Revocation of conditional use permit. 
    Revocations of a conditional use permit issued under this chapter shall be governed by section 17.32.890, et seq. of this Code. In addition to the grounds for revocation set forth in section 17.32.890, the planning commission and/or the city council may suspend or revoke a conditional use permit if the planning commission and/or the city council find: 
A.  Good cause; 
B.  The building, structure, equipment, location or manner of operation of such business does not comply with the requirements of or fails to meet the standards of the health, zoning, fire and safety laws of the state and ordinances of the city applicable to such business operations; or 
C.  The cannabis facility has failed to comply with this chapter or any condition of approval or a circumstance or situation has been created that would have permitted the planning commission to initially deny the conditional use permit, including, but not limited to, failure to comply with the operating plan or safety plan approved pursuant to section 5.56.070. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018) 
17.43.170 - Public nuisance. 
A.  It is unlawful and shall constitute a public nuisance to establish, maintain, or operate a cannabis facility within the city without having first received a primary or tenant license pursuant to chapter 5.56 and a conditional use permit pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  It is unlawful and shall constitute a public nuisance to engage in or conduct any commercial cannabis activity in violation of this chapter, chapter 5.56 or any other applicable local or state law. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018) 
17.43.180 - Regulations. 
    The city manager is authorized to promulgate such regulations as may be necessary or convenient to implement this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1053 , § 1, 12-11-2018) 
Chapter 17.44 - CONTINUATION, PENDING PROCEEDINGS AND REPEALS 

17.44.010 - Continuation of existing law. 
    The provisions of this title insofar as they are substantially the same as the provisions of any ordinance or portions of any ordinance repealed by the ordinance codified in this title shall be construed as restatements and continuation thereof, and not as new enactments. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 801) 
17.44.020 - Pending proceedings not affected. 
    No hearing or other proceeding initiated or commenced prior to November 5, 1971, and no right accrued, is affected either by amendments to this title effective on said November 5, 1971, or by the provisions of this title, but all proceedings thereafter taken shall conform to the provisions of this title so far as possible. Where the commission prior to said November 5, 1971, has recommended the granting, denial, revocation or modification of any permit, exception, license, or other approval, to the board of supervisors, the said board may act upon such recommendation either before or after November 5, 1971. In all other cases the commission shall grant, deny, revoke or modify as now provided in this title even if the action was initiated prior to November 5, 1971. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 802) 
17.44.030 - Pending proceedings. 
    If, prior to November 5, 1971, an application for an exception has been heard by the board of supervisors, commission or zoning board but has not been decided on November 5, 1971, the board of supervisors, commission and zoning board may, where applicable, consider the case as either an application for a variance or for a conditional use permit, and shall decide or recommend pursuant to the provisions of this title as they now exist. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 803) 
17.44.040 - Rights under existing approval not affected. 
    No rights given by any permit, license or other approval under any ordinance repealed by the ordinance codified in this title are affected by such repeal, but such rights shall hereafter be exercised according to the provisions of this title. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 804) 
17.44.050 - Prior approval of permits and maps. 
    No rights given by any permit or tentative map approval, or existing extension thereof, under any ordinance in effect prior to the effective date of this amendment shall be affected by this amendment. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 804.1) 
17.44.060 - Conviction of crime. 
    Any conviction for a crime under any ordinance which is repealed by the ordinance codified in this title, which crime is continued as a public offense by this title, constitutes a conviction under this title for any purpose for which it constituted a conviction under such repealed ordinance. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 805) 
17.44.070 - Repeals. 
    Ordinance No. 219 entitled "An Ordinance Regulating the Storage and Transportation of Explosives in the County of Los Angeles," adopted October 11, 1909; Ordinance No. 1454, entitled "An Ordinance Regulating the Establishment and Maintenance of Rock Quarries, Sand and Gravel Pits and Rock Crushing Plants in the County of Los Angeles," adopted March 14, 1927; Ordinance No. 1473 (New series) entitled "An Ordinance Providing for the Creation in the Unincorporated Area of the County of Los Angeles of Seven Zones Prescribing the Classes of Uses of Buildings, Structures, Improvements and Premises in Said Several Zones and Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof," adopted May 2, 1927; Ordinance No. 2179, entitled "An Ordinance Providing for a Comprehensive Scheme of Building Line Restrictions in the Unincorporated Territory of the County of Los Angeles," adopted November 2, 1932; Ordinance No. 2854, entitled "An Ordinance Regulating the Establishment, Maintenance and Extension of Cemeteries in the County of Los Angeles, Providing for the Issuance of Permits Therefor, and Providing Penalties for the Violation Thereof," adopted January 20, 1937; and Ordinance No. 5070, entitled "An Ordinance Temporarily Restricting and Regulating Residential Construction, Occupation and Use in the Laguna Domingues Area, Pending the Adoption of Permanent Official Plans of the Master Plan of Land Use," adopted February 17, 1948, are repealed. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 806) 
17.44.080 - No revival of repealed ordinances. 
    The repeal of said Ordinance No. 2854 does not revive Ordinance No. 927, New Series, entitled "An Ordinance Prohibiting the Establishment of Certain Institutions in Certain Localities in the County of Los Angeles," adopted October 1, 1923, nor any other ordinance or portion thereof repealed by said Ordinance No. 2854. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 807) 
17.44.090 - Zone exception modifying standards deemed variance. 
    Where a zone exception granted by action of the commission or board of supervisors prior to said November 5, 1971, may be granted as a variance under the present provisions of this title, it shall be deemed a variance. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 808) 
17.44.100 - Status of zone exceptions other than standards. 
    In all cases other than as provided in Section 17.44.090 where a zone exception was granted by action of the commission or the board of supervisors prior to November 5, 1971, such use shall be considered a nonconforming use under the provisions of this title provided: 
A.  That such uses shall remain in compliance with and subject to all limitations and conditions imposed by such grant; and 
B.  That all provisions governing nonconforming uses not in conflict with the limitations and conditions of such grant, shall apply. 
(Prior zoning ord. § 809) 
